          ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
        Operations Evaluation Department




PROJECT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORT


                                   IN


                                INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response.
Performance Evaluation Report




Project Number: PPE: IND 27132
Loan Numbers: 1415-IND and 1416-IND
November 2007




India: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
Project




Operations Evaluation Department
                               CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
             (as of 5 August 2005 [time of field mission] and 30 October 2007)

                       Currency Unit        ­        Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                             Re1.00         =        2005: $0.0231; 2007: $0.0252
                              $1.00         =        2005: Rs43.37; 2007: Rs 39.70

                                       ABBREVIATIONS

      ADB              ­    Asian Development Bank
      CDP              ­    Community Development Program
      EA               ­    executing agency
      EIRR             ­    economic internal rate of return
      FIRR             ­    financial internal rate of return
      HDFC             ­    Housing Development and Finance Corporation
      IUDP             ­    integrated urban development project
      KUDCEMP          ­    Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental
                            Management Project
      KUIDFC           ­    Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance
                            Corporation
      KUIDP            ­    Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
      KUWSDB           ­    Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board
      MCC              ­    Mysore City Corporation
      MUDA             ­    Mysore Urban Development Authority
      NGO              ­    nongovernment organization
      O&M              ­    operation and maintenance
      OEM              ­    operations evaluation mission
      PCR              ­    project completion report
      PIU              ­    project implementation unit
      PMU              ­    project management unit
      PPER             ­    project performance evaluation report
      PPTA             ­    project preparatory technical assistance
      RRP              ­    report and recommendation of the President
      STP              ­    sewage treatment plant
      TUDA             ­    Tumkur Urban Development Authority
      ULB              ­    urban local body

                                 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

      km               ­    kilometer
      mld              ­    million liters per day
      m3               ­    cubic meter

                                             NOTES

(i)         The fiscal year (FY) of the Government and its agencies ends on 31 March.
            FY before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends,
            e.g., FY2000 ends on 31 March 2000.

(ii)        In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
                                         Key Words
asian development bank, channapatna adb project evaluation, indian integrated urban
infrastructure development, indian urban development evaluation, indian urban housing lending,
karnataka urban project evaluation, mysore adb project evaluation, ramanagaram adb project
evaluation, tumkur adb project evaluation




 Officer-in-Charge R. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
 Director          R. K. Leonard, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED

 Team leader        W. Kolkma, Senior Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation
                    Division 1, OED
 Team members       A. Anabo, Senior Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation
                    Division 1, OED
                    A. Alba, Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation
                    Division 1, OED
                    V. Melo, Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation
                    Division 1, OED

                        Operations Evaluation Department, PE-706
                                        CONTENTS

                                                                                       Page

BASIC DATA                                                                                  iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                           v
MAP                                                                                        ix

I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                        1
       A.   Evaluation Purpose and Process                                                 1
       B.   Expected Results                                                               2
II.    DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION                                                           3
       A.   Formulation                                                                    3
       B.   Rationale                                                                      3
       C.   Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                                    3
       D.   Procurement, Construction, and Scheduling                                      6
       E.   Design Changes                                                                 7
       F.   Outputs                                                                        7
       G.   Consultants and Contractors                                                   15
       H.   Loan Covenants                                                                16
       I.   Policy Framework                                                              16
III.   PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT                                                             16
IV.    OTHER ASSESSMENTS                                                                  21
       A.   Impact                                                                        21
       B.   Asian Development Bank Performance                                            23
       C.   Borrower Performance                                                          23
       D.   Technical Assistance                                                          23
V.     ISSUES, LESSONS AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                                              24
       A.   Issues                                                                        24
       B.   Lessons                                                                       25
       C.   Follow-Up Actions                                                             26

APPENDIXES
1.   Achievement of Project Outputs                                                       27
2.   Self Help Groups in the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project           32
3.   Summary of Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation Indicators and Results                  36
4.   Housing Development and Finance Corporation Loan Type and Distribution               37
5.   Financial and Economic Analyses of Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development        39
     Projects


Attachment:          Management Response

The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
conflicts of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this
report. Robert Merrill was the consultant. To the knowledge of the management of OED, there
were no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing, reviewing or approving this report.
                                    BASIC DATA
  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project (Loans 1415-IND and 1416-IND)

Project Preparation/Institution Building

                                                   Person-      Amount       Approval
TA No.               TA Name               Type    Months          ($)          Date
1977       Urban Infrastructure             PP       47         $600,000    12 Nov 1993
           Development Project
2471       Resource Mobilization Study     AD         14        $300,000    14 Dec 1995
           for Local Governments in
           Karnataka

                                                       As per ADB
Key Project Data ($ million)                         Loan Documents            Actual
Total Project Cost                                         132.0              123.48
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization
 1415-IND                                                     85.0               76.4
 1416-IND                                                     20.0               20.0
ADB Loan Amount/Cancellation
 1415-IND                                                                           8.6
 1416-IND                                                                           0.0

Key Dates                                          Expected                Actual
Appraisal                                                            16 Jun­5 Jul 1995
Loan Negotiations
 1415-IND                                                              13­17 Nov 1995
 1416-IND                                                            4 Aug­4 Sep 1995
ADB Board of Directors' Approval                                          14 Dec 1995
Loan Signing
 1415-IND                                                                  10 May 1996
 1416-IND                                                                  13 Dec 1996
Loan Effectiveness
 1415-IND                                          8 Jul 1996                8 Jul 1996
 1416-IND                                         11 Feb 1997              19 Dec 1996
First Disbursement
 1415-IND                                                                  29 Nov 1996
 1416-IND                                                                  12 Dec 1997
Project Completion
 1415-IND                                         31 Dec 2001              30 Jun 2004
 1416-IND                                         31 Dec 2001              26 Jan 2001
Loan Closing
 1415-IND                                         30 Jun 2002               7 Dec 2004
 1416-IND                                         30 Jun 2002              26 Jan 2001
Months (Effectiveness to Completion)
 1415-IND                                            65.8                    95.8
 1416-IND                                            64.6                    49.3
iv



Borrower                              India
Executing Agencies                    Loan 1415 ­ Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
                                      and Finance Corporation
                                      Loan 1416 ­ Housing Development Finance Corporation Ltd

Type of Mission                                 No. of Missions                   No. of Person-Days
Fact-Finding                                            1                                 95
Appraisal                                               1                                 75
Project Administration
        Inception                                         1                                 40
        Midterm Review                                    1                                 30

                                             1415-IND          1416-IND          1415-IND          1416-IND
       Reviewa                                  22                7                 250              119
       Project Completion                        2                1                  14                4
Operations Evaluation                                     1                                   8
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IND = India, TA = technical assistance.
a
  Includes two statement of expenditures review missions that were carried out in connection with Loan 1415-IND
  only. The seven loan review missions recorded for Loan 1416-IND were also counted under Loan 1415-IND since
  these missions also assessed the implementation of Loan 1415-IND.
                                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

         The rapid expansion of Bangalore's industrial and information technology activities in the
early 1990s led to increased migration from rural areas of Karnataka state and elsewhere in
India, intensifying the strain on Bangalore's infrastructure facilities. Living conditions of residents
subsequently deteriorated, leading to increased urban poverty and environmental problems.
The key objectives of the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project (KUIDP) were to
promote decentralization of population growth and economic activity away from Bangalore by
addressing infrastructure deficiencies and related environmental issues in selected urban areas
in the Bangalore region, namely Channapatna, Mysore, Ramanagaram, and Tumkur. 1
The Project also sought to build the capacity of selected urban local bodies (ULBs) and related
sector institutions in order to ensure sustainability of the investments and to provide housing
finance assistance to low-income groups in the Project towns at affordable interest rates.

        At appraisal, a project was defined requiring some $132 million, of which $85 million was
borrowed from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) (Loan No.1415-IND). Due to the shortage of
housing and housing finance in the region, the Government of India also requested ADB
assistance to provide housing finance through the Housing Development Finance Corporation
(HDFC). The total financing for the Project therefore also included a separate $20 million for
housing finance (Loan no.1416-IND). The two loans to the Republic of India and HDFC were
approved by the ADB Board on 14 December 1995 and became effective on 8 July 1996.
Significantly, this was the first time the Government of India had borrowed from ADB for an
integrated urban development project. It was also the first time ADB had made a loan for
housing finance in the country.

       Since the nature of integrated urban development projects is multi-sectoral, the Project
comprised six parts, as follows.

      (i)     Environmental sanitation (36% of estimated base cost) including construction of
              facilities for water supply, solid waste management, sewerage, storm water drainage
              and sullage disposal.

      (ii)    Road improvement and truck and bus terminals (13%) including (a) rehabilitation
              and upgrading of roads, extension of road systems, construction or widening of
              bridges, construction of new roads; and (b) provision of truck terminals in Mysore
              and Tumkur, relocation of a bus stand in Ramanagaram to improve traffic circulation
              and safety, and the improvement of one private bus terminal in Maddur.

      (iii)   Poverty reduction (17%) including (a) provision of water supply, electricity, street
              lighting, improved sanitation and drainage, solid waste disposal and improved health
              facilities in selected urban slums in the Project towns; (b) low-income sanitation
              including provision of sanitary latrines for low-income households in the Project
              towns through community participation; (c) residential sites and services including
              development of housing sites and provision of roads, water supply, drainage and
              sanitation facilities for selected residential areas in the Project towns; and (d) cultural
              and women's training centers including establishment of a cultural and commercial
              center in Ramanagaram and a women's training center in Tumkur.


1
    Subsequently, due to project savings, two more towns along the Bangalore-Mysore highway were included,
    Maddur and Mandya.
vi


     (iv)   Development of industrial sites and services (6%) in the towns of Tumkur and
            Ramanagaram.

     (v)    Implementation assistance and institutional strengthening (8%) by providing
            consulting services, equipment and staffing costs for institutional support to the
            Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC)
            and relevant ULBs.

     (vi)   Low-income housing finance (20%) by providing housing loans to primarily low-
            income beneficiaries in the Project towns, as well as in the Bangalore region, at
            affordable interest rates without any form of external subsidy.

        Some or all of the six parts were implemented to varying degrees in each of the
six towns. Given that there were 36 separate sub-components and 12 implementing agencies
for the Project, implementation of the urban development component was complex, resulting in
an extension of the closing date by 2 years to 30 June 2004. This can be compared with the
housing finance component, which closed 17 months ahead of schedule. The early closure was
primarily due to the fact that HFDC had received permission from ADB to issue cheap housing
loans to middle and low-income families throughout the state and wherever families wanted a
house, rather than to the future occupiers of the residential sites and services schemes to be
developed under the Project as it was quickly clear that the services schemes would take years
to complete. The change of approach speeded up the process but reduced the internal
coherence of the Project.

        The operations evaluation mission (OEM) investigated each project component
separately. The expanded internal road and storm drainage systems for the towns provided high
quality outputs and were greatly appreciated by city officials and beneficiaries. The water supply
component was also successfully implemented in the four towns scheduled for the works,
although in Ramanagaram and Channapatna the long supply line of 42 kilometers (km) led to a
significantly higher cost per connection. Hence, given the existing tariff structure, the project
completion report (PCR) financial internal rate of return (FIRR), which was accepted by the
OEM, was negative. Overall, difficulties in increasing the water and sewer tariffs sufficiently to
cover operation and maintenance (O&M) remained a problem. The slum improvement and
community development components provided improvements in the quality of life for the
beneficiaries, although some are threatened by the inability of the Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC) or ULBs to follow up.

         There were mixed results particularly for the large sewerage component. Although most
physical outputs were of good quality, their utilization was less than optimal due to poor
maintenance in some plants and slow progress in individual houses connecting with the sewage
network. (Household connections were not included in the project design as per ADB practice at
the time; this is now changed.) Some sewage treatment plants also suffered from defective
pumps and, in one case, a leaking oxidation pond. A continuing dispute between the contractor
and the client as to who was responsible for repairs resulted in the plant being barely
operational. The five residential sites and services schemes were not successful at the time of
the OEM. Two such schemes were completed with plots sold but not occupied. (Due to
outstanding bills of many local bodies, the electricity provider was unwilling to invest in
electrification of the sites and services schemes.) Two schemes were completed but no plots
sold (due to high costs and poor location) and one scheme was still under construction at the
time of the OEM. Of the two planned industrial sites and services schemes, one was cancelled
and the other was nearly 80% utilized. Two bus terminals constructed by the Project were
                                                                                               vii


completed and in operation. Another was located in the wrong place and was transferred to the
Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation. One truck terminal was not being used and was
being converted to a residential site, while the second one was cancelled.

          In general, the OEM concluded that a project of this complexity required more
preparation than had been allotted, i.e., a longer project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA)
than was scheduled. A longer preparation would have benefited the quality of the investment
components as well as the consensus building within ULBs and city populations regarding the
required O&M of the assets. This may have something to do with the way ADB operates in India.
ADB responds to central government requests to prepare projects in certain sectors in certain
states and is generally confronted with many demands at state level, made in the expectation
that the central or state government will guarantee the loan and the project will present a one-
time opportunity. As a consequence, much tends to be included in the projects, some
components are not optimally investigated, and some that would have to recover their O&M
costs are not able to do so. The OEM has rated the Project "successful," but this is in part due
to the positive externalities of the Project. The Project was the first major integrated urban
investment project to be implemented in several mid-sized cities in more than a decade, not
only for ADB but also for the Government of India. As such, it generated substantial experience,
including state and country-wide policy initiatives. It had successful components, notably in
roads, and to some extent water supply and sanitation and slum development. It also helped to
establish KUIDFC as a professional urban development institution. After the Project began, the
World Bank developed similar projects while other agencies followed with related types of
projects for the urban sector. The OEM's economic and financial analysis assessed the Project
as less efficient and less sustainable. However, based on the efficacy of the Project, the
relevance of gaining experience in the urban sector, and the substantial indirect impacts, as well
as the highly successful community development and training components, a successful rating
is justifiable. The OED identified several lessons as follows.

        Project Design. Project preparation and design for complicated, multisector, multi-town
projects such as KUIDP should be allotted adequate time to do the necessary technical,
financial, socioeconomic and institutional analysis such that ultimate project implementation and
evaluation closely resembles original project objectives, outputs and financial projections. Time
also needs to be taken to build consensus within ULBs regarding the importance of O&M of the
assets. Furthermore, if the Project was intended to help relieve pressure on Bangalore, it would
have needed to be more directly geared to job creation in the surrounding cities, which was not
the case. Offering housing sites, two industrial sites and improved services in such cities is not
sufficient to significantly divert business and migrants from coming to Bangalore.

        Bridging TA. Since project preparatory TAs do not generally include detailed design
and procurement, ADB should consider to grant bridging TAs, or alternatively the approval of TA
loans, such that when an investment loan becomes effective, sub-components can be tendered
and civil works can start within the first year.

        Institutional Development and Training. Institutional development and training should
be given equal priority with development of physical components. This has been done to a great
extent in the Project, enabling KUIDFC to undertake the design of the North Karnataka Urban
Sector Investment Program so that while ADB will do the report and recommendation of the
President, the project concept and details will be supplied by KUIDFC.

       Capacity of Urban Local Bodies. The capabilities of municipalities as implementing
agencies need to be investigated in more detail, especially in small bodies such as
viii


Ramanagaram and Channapatna, so that KUIDFC (or any other project management unit) will
not have to implement the work on their behalf or have the civil works turned over to a
specialized state agency such as the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board for
O&M and tariff collections.

        Civil Works and Equipment versus Services. The ultimate focus should be on the
provision of affordable services and cost recovery, not just on the provision of civil works and
equipment. Least-cost analysis should identify the type of technical solution that would provide
the service at the lowest cost for the project as well as the beneficiary. Performance-based
private sector participation schemes should be pursued, and service provision emphasized.

        Beneficiary Involvement. The ULBs and their clientele should be involved in the design
of all project components, especially water, sewer and drainage components. Design and
implementation according to beneficiaries' felt needs generally leads to better post-project cost
recovery and O&M. Involvement of nongovernment organizations (NGOs) also led to effective
results, particularly in identifying needs in slum upgrading and low-cost sanitation components.



                                                           Ramesh B. Adhikari
                                                           Officer-in-Charge
                                                           Operations Evaluation Department
                                             I.       INTRODUCTION

A.        Evaluation Purpose and Process

1.      This project performance evaluation report (PPER) focuses on pertinent aspects of the
Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project (KUIDP), including the low-income
housing component, and presents the findings of the operations evaluation mission (OEM) to
India from 18 July to 5 August 2005. The timing of the OEM, a year before completion of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) project completion report (PCR), was influenced by the need to
assess findings on the first completed integrated urban development project (IUDP) to be
conducted in India in a special evaluation study on ADB's urban sector strategy and
operations. 1 The mission visited all six project towns and the sites of subprojects in each town,
including a sample of the slum upgrading schemes. Before visiting the towns, interviews were
conducted with relevant central government officials in (i) the Department of Economic Affairs in
the Ministry of Finance, (ii) officials of Karnataka state's Department of Municipal Administration
and Department of Housing and Urban Development (DHUD), (iii) key implementation agencies
such as the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board (KUWSDB), and (iv) managers
and staff of the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation
(KUIDFC), the Executing Agency (EA) of the Project. 2 In each town, meetings were held with
municipal commissioners (or the city commissioner in the case of Mysore) and relevant staff, as
well as with the managing directors of local urban development agencies such as Mysore Urban
Development Authority (MUDA) and Tumkur Urban Development Authority (TUDA), and local
KUWSDB staff. Local nongovernment organizations (NGOs) involved in community
development aspects of the Project, as well as federations of self-help groups, were also visited.
Upon return from the field, debriefings and wrap-up meetings were held with DHUD and
KUIDFC in Bangalore and the Department of Economic Affairs in Delhi. This delayed report
takes into account the results of follow-up communications with KUIDFC and ADB's resident
mission in August­October 2007.

2.     With respect to the housing finance loan, a meeting was held with the general manager
of the Housing Development and Finance Corporation (HDFC) in Bangalore. Various findings
from the meeting regarding housing finance for low-income families are included in the relevant
sections of this PPER.

3.      The project management consultants submitted a draft PCR to KUIDFC in June 2004.
This focused mostly on the completion and status of the civil works and equipment, with limited
analysis of the Project's overall performance, especially its socioeconomic and policy impacts.
A draft ADB PCR 3 was completed before the OEM and drew mainly on the EA's PCR to
describe the civil works. Based on several missions to the field, ADB's draft rated the Project as
successful, noting (i) all the works, including additional ones, were completed within the
extended time frame; (ii) rather than cost overruns, savings were made despite cancellation of a
$5 million loan; and (iii) requirements for social and environmental safeguards were followed.
The draft observed a major improvement in environmental and sanitary conditions of the project
towns, although the performance on financial and governance-related loan covenants was rated
only "partially satisfactory." Furthermore, the state's initiatives on property tax and other reforms,

1
    ADB. 2006. Special Evaluation Study on ADB's Urban Sector Strategy and Operations. Manila.
2
    At the time of loan approval, only four towns were included under the Project: Channapatna, Mysore,
    Ramanagaram and Tumkur. In November 2002, Maddur and Mandya were added to the project scope.
3
    At the time of the OEM, the PCR was in its draft final form. The final PCR was circulated to the Board of Directors
    on 5 July 2006 (ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
    in India. Manila).
2


as promoted by the Project and ADB, were viewed as steps in the right direction. The PCR
noted a substantial positive impact on municipal finances. ADB completed a separate PCR for
the housing finance component of the Project in December 2001. This component was rated as
"highly successful." The PCR for the infrastructure components was finalized by July 2006. Both
were posted on ADB's website. 4

B.       Expected Results

4.      The primary objective of the Project, as outlined in ADB's report and recommendation of
the President (RRP), 5 was to promote decentralization of population growth and economic
activity away from Bangalore by addressing infrastructure deficiencies and related
environmental issues in selected urban areas in the Bangalore subregion, namely Channapatna,
Mysore, Ramanagarm, and Tumkur. The Project, which had an estimated base cost equivalent
to $80.3 million for works and $20.0 million for housing loans, also sought to (i) build the
capacity of urban local bodies (ULBs) and related sector institutions in order to ensure
sustainability of the investments, and (ii) provide housing finance assistance to low-income
groups in the project towns at affordable interest rates. The Project had six parts as follows.

5.     Part A: Environmental sanitation ($37.1 million) comprising construction of facilities for
water supply, solid waste management, sewage systems and storm-water drainage and sullage
disposal.

6.       Part B: Road improvement and truck and bus terminals ($12.8 million) comprising
(i) rehabilitation and upgrading of 190 kilometers (km) of roads, construction or widening of
bridges, and construction of new roads to improve access to housing and industrial areas; and
(ii) provision of truck terminals in Mysore and Tumkur, the relocation of a bus stand in
Ramanagaram to improve traffic circulation and safety, and improvement of one private bus
terminal in Maddur.

7.      Part C: Poverty reduction ($16.6 million) comprising (i) upgrading of 31 slums including
provision of water supply, electricity, street lighting, sanitation and drainage, solid waste
disposal and improved health facilities in selected urban slums in the project towns;
(ii) low-income sanitation including provision of 23,700 sanitary latrines for low-income
households in the project towns through community participation; (iii) residential sites and
services schemes including development of 7,200 housing sites and provision of roads, water
supply, drainage and sanitation facilities for selected residential areas in the project towns; and
(iv) establishment of a cultural and commercial center in Ramanagaram and a women's training
center in Tumkur.

8.    Part D: Development of industrial sites and services ($5.6 million) in the towns of
Tumkur and Ramanagaram.

9.     Part E: Implementation assistance and institutional strengthening ($8.2 million)
through provision of consulting services, equipment and staffing costs for institutional support to
KUIDFC and ULBs.



4
    Available: http://adb.org/Documents/PCRs/IND/27132-IND-PCR.pdf; and
    http://adb.org/documents/pcrs/IND/In311_01.pdf.
5
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance to India for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila.
                                                                                                                3


10.    Part F: Low-income housing finance ($20.0 million) through the provision of housing
loans primarily to low-income beneficiaries in the project towns, as well as in the Bangalore
subregion, at affordable interest rates and without external subsidies.

                                 II.     DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A.        Formulation

11.     The Government approached ADB in 1993 for assistance to prepare a project that would
enable selected urban locations to be developed as growth areas in an effort to reduce
pressures on Bangalore. The urban areas of Channapatna, Mysore, Ramanagaram and Tumkur
were selected based on criteria such as location in relation to Bangalore, existing population
and annual growth rates, quality of infrastructure facilities and related amenities, and definition
as self-contained urban areas. (Due to project savings, two more towns along the Bangalore-
Mysore highway, Maddur and Mandya, were included later.) At the time, Mysore, 140 km from
Bangalore, was considered to be the most likely counter-magnet to Bangalore. Tumkur, which is
smaller and 90 km away, was considered a potential counter-magnet. ADB approved a project
preparatory technical assistance (PPTA) 6 on 12 November 1993 to investigate the feasibility of
a project. The consultants submitted their report in April 1995. Based on the report, ADB's
appraisal in June and July 1995 defined a project costing some $132.0 million equivalent.
Because of a shortage of housing and housing finance in the region, the Government also
requested ADB assistance to provide housing finance through HDFC. Thus, the total project
cost included a separate loan for $20.0 million for housing finance. Loan negotiations took place
during November 1995. 7 ADB's Board subsequently approved an urban development loan for
$85.0 million to the Republic of India and a housing loan of $20.0 million to HDFC on
14 December 1995. The loans became effective on 8 July 1996. 8 Significantly, it was the first
time the Government of India had borrowed from ADB for an IUDP and it was the first time ADB
had made a loan for housing finance in the country.

B.        Rationale

12.      Bangalore, the capital of Karnataka State, had expanded at a rapid rate mainly because
of its location, favorable climate and the availability of good physical infrastructure. The city was
therefore the recipient of increasing and substantial local and foreign investment from 1991,
when the Government began its liberalization program. The rapid expansion of industrial and
information technology activities prompted increased migration to Bangalore from rural areas of
Karnataka and elsewhere in India, intensifying the strain on the city's infrastructure. Living
conditions of residents subsequently deteriorated, leading to increased urban poverty and
environmental problems.

C.        Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

13.    The estimated total project cost at appraisal included a foreign exchange cost of
$36.0 million, which ADB was to finance, together with $69.0 million equivalent of local currency

6
    ADB. 1993. Technical Assistance to India for the Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila.
7
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila (Loan 1415-IND, for $85.0 million, approved
    on 14 December). Loan negotiations for Loan 1416-IND were done in August­September 1995.
8
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila (Loan 1416-IND, for $20.0 million, approved
    on 14 December and effective on 19 December 1996).
4


costs ($49.0 million from the loan to India and $20.0 million equivalent from the loan to HDFC).
The Government of Karnataka was to finance $19.3 million equivalent, with equity from ULBs
and related institutions in kind and land amounting to another $7.7 million equivalent. Thus,
ADB financing covered 79.6% of the total project costs, 64.4% of all the components except
low-income housing, and 15.2% for the low-income housing component. The loan was made to
the central Government from ADB's ordinary capital resources for a period of 25 years,
including a grace period of 5 years, at ADB's variable interest rate. The central Government
then made loans, excluding interest during construction, to the Government of Karnataka on
standard terms and conditions set by the Ministry of Finance for foreign aided projects.
The foreign exchange risk was borne by the central Government, but $62 million for various
works was to be reissued as loans for a term of 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years, at
an annual interest rate of 12%. 9

14.     The actual project cost amounted to an equivalent of $114.35 million, $17.65 million less
than the appraisal estimate (see Table 1). Of the $105 million loan amount, $96.38 million was
utilized and $8.62 million was canceled ($5 million after the midterm review, the rest after
project completion).

                                            Table 1: Project Cost
                                                  ($ million)
      Cost                                                  Appraisal Estimate                  Actual
      Foreign Exchange Cost                                        36.00                        33.24
      Local Currency Cost                                          96.00                        81.11
              Total                                               132.00                       114.35
     Source: ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in
             India. Manila.

15.      While cost overruns occurred in the water supply and road improvement components
(the latter due to more roads being added to the project scope), substantial savings were made
in components covering sewerage and residential sites and services. The latter savings were
mainly because financing for the Tumkur scheme, which was delayed by the acquisition of land,
was cancelled. In addition, during project implementation, there was a substantial devaluation of
the rupee against the US dollar from Rs34.6 at appraisal to about Rs46 at project completion.
Another reason for savings was that costs were overestimated due to ADB's rather rigidly
applied formulas to calculate contingencies. The availability of loan savings led to approval of a
major change in scope, with the towns of Mandya and Maddur added to the Project
($6.0 million). These two towns had been evaluated before the project but were not included in
the original scope due to funding constraints.

16.     The EA for the infrastructure project was Karnataka's DHUD, through KUIDFC. The EA
for the low-income housing component was HDFC. Given the large number of subprojects (36)
in various sectors for each of the six towns, there was a variety of implementing agencies
(see Table 2).




9
    The $10.5 million balance of the funds for components covering drainage, road improvements, slum upgrading,
    low-income sanitation and institutional strengthening were to be provided to local authorities as grants through
    budgetary allocations.
                                                                                                                        5


                                        Table 2: Implementing Agencies
 Implementing Agency                                                             Area Covered
 Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage                     All water supply and sewage schemes
 Board
 Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board                   All industrial sites and services
 Karnataka Slum Clearance Board                                All slum upgrading work
 Public Works Department                                       All project roads
 Mysore Urban Development Authority                            Outer ring road, bus terminal and residential sites
                                                               and services in Mysore
 Tumkur Urban Development Authority                            Southern bypass road, truck terminal and
                                                               residential sites and services in Tumkur
 Mysore City Corporation                                       Solid waste management, storm water drainage,
                                                               road improvement and traffic management, and
                                                               low-cost sanitation in Mysore
 Tumkur Municipality                                           Solid waste management, storm water drainage,
                                                               road improvement and traffic management, low-
                                                               cost sanitation and women's training center in
                                                               Tumkur
 Ramanagaram Municipality                                      Solid waste management, storm water drainage,
                                                               road improvement and traffic management, low-
                                                               cost sanitation, residential sites and services, bus
                                                               stand relocation, cultural / commercial center in
                                                               Ramanagaram
 Channapatna Municipality                                      Solid waste management, storm water drainage,
                                                               road improvement and traffic management, low-
                                                               cost sanitation, residential sites and services in
                                                               Channapatna
 Mandya Municipality                                           Road improvement and traffic management, solid
                                                               waste management, and low-cost sanitation in
                                                               Mandya
 Maddur Municipality                                           Road improvement and traffic management, solid
                                                               waste management, low-cost sanitation, bus
                                                               terminal and municipal building in Maddur
 Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development                     Conceptual plan for Bangalore subregion and
 Authority                                                     detailed plan for Bangalore urban and rural
                                                               districts
Source: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation.

17.    KUIDFC was responsible for overall project administration and institutional strengthening.
Early in the Project, it established a project management unit (PMU), headed by KUIDFC's
managing director; three project implementation units (PIUs), headed by executive engineers; a
community development unit; and a training and capacity building cell. Consultants were also
recruited to assist KUIDFC to implement the various programs 10 while local NGOs in each town
were recruited to assist with community participation and poverty reduction aspects of the
Project.




10
     (i) An international consulting firm, Louis Berger International Inc., to assist with project management consultants;
     (ii) two domestic consulting firms, Dalal Mott MacDonald and STUP Consultants to carry out design and
     construction supervision of the civil works; and (iii) an international consulting firm associated with domestic
     consultants for preparing the Bangalore subregional plan. In addition, the Project recruited a national consultant,
     M/s Intervention India, to conduct a benefit monitoring and evaluation study.
6


18.     The Government of India, the borrower, represented by the Department of Economic
Affairs, conducted regular tripartite meetings and reviews involving KUIDFC and ADB. KUIDFC
was created in 1993 for similar domestically financed projects.

19.     A major problem was the contractors' bill payment mechanism, which was too
complicated and involved long delays and dependence on the state treasury. Implementing
agencies had to prepare and certify contractors' bills for payment, which were reviewed at
KUIDFC. Payment was obtained from the state and then forwarded to the implementing agency
for release to the contractor. The state should probably have instituted a second project
operational account at KUIDFC to speed up the payment process and reduce KUIDFC's
dependence on state finances, helping it to establish authority over the implementing agencies.

20.       Based largely on its experience in the Project, KUIDFC gradually evolved into an
independent organization with adequate staff and authority. The basic training received by
KUIDFC staff during the Project resulted in the state following up on the second ADB-assisted
project, known as the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management
Project (KUDCEMP). 11 Significantly, for a third ADB-assisted project, KUIDFC prepared a PPTA
itself 12 and the project 13 was approved in December 2006. Due to its growing institutional
capacity, KUIDFC has established itself as a key agency for all externally aided projects in the
state.

D.      Procurement, Construction, and Scheduling

21.     In as far as the OEM was still able to check, KUIDFC carried out the procurement of
goods and services generally in accordance with ADB's Guidelines on the Use of Consultants
(as amended from time to time) and Guidelines for Procurement (as amended from time to time).
From July 1997, prequalification of contractors for various works was done in stages to meet the
needs of the Project. ADB approved broad criteria for qualification of small civil works programs.
Standard bidding documents, work specifications and bid evaluation procedures were approved
for use in the Project in July 1997 and were used for local competitive bidding for all project civil
works. Standard bidding documents for procurement of goods internationally and locally were
developed for use in procuring solid waste management equipment and water meters.
Procurement of other items such as vehicles, office equipment and furnishings for the PMU,
PIUs and consulting teams was done by KUIDFC through local purchase. Most works were
completed after substantial delays.

22.   The Project was due to be completed by 31 December 2001. It was completed on
30 June 2004, although the low-income housing component was completed in January 2001.
However, according to KUIDFC, some "spill-over" works were not completed until the end of
January 2005.

23.    While the original plan was to complete the project in 6 years, the Project was completed
in 8 years. Generally, delays were encountered in almost all stages and components, mostly

11
   ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
   for the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management Project. Manila. (Loan 1704-IND,
   for $175.0 million, approved on 26 October).
12
   ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance to India for Preparing the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
   III. Manila.
13
   ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
   for the Multitranche Financing Facility: North Karnataka Urban Sector Investment Program. Manila (Loan 2312-IND,
   for $33 million, approved on 26 January 2007).
                                                                                                                  7


due to construction problems caused by contractors. However, there were major delays due to
land acquisition, 14 changes in design owing to inadequate surveys and investigation by
consultants, poor contract administration by the implementing agencies, lack of coordinated
efforts by the implementing agencies, and late release of payments by the state.

E.         Design Changes

24.     Initially, the Project was to cover Channapatna, Mysore, Ramanagaram and Tumkur.
ADB approved the inclusion of two more towns, Mandya and Maddur, in November 2002. Other
project-related changes included the addition of public toilets, lake improvement in Mysore and
rainwater-harvesting works, while the electrification of residential sites and service areas in all
project towns was cancelled (meaning that such services would have to be acquired by the
owners). The Project provided water connections in Channapatna to improve the use of new
assets. In Mysore, the changes included (i) realigning the outer ring road in accordance with the
recommendations of an environmental impact assessment and public consultations,
(ii) canceling the truck terminal, and (iii) including water supply and sewerage interconnections
to improve the impact of the bulk water supply system and sewage trunk mains and treatment
plant. Since land was not available in Ramanagaram, the sewage treatment technology was
changed from an oxidation pond to an aerated lagoon, and the industrial sites and services
component was canceled. In addition, water and sewer connections to houses were provided in
Ramanagaram to improve the use of the new assets. In Tumkur, the residential sites and
services component was at a standstill due to land acquisition problems at the time of the OEM.
However, KUIDFC reported in 2007 that all the sites, except corner and commercial sites, had
been allotted. Corner and commercial sites were to be auctioned.

F.         Outputs

25.     The achievement of outputs is summarized in Appendix 1. OEM's assessment of the
quality of physical and institutional outputs, including shortcomings and successes, is as follows.

           1.       Part A: Environmental Sanitation

26.    The two major components of environmental sanitation were water supply and sewerage.
Water supply was a significant component in Mysore, Ramanagaram, Channapatna and
Tumkur. In all cases, the civil works and equipment were found to be functioning well and to be
well maintained. However, increases in water tariffs and other policy measures designed to
make ULBs financially viable had not materialized to a sufficient extent, due to insufficient
willingness of ULBs to collect payments and customers' reluctance to pay the full cost. On the
positive side, a special drive in Mysore to collect water charge arrears showed positive results,
and collections in Ramanagaram and Channapatna have increased significantly after
management of the system was handed to KUWSDB. Tumkur was also planning a collections
drive to reduce water payments arrears as well as illegal connections.

27.    The operational performance with respect to sewerage was less impressive. All of the
sewage treatment plants (STPs) were operating way below capacity, usually at 20% to 25%.
Given that the plants should be operating at nearly full capacity by 2011, the main question was
whether the percentage of capacity was on target for 2011. While drives to increase sewer
connections were conducted in each town, it was essentially up to households to pay the

14
     This was in spite of the time bound land acquisition plan approved with the Government before project approval,
     and covenants in the loan agreement.
8


connection fee and subsequent consumption charges. Since all households must have had
some arrangement for sewage disposal, it may have been more cost effective to offer
households the choice of installing the latrines popular in low-income neighborhoods.

28.     Despite the best efforts of the Project and local authorities, solid waste management
remained a problem in all the towns at the time of the OEM. Designated solid waste disposal
sites could not be developed (Tumkur), were open dumping sites (Ramanagaram and
Channapatna) or operations had stopped due to legal problems (Mysore, where an insufficiently
specified management contract probably lay at the basis of the problem). Re-use of waste
through composting is still a problem in many places in India.

29.     Mysore. The water supply improvement program in Mysore was the single largest
investment in the Project. It comprised a new water supply system designed to supply 50 million
liters per day (mld) initially, adequate to meet estimated demand until 2011 and capable of
being upgraded to 150 mld to meet further demand until 2026 without additional civil works.
Although a September 2004 memorandum from ADB's resident mission stated that O&M was
not being carried out properly, the OEM found the water treatment plant operating well, with all
meters and gauges working, the flocculator operating, records of flow measurement being kept,
and the laboratory undertaking water quality tests. Mysore had about 110,000 water
connections, 20,000 of which were illegally constructed (this was reduced to 10,000 by the time
of the OEM). Although supply is for some 20 hours per day at about 130 liters per capita per
day, about 25% remains non-revenue water.

30.     Leak-detection equipment was procured for Mysore City Corporation (MCC) to be used
for studies in Mysore. However, it was never used and ultimately the equipment was transferred
to KUWSDB. The use of such equipment requires commitment by the water provider,
cooperation from residents and special skills among staff. Due primarily to a lack of skilled
manpower, the MCC could not appreciate the benefits of the equipment.

31.     The sewage system program for Mysore included construction of trunk sewers and
STPs for three separate drainage districts (Districts A and D, B, and C). The program also
included making connections to existing laterals. All systems were designed with an initial
installed capacity to meet forecast demand until 2011, allowing for easy incremental expansion
of mechanical equipment and some civil works to meet ultimate design capacity until 2026.
Although the STPs for Districts B and C were operating well, one was operating at only about
25% of its 30 mld capacity, while the larger one was processing an average of 25 mld, or 37%
of its 67.65 mld capacity. Major problems were found at the STP for Districts A and D.
The 60 mld capacity plant was operating at a peak of only 22 mld. Just three of 11 pumps were
operating. Several had broken down months previously and had not been repaired by the
contractor. Maintenance personnel for the STP were co-opted from KUWSDB to implement the
works, but they did not seem qualified to carry out adequate maintenance. The earth berm also
been leaking over about 600 meters and the contractor had merely dumped gravel and dirt on it
without compacting it. Thus, some leakage was still detected. Due to a lack of pumping capacity,
raw sewage was also observed in the drainage ditch. 15 In October 2007, KUIFDC reported that
about 14,000 new connections had been added since 2004, so that the inflow to the STPs
should have increased. It reported the STPs were working satisfactorily.


15
      At the time of completion of this PPER, in 2007, ADB staff mentioned that some of the raw sewage in Mysore
     intended for an STP was being intercepted as nutrient for farming for the benefit of some local businessmen, and
     that the sewage ponds were used for growing fish.
                                                                                               9


32.     Regarding solid waste management, a 200 ton per day composting plant was built under
build-operate-transfer conditions. A contractor operated the plant for 3 years under a 10-year
agreement with the MCC. However, as of 27 June 2005, the plant had stopped operating due to
a disagreement on the payment of fees which were owed to MCC over a year. MCC was taking
legal action to break the agreement and find another operator. In the meantime, it was looking
for a new landfill, as the existing plant area was filled with garbage. According to the engineer
who had operated the plant, the plant was efficient in segregating organic and non-organic
material and processing the former to produce some 6,000 tons per month of organic compost,
which had a market for farmers. Community collection bins were constructed and collection and
transport vehicles purchased. By the time of issuance of this report, the plant was operated by
MCC only during the day shift. KUIFDC reported that MCC was marketing the manufactured
compost efficiently.

33.      Tumkur. The component included (i) extension and augmentation of the existing water
distribution systems, (ii) construction of new underground sewage systems and an STP, and
(iii) improvement of facilities for solid waste management and development of a new disposal
site. Development of the water supply system, which included improvements and upgrading of
the existing water distribution system (128 km) and construction of a reservoir at the old water
treatment plant site, was very well received by municipal officials. In August 2006 the town
began a drive to reduce the 10,000 illegal water connections (of a total of 28,000 connections)
and to increase the sewer connections from 15,000 to 30,000 over 3 months.

34.      The sewerage program included construction of a new sewage system (190 km)
together with an STP to serve the core area of the town and key residential areas and pump
stations (24.57 mld). Although the STP was running at an average of only 6 to 7 mld, about 25%
of its capacity, the plant was well run and maintained. (The plant was peaking at about 8.5 mld
at the time of the OEM.) There was no leakage or seepage from the earth oxidation ponds,
which were about 1.5 km from the plant.

35.      The solid waste management program was to improve the operational efficiencies of the
system and development of a new solid waste disposal site. A sanitary landfill site was
constructed under the Project. However, the site was not being utilized due to opposition from a
village a kilometer from the site. Although there were no settlements in the immediate vicinity,
the villagers succeeded in stopping trucks to the site, dismantling much of the site works, and
convincing several councilors that the site was a nuisance and created disease problems.
Municipal officials have found an alternative landfill site at Ajjagondanahalli village, and the
compound wall and approach road construction were in progress by October 2007.

36.     Ramanagaram and Channapatna. A water supply scheme of 27 mld capacity for
Channapatna and Ramanagaram was built under the Project. The scheme included
rehabilitation of existing intake works and a raw-water pumping station on the Shimsa River.
A 15 mld treatment plant, a clear-water reservoir and pump station, a 43 km clear-water raising
main, two intermediate pumping stations and 85 km and 96 km of distribution networks for
Channapatna and Ramanagaram respectively were built. The bulk water supply scheme was
maintained by KUWSDB on behalf of the towns through a management contract with a private
operating firm. At the time of the OEM, 6 mld of water was being supplied to each town, allowing
water to be provided for about two to three hours a day. According to town officials, this was a
very big benefit. In addition, KUIDFC installed about 16,000 connections, of which 11,000 were
done before the closing date.
10


37.     For Ramanagaram, improvements and extensions to the existing sewer system and
construction of a new STP (7.56 mld) were undertaken, including extending the sewer system
works to cover a broader area. In order to encourage house owners to connect, KUIDFC made
connections a part of the Project, with the cost to be recovered from property owners through
10 interest free installments. Some 6,500 connections were made up to the individual plot lines.
However, only about 3,000 to 4,000 households have actually connected. Thus, the plant was
receiving only about 2.0 mld in comparison with about 5.0 mld for optimal operation. The town
was planning a second phase to connect 3,500 more households. At the time of completion of
this PPER, in 2007, the two towns had passed a bylaw to make people connect and another few
thousand households had connected.

38.     Regarding solid waste, a composting plant for Ramanagaram and Channapatna was
planned. However, detailed surveys completed as part of the solid waste management plan
indicated there would be insufficient volume to support a viable composting operation, and a
sanitary landfill site was developed instead. However, the OEM confirmed that the site was not
operating properly as a sanitary landfill, but was an open dump with just one tractor spreading
the waste.

       2.      Part B: Road Improvement and Truck and Bus Terminals

39.     In the towns visited by the OEM, especially Mysore and Tumkur, where roads and
drainage were major components, the improved roads and accompanying drains were found to
be in good condition, sometimes 4 years after installation. In Tumkur, where road and drainage
improvements covered most of the center of the town, officials said the component had
completely changed the town's character. The roads observed during the OEM were invariably
in good condition. The mission also observed that the southern bypass road in Tumkur and the
outer ring road in Mysore were built to a good standard, and concurred with the view that they
would facilitate the orderly growth of the cities.

40.     Mysore. The Project has had a significant impact in improving the internal and external
road system for Mysore through the (i) upgrading and improvement of city roads (48 roads for
58 km), (ii) widening and strengthening the intermediate ring road (19 km), and (iii) construction
of a city bus terminal. The work could be carried out only on one bus terminal, as the land for
the other could not be acquired. Two contracts for the outer ring road and truck terminal were
awarded. However, during the execution the work on the truck terminal was removed from the
scope as it was unlikely to be used. Instead, the western portion of the ring road (24.82 km) was
taken up. Thus, in addition to the eastern portion of 7.5 km, a total of 32.3 km was constructed
under the Project. However, some 9.4 km remained to be built at the time of the OEM to
complete the ring road. Once this portion was completed, it was expected that truck traffic would
increase substantially. In the meantime, many industries were locating along the ring road
(including a training center for Infosys). MUDA was also planning almost 30,000 housing sites in
various schemes, while the private sector planned 10,000. Due to the road, property values had
more than doubled in residential areas and almost quadrupled in industrial areas.

41.     Tumkur. The Project constructed extensive local road and drainage improvement works
(18 roads for 24 km) in Tumkur. In addition, a 10.5 km southern bypass road, including a railway
overpass, was built. According to local officials, the roads in the center of the town used to be
dirt and would turn to mud during the monsoons. Now the town center was dry and sanitary.
The southern bypass road was also being well used.
                                                                                                           11


42.     To improve traffic congestion within the city by moving truck parking and transshipment
of goods out of the city, the Project provided a truck terminal. However, truck operators were
unwilling to shift to the new location and the district administration was not prepared to restrict
entry of trucks into the city. Tumkur had received state approval to convert the site to a
residential sites and services scheme by the time of the OEM. The OEM was shown the plans
for the site (147 serviced sites) and the financial plan. By 2007, KUIDFC reported that all
residential sites had been allotted and that corner and commercial sites were going to be
auctioned. It is hoped that the conversion of the site to a housing area will allow the subproject
to break even.

43.      Ramanagaram and Channapatna. This component included (i) 23 km of roads and
30 km of drains in Ramanagaram, (ii) 25 km of roads and 35 km of drains in Channapatna,
(iii) widening of 11 km of the Bangalore-Mysore highway from two to four lanes within the
municipal limits of the towns, and (iv) construction of a 78 meter two-lane bridge across the
Arkavathi River. It was well received by the population of the two towns.

44.    A bus terminal for operation of private bus services was built half way between the two
towns to relieve traffic jams at the existing informal stops. Since the private bus operators
refused to shift their operations to the remote facility, the terminal remained unused. It was
subsequently transferred to the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation in March 2005 to
be used as a bus depot.

           3.      Part C: Poverty Reduction

45.     The OEM found the outputs of the slum upgrading schemes to be of variable quality,
although they seemed to be generally well appreciated by residents. Roads and footpaths were
of variable standard, and many water taps were without spigots. Many drains were constructed
well but remained clogged with dirt, although some were cleaned at the time of the inspection.
Low-cost sanitation (stand-alone toilets) had been built on most plots and functioned well.
Several federations of self-help groups were visited, as well as the training center in Tumkur
and a computer training NGO in Mysore. In all instances, women and trainees were very proud
to be participating and had gained a new outlook through increased self-confidence and self-
esteem. Due to its success, the self-help group approach was replicated in other ADB projects.
Although the component was passed on as a grant, other ADB TAs in India (TA 3344-IND) 16
have investigated whether there might be some element of cost recovery for the small loan
portion.

46.      Residential Sites and Services. The Project included provision for developing a total
area of about 252 hectares of land in the original four project towns with roads, water supply,
storm water drainage and sanitation facilities. At least 60% of the developed sites were to be
allocated to low-income groups at affordable prices and the balance to middle-income groups.
Four contracts were awarded: (i) 3,800 sites for Mysore, work completed, plots sold;
(ii) 1,831 sites at Tumkur, works still under construction with TUDA funds; (iii) 935 sites at
Ramanagaram, work completed; and (iv) 931 sites at Channapatna, work completed. Provision
of electricity to the Mysore, Ramanagaram and Channapatna sites was also scheduled to be
done under separate contract packages at the time of the field visit.



16
     ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to India for the Strengthening of Microfinance Institutions for Urban and
     Environmental Infrastructure Finance. Manila.
12


47.      While all the sites in Mysore were sold, they had not been occupied by mid-2005 due to
the lack of electrification, although it had been contracted at the time of the OEM. The allottees
had made their deposits some years previously and had been waiting to occupy the plots.
To prevent speculation, the allottee cannot sell the plot for 10 years and must build a house on it
within 2 years. The Project originally envisioned that HDFC would extend housing loans to the
allottees of the residential sites and services schemes. However, this did not happen, mainly
because (i) the schemes were late in being completed, (ii) most allottees would not qualify
financially for HDFC loans, (iii) the schemes in Ramanagaram and Channapatna proved not
very attractive, and (iv) the land could not be fully acquired in Tumkur. In Ramanagaram and
Channapatna, market demand did not materialize because the sites were some way out of town
and plot costs were higher than the prices being offered by the private market in town (although
these were provided without services). The Ramanagaram City Municipal Council planned to
sell the two schemes to Rajiv Gandhi Housing Development Ltd at the time of the OEM, for
resale to the Beedi Rollers Association (low-cost cigarette makers), which would buy all the
smaller plots. KUIFDC reported in October 2007 that Rajiv Gandhi Housing Development had
bought the residential lots in Siddlakallu in Ramanagaram to develop low-cost housing as
planned. The Channapatna council planned to sell its sites to local private factories at the time
of the OEM. KUIDFC reported that the Karnataka Housing Board intended to develop a layout
adjoining the layout of KUIDFC at Sunnagatta in Channapatna, and take over this layout. In
Tumkur, after an initial expenditure of Rs1.75 million, the work was abandoned and the contract
closed as land was not available. Work had since been restarted with funds from TUDA.
However, some 427 of the original allottees have withdrawn their applications, while the
remaining 500 have paid in full. Given the foregoing problems in the sale and occupation of the
residential sites and services schemes, it seems that (i) adequate market studies were not
carried out during project design, (ii) difficulties of land acquisition were not foreseen, and
(iii) coordination of works was not adequately carried out.

48.     Slum Upgrading and Low-Cost Sanitation. Some 55 slum areas were selected under
the Project for provision and upgrading of basic urban services including water supply,
sanitation, roads, drains, solid waste disposal facilities and street lighting, plus facilities such as
public toilets and community centers. All facilities included in the program were identified by the
consultants, municipalities and implementing agencies with the full participation of the
communities, using local NGOs and community-based organizations as key facilitators.
Contracts were awarded for (i) 20 slums in Mysore, (ii) six slums in Tumkur, (iii) six slums in
Ramanagaram, (iv) seven slums in Channapatna, and (v) 13 slums in Mandya and three in
Maddur. Most of the households have been provided with on-site toilet units under the low-cost
sanitation program (see para. 49). All the works were completed and the living environment of
the residents of these areas has improved. While most slum areas are maintained by the
Karnataka Slum Clearance Board, the MCC retained responsibility for Gousia Nagar, a large
70,000-person low-income area.

49.     Low-Cost Sanitation. The original Project planned for some 23,700 low-cost sanitation
units, mostly in the slums of the project towns. It also provided for a strong role for local NGOs
to participate in beneficiary identification and community participation aspects of the program,
with the help of the Project's community development officers. A particular emphasis was
placed on using the NGOs to motivate and educate women on the proper use of the facilities.
Individual toilet units were provided to families below the poverty line, through beneficiary
participation (50% of unit cost from the Project, with 25% from the ULB upfront and 25% as a
loan from the ULB to the beneficiary). The targets were revised and 16,154 low-cost sanitation
units were completed in the six project towns.
                                                                                                    13


                                 Table 3: Low-Cost Sanitation Units
 Item            Mysore      Tumkur     Ramanagaram         Channapatna       Mandya   Maddur    Total
 Original         8,750       8,710        2,770               3,470           2,000     0      25,700
   Target
 Revised          8,750       3,300           1,910             3,368          163       13     17,504
   Target
 Completed         8,184      3,020           1,910             2,864           163      13     16,154
   (%)            (100%)      (92%)          (100%)             (85%)          (8%)             (92%)
Source: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Finance and Development Corporation.

50.    Officials in each of the towns felt that the low-cost sanitation component was a great
success, bringing a sense of privacy, self-esteem and ownership to the beneficiaries. All the
units inspected (often marked "ADB") were kept clean and often used for bathing.
The component was expanded by KUIDFC to KUDCEMP (6,000 low-cost sanitation units
constructed) and other projects.

51.     Community participation. KUIDFC identified a set of NGOs for each town and
agreements were signed with each of them. Twenty NGOs, under the supervision of KUIDFC
social development officers, implemented the agreed social action programs under the
three broad categories of health education, skills training and income generation, with a
particular focus on women and children in the slum areas of the Project. KUIDFC also decided
to integrate with the training programs of other government agencies such as the Department of
Industries, Mass Education and Information Technology. In all the towns, emphasis was on
creating self-help groups mainly consisting of women of low-income families residing in slums.
When the approach was tested in earnest about 2 years before project completion, 722 self-
help groups were created. This mobilized about Rs15 million in savings, resulting in the
disbursement of Rs56 million in loans. This effort has since been expanded to KUDCEMP
where 2,400 self-help groups have been formed with Rs32 million in savings and Rs129 million
in loans until mid-2005. Membership in a self-help group has contributed to significant positive
changes in the lives of an estimated 12,000 women (and their families). Of the groups formed,
less than 5% disintegrated. The Project's self-help groups covered 40% of the urban poor in the
short period that the Project was active (see Appendix 2).

        4.      Part D: Development of Industrial Sites and Services

52.    Ramanagaram. Construction of the industrial site and service subproject could not be
taken up due to non-availability of land and was removed from the scope of the Project.

53.      Tumkur. The Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board developed 108 industrial
lots on 216 acres with $1.1 million in ADB financing. Of these, 86 plots have been allocated and
15 industries were operating at the time of the OEM. Significantly, a large Indian and German
joint venture has located on one of the larger sites, employing some 350 workers. After a slow
start, the industrial zone seemed to be taking off, with about 20 units allocated in the 2 months
before the mission. It was expected that full occupancy would be achieved by the end of 2005,
thereby creating further economic growth and job opportunities in Tumkur.

        5.      Part E: Implementation Assistance and Institutional Strengthening

54.    There was a general consensus among KUIDFC staff that the Project had provided
valuable experience, which was beneficial to themselves and the EA as a whole. A large
number of KUIDFC staff remained with the EA throughout the Project. Despite the transfer of
14


several of the most senior staff, the experience gained during the Project by and large has been
retained in KUIDFC and the former PIUs. In addition, with the exception of some of the
ULB staff, the institutional memory of the Project was good in the towns. Even new municipal
commissioners knew the project components well, as their engineering and financial staff had
not changed.

55.      Training and Capacity Building. KUIDFC's Training and Capacity Building Cell began
its training courses in March 1999 and conducted training programs in the areas of quality
control and implementation, public awareness and capacity building of ULBs. The latter included
meetings with ULBs on implementation of their management action plans, development of
computerization plans, reviews of organization and staffing, and attending council meetings to
enhance awareness regarding repayment and O&M requirements under the Project. In the
second phase, training on attitudinal change was imparted to all ULBs. Of the targeted
2,688 employees of the six ULBs, 1,966 employees received training during 2002.

56.     Implementation of Management Action Plans. Management action plans were
developed for all project ULBs by the project management consultants and approved by the
state Government. However, progress was not very satisfactory. Most of the ULBs did not
achieve revenue collection targets. Subsequently, KUIDFC employed a private company during
2003 to prepare updated plans with a special focus on measures required to upgrade the
financial viability of the project towns. Implementation of the plans will continue beyond the
project period.

57.     Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation Study. According to a comprehensive report by a
private firm in April 2003, awareness of the Project and the benefits gained from it was high
among beneficiaries, local officials and the public at large. The study also helped the Project in
making some mid-term corrections in order to capture the perceived demand and immediate
needs of beneficiaries, especially in slum areas. Appendix 3 contains a summary of the impacts
measured by the study, which are an indication of the degree of acceptance of the Project.

       5.      Part E: Low-Cost Housing Finance

58.     The low-cost housing finance component was included primarily to offer housing loans to
the beneficiaries of the Project's residential sites and services schemes. However, as seen
above, the schemes were substantially delayed and were not occupied at the time of the visit.
At the request of HDFC and the state Government, the original scope was therefore modified to
include the entire state. Although HDFC committed to making loans from its own resources to
low-income families once they were allotted plots, only a small percentage of families qualified
for the loans due to the stringent income and employment requirements of HDFC loans. It was
evident that there was no collaboration between the urban development authorities (MUDA and
TUDA) and with the Karnataka Slum Clearance Board in allotting plots to families who would
qualify for HDFC loans.

59.     Based on ADB's PCR for the housing finance component, the total number of project
beneficiaries was 7,511, including 4,885 low-income households (65%, exceeding the target of
50%). About 70% of the beneficiaries were in urban areas. Almost 85% belonged to the
employed salaried class, with the remainder being housewives, pensioners, retirees and self-
employed. Most of the loans were in the range of Rs25,000 to Rs300,000, with more than 70%
in the Rs100,000 to Rs300,000 range. The weighted average loan-to-cost ratio was about 53%,
signifying a substantial investment by the borrowers. The households provided down payments
and their own investment from savings, inheritance and contributions from all members for the
                                                                                                     15


common purpose of owning a house. Overall, the quality of life of the beneficiaries improved
substantially through the loans, with larger houses, a better locality, improved water supply and
sanitation facilities, larger plot sizes and a cleaner environment. The beneficiaries were highly
satisfied with house ownership. Loan repayment was 100%. Details of the beneficiaries and
loan disbursements are shown in Appendix 4.

60.      This PPER downgrades the rating of "highly successful" given in ADB's PCR for the
housing finance component to "successful." Although the RRP and loan agreement had not
specified unequivocally that the funds were to go to poor households in the informal sector
rather than the formal sector, this was the real intention as NGOs were to be employed to
identify and assess suitable poor households without guaranteed income and documented
earnings. HDFC claimed that it could not find NGOs capable of doing this, and that it had
therefore chosen to provide the loans to low-income households in the formal sector, such as
government employees in the police service and in state-owned corporations. Furthermore, the
RRP had specified in its Appendix 4 that the beneficiaries of housing loans would include those
who applied for one of the 4,120 plots of the five residential sites and services to be developed
under the Project. However, these sites were all developed far too late for HDFC and it claimed
at the time of the OEM that even if the sites had been completed in time, HDFC would not have
been able to give more than 10% of these plot owners a housing loan under the conditions of
the loan. Criteria for access to the sites had not been linked to criteria for housing loan eligibility.
Thus, the design of the housing finance component within the total Project was not flawless.
The housing finance loan nevertheless came just in time for the low-income groups in the formal
sector. After the closing of the Project's housing finance facility in 2000, HDFC has had more
difficulty awarding loans to low-income borrowers. The Urban Land Act was repealed in 2001,
and the Government has since had to pay for land acquisition at market rates. Land prices have
gone up dramatically in Bangalore and even some other towns, such as Mysore, Mangalore and
Hubli. It is now virtually impossible for low-income groups to access land legally, and therefore
to borrow for house construction. Lending to such groups for housing through NGOs has not
prospered. HDFC so far is working with two small NGOs only, one in Bangalore and one in
Mysore.

G.      Consultants and Contractors

61.     This PPER agrees with the findings of ADB's PCR and largely concurs with its
assessment of consultants and contractors. The performance of the consultants was marginally
satisfactory. Drawbacks were that many consultants were changed during the Project, which
delayed detailed design of the various components. This put pressure on KUIDFC staff.
The consultants' delay in finalizing and issuing technical drawings, frequent design changes and
lack of proper pre-design investigations led to problems during construction. This was worsened
by a lack of familiarity with and understanding of ADB's changing procurement procedures,
guidelines and quality control requirements. However, with increasing capacity in KUIDFC, the
domestic consultants improved their performance over time.

62.     As noted by the PCR, contractors sometimes did not understand the requirements for
quality, methodology, cash flow and management in an urban environment, which involves
inconveniences to the public and coordination with various other service providers and utility
departments. The contractors lacked works and financial planning, and most contracts were
completed with long delays. The contractors did not always understand the contract provisions,
which delayed settlement of variations and bills for payments. Toward the Project's end,
the contractors' performance improved.
16


H.      Loan Covenants

63.     At project completion, most of the loan covenants were complied with, although there
was one which had not been complied with, four only partly complied with, and three still being
complied with (PCR, Appendix 8). Importantly, there was only part compliance with the
collection efficiency covenant. This covenant mandated the prompt collection of all revenues
due to ULBs and the maintenance of a collection efficiency ratio of 90 days' arrears from
1 January 1997. Only some of the project towns complied with this requirement and only for
certain years. At the time of the OEM, the project towns were still encountering difficulties in
meeting the stipulated collection efficiency ratio.

I.      Policy Framework

64.     The PCR concluded that the major reason for non-compliance or late compliance with
loan covenants was that it proved impractical to implement policy reforms only in the Project
towns and not in the rest of Karnataka state. When the Government realized this, it began to
implement the reforms in all 63 cities of the state. The same was the case for the Nirmal Nagar
program, relating to application of information technology to property tax reforms. This was
started through the Project but was expanded under KUDCEMP. 17

                                 III.     PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT

65.    Overall Assessment. The Project is rated "successful," although at the lower end of the
scale (Table 4). This is based on assessments of relevance and effectiveness of the Project,
although with lower efficiency and lower likelihood of sustainability of the outcomes.

                        Table 4: Assessment of Overall Project Performance
Criterion                Weight (%)   Assessment        Rating Value      Weighted Rating
Relevance                    20       Relevant                 2                0.4
Effectiveness                40       Effective                2                0.8
Efficiency                   20       Less efficient           1                0.2
Sustainability               20       Less likely to be        1                0.2
                                      sustainable
Overall rating              100       Successful                                1.6
Note: Weights used are different from those recommended by OED's guidelines. More weight was given to the
      positive unintended impact of the Project (para.79). OED's Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation
      Reports for Public Sector Operations define projects as successful when their weighted rating has a value
      between 1.6 and 2.7.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

66.    Relevance. The Project was in line with ADB's country strategy and the Government's
Eighth Five-Year Development Plan. 18 However, the Project's objective was not realistic in
aiming to achieve decentralization of population growth and economic activity in Bangalore by
addressing basic infrastructure deficiencies and related environmental aspects in selected
urban areas in the Bangalore sub-region. More direct support for economic activity in the towns
chosen would have been needed to achieve the objective. This PPER does not assess the
relevance of the Project exclusively against the specific objective, as it sees a need for

17
   ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation to the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
   for the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Management Project. Manila. (Loan 1704-IND, for $175 million,
   approved on 26 October).
18
   The PCR has provided more detailed justification for this, which this PPER concurs with and does not repeat here.
                                                                                               17


development of the six towns independent of this, and such development would also have been
in line with ADB and government strategies at the time.

67.    The Project had a complex design, with physical subprojects often of a different nature,
and not counting the 55 slum upgrading schemes which in themselves could be seen as mini
IUDPs. If the Project was to be a true IUDP, it should have concentrated on water supply,
sewerage, interior roads and drainage, solid waste management and slum upgrading, including
low-cost sanitation, perhaps in fewer towns and with the clear objectives of urban development
and poverty alleviation, which were policy goals of the Government and ADB at the time. In the
event, the overall Project objective of relieving pressure on Bangalore became obscure.
Nevertheless, this PPER assesses the Project overall as relevant.


68.     Effectiveness. With the exception of the truck terminal in Tumkur and the bus terminal
and the industrial site in Ramanagaram, the Project achieved the physical completion of all sub-
components. With the further exception of the residential sites and services schemes, the
completed subcomponents were in use by the time of the OEM. The Project as a whole
contributed to improving the living environment for the majority of the population in the Project
towns. The slum improvement component along with the low-cost sanitation and community
development programs, such as those supporting women's self-help groups, directly benefited
the poor and vulnerable sections of society. Two benefit monitoring and evaluation surveys, one
conducted in 1999 and another in 2003, documented mostly positive responses from
beneficiaries in the four towns (Appendix 9 in the PCR and Appendix 4 in this PPER). When the
components and subcomponents are rated individually in terms of completion schedule, work
quality and utilization, the composite score, weighted by cost of the components, is satisfactory.
Thus, the Project overall is assessed as effective.

69.    Efficiency. From a financial and economic point of view, the water supply and outer ring
road in Mysore achieved figures beyond the financial and economic threshold. Similarly, the
southern bypass road in Tumkur achieved a significant economic internal rate of return (EIRR).
However, due to the heavy investment for relatively small towns, the water supply in
Ramanagaram and Channapatna did not achieve either the financial internal rate of return
(FIRR) or the EIRR thresholds. STPs in all towns remain underutilized and it is uncertain
whether they will achieve their design capacity by 2011. For these reasons, the Project is
assessed as less efficient.

70.     The OEM reviewed and accepted the EIRR calculations and assumptions of the PCR for
the Mysore water supply (Table 5). However, given that the PCR came to substantially higher
EIRRs for the Mysore outer ring road and the Tumkur bypass road than those calculated at
appraisal, the OEM re-evaluated the EIRRs for these two components. Both roads opened up
new areas for residential and industrial uses. In the absence of vehicle counts and operating
costs, the methodology used by the PCR and the PPER was based on increases in raw land
costs. However, the PCR did not distinguish between increases in land costs due to the normal
outward growth of the cities and the incremental increase due to the construction of the
two roads. The latter was estimated based on conversations with local officials, MUDA and
TUDA engineers and local residents. The results of the re-evaluation are therefore significantly
lower than those of the PCR, with an EIRR for the Mysore outer ring road of 45% and for the
Tumkur bypass road of 38%.
18


                      Table 5: Comparison of Economic Internal Rates of Return
                                                (%)
      Project Component                                         RRP               PCR               PPER
      Mysore
       Water supply                                             13.6              16.4               16.4
       Truck terminal
       Intermediate ring road                                   21.5
       Outer ring road                                          53.1              73.0               45.0
      Ramanagaram and Channapatna
        Water supply                                            10.3             (0.75)             Neg.
        Community and commercial center
      Tumkur
        Southern bypass road                                    32.9              96.0               38.0
     PCR = project completion report, PPER = project performance evaluation report, RRP = report and
     recommendation of the President.
     Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
     Sources: ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in
             India. Manila; ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on
             Proposed Loans and Technical Assistance to India for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
             Development Project. Manila; and staff estimates.

71.     Sustainability. Low water tariffs and minimal O&M remained a problem in the water and
sanitation sector. Based on the loan repayment schedule prepared by KUIDFC, debt repayment
obligations of the project towns ranged from 43% of the operating revenue to almost 115%. In
1997, the state Government decided that all project payments would be made to and retained
by KUIDFC in order to create a revolving fund, while the state serviced the total loan. Since
such an arrangement does not stimulate sustainable debt financing by the ULBs, the Project is
assessed as less sustainable.

72.     The overall sustainability of the Project outcomes is in doubt. Water supply and
sanitation components are the critical issues. From an engineering point of view, the water
supply systems in the four original towns are sustainable, provided there is adequate O&M.
Similarly, assuming an increase in connections in Tumkur and Ramanagaram and Channapatna,
the sewer systems will become more viable. However, before the STP for Districts A and D in
Mysore can become viable, necessary repairs to the pumps must be done and more qualified
O&M personnel put in place.

73.      With respect to funding overall O&M for the Project, the state Government decreed in
1997 that all borrowing agencies were to make their loan repayments to KUIDFC, which would
then be permitted to retain the payments in order to create a revolving fund for O&M and
financing further infrastructure projects in the state. Thus, the state would make all loan
repayments. Up to 30 June 2005, total repayments of principal and interest amounted to
Rs463 million of a due total of Rs833.6 million. MUDA in Mysore was the only agency ahead on
scheduled payments. 19 While such an arrangement runs counter to the principle of sustainable
project financing, for small towns such as Channapatna, Ramanagaram, and Tumkur, more
realistic debt projections should be carried out during project design based on alternative
subproject packages. A final subproject affordable to the towns can then be decided.


19
      In October 2007, KUIFDC reported that the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board had fully repaid the
     loan and MUDA was still regular in its repayments. Among the other ULBs, TUDA and MCC had made some
     partial repayments. The Government of Karnataka was readjusting a part of the State Finance Commission grants.
     The repayments were to contribute to an Urban Infrastructure Development Fund.
                                                                                                                   19


74.     On the positive side, ownership of project components from the bottom up (i.e., by the
people for the low-cost sanitation units and slum-upgrading schemes; by the ULBs for the water
supply, sewerage, roads and drainage components; and by the commitment of the Project and
the state Government to remain involved in order to assure the operational and financial
success of the Project) is highly relevant to project sustainability. In addition, components such
as the low-cost sanitation and slum upgrading were wholly integrated with the socio-cultural
setting of the beneficiaries.

75.     The financial calculations and assumptions of the PCR were reviewed and accepted by
the OEM. Table 6 compares the FIRRs contained in the RRP, the PCR and recalculated as
necessary for the PPER. During project preparation, FIRRs were calculated for seven
components as well as the two planned industrial sites and all six residential sites and services
schemes. During project implementation, several components were (i) dropped from the Project,
such as the Mysore truck terminal and the Ramanagaram industrial site; (ii) not completed or
occupied, such as all the residential sites and services schemes; or (iii) operating at a loss, such
as the Ramanagaram community commercial center. Hence, the ADB PCR only calculated
FIRRs for the two water supply projects in Mysore and Ramanagaram. 20 It can be seen from
Table 5 that the FIRRs for the water projects have decreased substantially from appraisal.
Although the FIRR for the Mysore water supply dropped from 15.5% to 4.3%, it is still
considered financially viable since the FIRR is above the 2.1% weighted average cost of capital.
However, the FIRR for the Channapatna and Ramanagaram water supply turned from 7.6% to
negative. The main reasons for this were the very high cost of the works (42 km of pipe from the
well head) and the fact that none of the assumptions were realized. These assumptions
included (i) water tariffs increasing annually at an average of 13%, (ii) the ULBs introducing a
sewerage cess of 30% in 1999, and (iii) non-revenue water decreasing from 30% in 1995 to
20% by 2001. In addition, the percentage of illegal water connections in Channapatna and
Ramanagaram was estimated at some 40% to 45% of total connections, while many meters
were not working and, until recently, percentage tariff collections were very low. As mentioned
above, handing back the water supply maintenance and collections to KUWSDB (which was still
the relevant entity in 2007) may have resolved some of these problems. KUIDFC reported in
October 2007 that water tariffs had been raised after the water supply service had improved in
the towns.




20
     Appendix 5 contains the detailed analysis and tables of the FIRR and EIRR calculations, as well as the reevaluated
     EIRRs calculated by the OEM.
20


                  Table 6: Comparison of Financial Internal Rates of Return
                                            (%)
     Project Component                                     RRP                PCR              PPER
     Mysore
       Water supply                                         15.5               4.3               4.3
       Truck terminal                                       14.1
       Intermediate ring road
       Outer ring road
     Ramanagaram and Channapatna
       Water supply                                         7.6               (5.1)             (5.1)
       Community and commercial center                      2.6
     Tumkur
       Southern bypass road
     Four project towns
      Industrial sites and services                         16.0
      Residential sites and services                        14.8
 PCR = project completion report, PPER = project performance evaluation report, RRP = report and
 recommendation of the President.
 Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
 Sources: ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in
         India. Manila; ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on
         Proposed Loans and Technical Assistance to India for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
         Project. Manila; and staff estimates.

76.      The Project envisioned the basic operating entities as the ULBs for all the components.
The smaller municipalities were charged with implementing road improvement, drainage traffic
management, solid waste management, low-cost sanitation, residential sites and services, bus
stand relocation and the cultural and commercial center. KUWSDB had responsibility to
implement the water supply and sewerage works and hand these over to the municipalities.
Thus, the basic operating entities for the completed works were the project towns. However,
in the case of water supply and sewerage, it was soon seen that the smaller ULBs did not have
the capacity to maintain the works or to levy viable tariffs. In the case of Ramanagaram and
Channapatna, the works were therefore handed back to KUWSDB, and collections as a
percentage of monthly demand jumped from some 60% in March 2005 to 96% in May 2005.
Since KUWSDB was not a political entity, it could raise tariffs to recover costs, and disconnect
customers who refused to pay. A similar story occurred in Tumkur, where the council refused to
approve a tariff increase. The municipality was therefore petitioning the state to hand back the
works to KUWSDB. Mysore would have liked to return the water and sewerage works to
KUWSDB, but does not feel it can due to the under the 74th Constitutional Amendment.
As mentioned above, solid waste management is another component that is not being properly
utilized and maintained by the project towns.

77.     In an effort to determine the financial sustainability of the project investments, the ADB
PCR undertook a financial sustainability analysis based on the projected financial positions of
KUIDP towns. A comparison of the projected financial positions made during project appraisal
with the actual performance of the original four project towns from 1999 to 2005 showed wide
variations in the estimates (Table 7) Since the projections made during appraisal were
unrealistically high, the differences largely explain the fiscal difficulty of most of these towns to
service the project debts. Almost all of these policy measures had not been implemented during
the 1995 to 2004 period. Thus, more attention should be given to developing realistic ULB
financial projections during future project preparation.
                                                                                                             21


     Table 7: Comparison of Financial Projections and Actual Performance of KUIDP Towns
Municipal Financial Profile                      2003­2004         MMC         TMC        CMC          RMC
Tax receipts                                      Appraisal       571.25       107.11      23.57        16.58
                                                   Actual         122.30         51.33      5.83         5.59
Water charges                                     Appraisal       179.07 a        8.57      3.20         2.47
                                                   Actual         107.20          4.07      0.84         1.68
Operating revenue                                 Appraisal       843.08       146.33      72.37        44.63
(Excluding fiscal transfers)                       Actual         343.12         66.70     29.03        25.00
Operating expenditure                             Appraisal       485.22         84.52     41.52        24.54
                                                   Actual         564.65         87.69     19.83         6.72
Net cash flow                                     Appraisal          9.63         3.51   (21.05)      (38.47)
(Revenue and capital)                              Actual         (23.46)      (15.14)      8.96        16.40
Debt servicing capacity
Debt servicing as % of operating
  revenue                                        2003­2004           43%         58%        68%        115%
KUIDP-related                                    2004­2005            390         104         61          86
Debt servicing and over dues
CMC = Channapatna Municipal Council, KUIDP = Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project,
MMC = Mysore Municipal Corporation, RMC = Ramanagaram Municipal Council, TMC = Tumkur Municipal
Corporation.
a
  The estimate includes both incremental water charges and truck terminal revenue.
Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
Source: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation.

                                      IV.      OTHER ASSESSMENTS

A.         Impact

78.   Given the robust development of KUIDFC to manage more projects in addition to KUIDP,
as well as the likely impact on non-income poverty reduction through the slum improvement
schemes, the low-cost sanitation units and expansion of the self-help groups, the Project has
had a significant impact on institutional development as well as unintended benefits.
The Project's institutional development and other impacts are therefore assessed as substantial.

           1.       Impact on Institutions and Policy

79.     In the opinion of state and national officials as well as the OEM, the Project has had a
significant impact on government institutions and policy. Based largely on the experience in the
Project, KUIDFC has graduated into an independent organization with adequate staff and
authority and has established itself as a key agency for all externally aided projects in Karnataka
(para. 20). Follow-on ADB projects such as KUDCEMP (footnote 17) and the North Karnataka
Urban Sector Investment Program (footnote 13) have been modeled on KUIDP and have
learned from its experience as well as other IUDPs, such as the Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure
Development Project 21 and others in Madhya Pradesh and Kolkata.




21
     ADB. 1998. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
     for the Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila.
22


         2.      Socioeconomic Impact

80.      The socioeconomic impact of the Project has been significant. The physical
improvements in water supply, sanitation through water-borne sewerage and low-cost sanitation
units in low-income areas, better storm water drainage and some internal roads, and improved
solid waste collection and disposal have had an effect on all or almost all of the inhabitants of
the project towns. Certain components have had an additional and very important impact on the
lives of poor women, most of whom resided in slums. Under the Project's poverty alleviation
component, the community development program empowered low-income communities by
enabling them to extend the reach of the existing services, thereby making the Project more
useful and effective. The objectives of the community development program were to (i) increase
awareness among below the poverty line about issues related to health and education etc.,
(ii) increase community participation in the execution and sustainability of project components,
and (iii) increase opportunities for self-employment through the provision of skill-based training
and financial assistance from formal and non-formal financial institutions. Under the poverty
alleviation component, KUIDP covered 23,324 families below the poverty line. Due to the
popularity of the low-cost sanitation compost toilets, they are now being included in follow-on
projects. Slum upgrading schemes have imparted increased wealth to low-income land owners
in the form of higher land prices.

81.      The initiation of federations of self-help groups in slums through the help of NGOs has
been a considerable benefit to poor women living in slums (Table 8). They were able to save
some money, obtain small loans from the group for income-generating activities, improve their
life style and become more independent. The impact of the Project's self-help groups was
expanded under the follow-on KUDCEMP.

                    Table 8: Comparison of Self-Help Groups in Two Projects
                                                                                  KUDCEMP
     Description                                                    KUIDP          (ongoing)
     Number of families benefited                                     23,000           28,000
     Number of women's self-help groups formed                            722            2,400
     Savings made by self-help group members                      Rs15 million     Rs32 million
     Amount disbursed among members as internal                   Rs56 million    Rs129 million
     lending
     Low-cost sanitation units constructed                              16,154           6,000
     Number of young people provided with skill training                 2,830           3,403
     Number of young people provided with computer skills                2,050           1,200
     Number of young people covered under livelihood                       520             530
      advancement training
     Number of trained young people provided with job                      127             184
     opportunities
     Project Cost                                                  $0.5 million    $1.09 million
 Source: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation.

         3.      Environmental Impact

82.     The Project was categorized under environmental category B. According to the benefit
monitoring and evaluation report, there were definite perceived improvements in water supply in
terms of quality, quantity and reliability of supply. The sewerage, drainage and low-cost
sanitation components have significantly improved sanitary conditions in the towns, particularly
in the project slum areas. Although all the landfill sites, the composting plant, and the STPs
obtained the requisite permission from the State Pollution Control Board, their operation, which
                                                                                                23


has been sub-optimal, required a second stage of approvals from the Pollution Control Board,
which were not obtained at the time of the OEM. KUIFDC reported in October 2007 that the
required approvals had since been obtained.

83.    Since the original plan of the outer ring road abutted a lake, an initial environmental
examination was carried out and identified the requirement for an environmental impact
assessment. Subsequently, the impact assessment established substantial environmental
impacts and recommended a change of alignment to bypass the lake. The alignment of the road
was therefore changed, requiring additional land acquisition of about 4 km.

84.     Land was acquired following government land acquisition procedures and ADB
guidelines. A resettlement plan was prepared and approved by ADB. According to the socio-
cultural and environmental assessment report, inquiries with the Project Authorities and project
affected persons revealed that the whole process of acquiring land and paying compensation
took very little time. The affected people were happy that they got the compensation within a
very short period unlike other projects. Vulnerable groups such as scheduled castes, scheduled
tribes and women-headed households were treated the same as others and this did not seem to
cause problems.

B.     Asian Development Bank Performance

85.       The loan was declared effective in July 1996. ADB regularly undertook review missions
and closely monitored the progress of the Project, providing useful advice in several areas.
It facilitated discussions with KUIDFC and the state Government to assist in faster
disbursements. ADB delegated project administration to the resident mission in January 1996.
In addition to regular ADB review missions, the Project was reviewed at bilateral review
meetings at ADB as well as at tripartite portfolio review meetings of the Ministry of Finance in
which ADB, the Department of Economic Affairs and KUIDFC participated. KUIDFC and the
Department of Economic Affairs found the bilateral and tripartite review meetings very useful in
addressing constraints. EA staff participated in various training courses and workshops
organized by ADB. Overall the performance of ADB was satisfactory.

C.     Borrower Performance

86.     India, the borrower represented by the Department of Economic Affairs, conducted
regular tripartite meetings and reviews involving KUIDFC and ADB. These reviews helped to
identify bottlenecks and were used to monitor the Project's progress in relation to the targets for
disbursement and contract awards. KUIDFC was designated as the agency to implement the
works. KUIDFC established an effective field-level monitoring and implementing mechanism by
establishing independent PIUs in all the project towns. This helped in interagency coordination,
monitoring and progress reporting from the field. KUIDFC has now established itself as a key
agency for all externally aided projects in the state, with active support and continuous
engagement by ADB. The overall performance of KUIDFC can therefore be rated "satisfactory."

D.     Technical Assistance

87.     The PPTA was of too short a duration and, as a consequence, did not sufficiently gauge
demands for the many components it proposed. It also identified several demands that made
the project unnecessarily complex. However, the problem lies not with the consultants but rather
with the nature of ADB's identification of projects in India, which is discussed below (para. 89).
24


                   V.      ISSUES, LESSONS AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.     Issues

88.     Project Complexity. The inherent complexity of IUDPs must be kept in mind when
drafting TA papers, during PPTA missions, and in determining project duration. When designing
IUDPs in India, it must be remembered that the construction sector remains largely labor
intensive, continues to use outdated equipment and methods, is often under-financed, is
unfamiliar with urban development projects, and rarely brings a project in on time.

89.     Operation and Maintenance. Effective O&M, along with adequate financing, is
essential for project sustainability. O&M in the Project varied depending on the component and
the size of the town. The fact that water and sewage systems had been handed back to
KUWSDB in Ramanagaram and Channapatna and were to be handed back in Tumkur should
improve O&M and tariff collections in those towns. Adequate funds and trained personnel must
therefore be provided for O&M during project design such that, if necessary, it can be out-
sourced to private companies. Where this was done in KUIDP, O&M operations were highly
effective; where it was not done, the lack of proper O&M was obvious. Given the precarious
nature of ULB finances, funding for O&M cannot be left to projected increases in their finances.

90.     Sustainable Cost Recovery. Increases in local tariffs and initiation of charges for
sewerage are politically charged. This should be taken into account in the financial design of
future projects. Most ULBs are not capable of increasing tariffs (e.g., 13% per year in the Project)
to service subproject debt, even though the 74th Constitutional Amendment provides for
financial decentralization to ULBs. This is no excuse for absolving them of repayment or
allowing them to remain in arrears. The Karnataka Department of Municipal Administration was
introducing a fund-based accounting system, comprising double entry accounting, for all ULBs
in the state. This, along with property tax reforms introduced in the state in 2002, should
significantly improve the finances of most of the project towns. Hence, future projects should
plan for more disciplined cost recovery from ULBs, including penalties for arrears, and not
assume the state will repay the difference, or even the total loan, as in the Project.

91.     IUDP versus Housing Finance. Another complexity of the Project was the addition of a
$20 million loan for housing finance. Originally meant for occupants of the residential sites and
services schemes, the housing loans had to be reprogrammed because the schemes were not
finished on time, and were still not occupied at the time of the OEM. In the event, loans were
made to households in low-income groups (50%) and middle-income groups (50%) throughout
the state by the HDFC Bangalore branch office. Hence, there was no link between the two loans
as originally planned. However, even if the schemes had been allocated and occupied, the
occupants would still have needed to meet HDFC criteria to receive loans. The HDFC branch
manager estimated that not more than 10% of the occupants would have qualified. It seems that
the lesson in trying to combine a single sector finance loan with a multi-sector investment loan
has been learned, since this has not been tried in subsequent projects.

92.      Project Objective versus Design. The counter magnet concept was not realistic at the
time. If such an objective were to be achieved, project components such as major transportation
and communication links, perhaps limited to Mysore and Tumkur, would have been necessary.
Hence, for future IUDPs, project objectives should be consistent with actual project design, such
as improving the overall quality of life of urban households, with a focus on the urban poor.
                                                                                             25


B.     Lessons

93.     Project Design. Project preparation and design for complicated, multisector, multi-town
projects such as KUIDP should be allotted adequate time to do the necessary technical,
financial, socioeconomic and institutional analysis so that ultimate project implementation and
evaluation closely resemble original project objectives, outputs and financial projections.
Time needs also to be taken to build consensus within ULBs on the importance of O&M of
assets. This is especially the case when a central government decides on the allocation of
foreign loans to states, and where the intra-state demand for a particular loan-based project or
for some preconceived components may not be strong at the start of the PPTA.

94.    Bridging TA. Since PPTAs in situations such as those occurring in India need to do
much identification work, and are not generally given the time and resources to include detailed
design and procurement, ADB should consider granting bridging TAs, or alternatively approving
TA loans, so that when an investment loan becomes effective, subcomponents can be tendered
and civil works can start within the first year.

95.     Implementation Support. Given the numerous problems with consultants and
contractors, partly due to procurement and safeguard arrangements promoted by ADB that are
very different to government requirements, there is a need for much hands-on support in a
project that involves many agencies and small towns that have not previously been involved
with ADB. Since KUIFDC was being set up at the same time, constant ADB project
administration support is required.

96.     Institutional Development and Training. Institutional development and training should
be given equal priority with development of physical components. This has been done to a great
extent in the Project, enabling KUIDFC itself to undertake the design of the North Karnataka
Urban Sector Investment Program, with KUIDFC supplying the project concept and details while
ADB prepares only the RRP.

97.     ULB Capabilities. The capabilities of ULBs acting as implementing agencies need to be
investigated in more detail, especially in small ULBs such as Ramanagaram and Channapatna,
so that KUIDFC (or any other PMU) will not have to implement the work on their behalf or turn
the civil works over to a specialized agency such as KUWSDB for O&M and tariff collections.
An extensive program of capacity development needs to precede and accompany physical
investments in small towns, especially when these are expected to be operated on a cost
recovery basis.

98.     Civil Works and Equipment versus Services. The ultimate focus should be on the
provision of affordable services and the cost recovery thereof, not just the provision of civil
works and equipment. Least-cost analysis should identify the type of technical solution that
would provide the service at the lowest cost for the project as well as the beneficiary.
Performance-based private sector participation schemes should be pursued, and service
provision emphasized. It can be questioned whether expensive water-borne sewerage (versus
the proven double vault compost low-cost sanitation units) was necessary in small towns such
as Ramanagaram and Channapatna.

99.    Beneficiary Involvement. The ULBs and their clienteles should be involved in the
design of all project components, especially water, sewer and drainage components. Design
and implementation according to beneficiaries' felt needs generally leads to better post-project
26


cost recovery. Involvement of NGOs leads to good results, particularly in identifying needs
regarding slum upgrading and low-cost sanitation components.

100. Replicability. Components should be designed so that they can be replicated in other
IUDPs. The Project has been successful in this with regard to water supply, internal roads and
drainage, slum upgrading and low-cost sanitation. It has been less successful in STPs, truck
terminals, municipal buildings, and residential sites and services schemes.

C.     Follow-Up Actions

101. Since the loan account is closed, all disbursements have been made and civil works are
completed, major follow-up actions include (i) ensuring effective O&M for all project facilities,
especially the STPs; and (ii) monitoring the implementation of the ULB management action
plans so that the project ULBs become more financially self-sustaining.
                                                                              Appendix 1    27


                          ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT OUTPUTS

A.     Part A: Environmental Sanitation: Water Supply, Sewerage, Solid Waste
       Management and Storm Water Drainage

       1.     Mysore

1.      The environmental sanitation program in Mysore included (i) a water supply covering
a new intake, a water treatment plant, water supply mains and extensions to the distribution
system; (ii) sewerage systems covering construction of three treatment plants with
accompanying trunk sewer systems, coupled with an expanded collection system to intercept
flows from the existing sewer systems; (iii) solid waste management covering community bins
and a composting plant; (iv) improvements to the storm water drainage system; (v) ancillary
works for providing electricity to the water and sewerage facilities; and (vi) improvement and
rehabilitation of two urban lakes.

2.     The water supply improvement program comprised a new water supply system that is
designed for an initial supply of 50 million liters (mld) a day, adequate to meet estimated
demand up to 2011 and capable of being upgraded to 150 mld to meet estimated demand in
2026 without additional civil works. The augmentation works were divided into four main and a
few small contract packages.

3.      The sewage system programs included construction of trunk sewers and sewage
treatment plants (STPs) for three drainage districts (Districts A and D, B, and C) and included
making connections to existing lateral sewers that drained into the trunk sewer systems.
This work was augmented by further extensions of the collection system to pick up existing
outfalls into the storm drainage system. All systems were designed with an initial installed
capacity to meet forecast demand up to 2011. They were intended to be expanded easily to
meet the ultimate design capacity for 2026 through incremental expansions of the mechanical
equipment and some of the civil works. The works were divided into seven main contract
packages and a few small packages and have since been completed.

4.      The solid waste management program was divided into two packages. The contract for
construction of 211 community bins was completed, including an extension to provide additional
bins in response to public demand. The contract for construction of a 200 ton per day
composting plant under build-operate transfer conditions was commissioned but was no longer
in operation at the time of the evaluation mission due to a dispute between the company and the
Mysore City Corporation (MCC). Two years later, the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC) reported that MCC had taken over operation
of the plant, although it ran only during the day.

5.       Under the storm water drainage program, drainage master plans were prepared and
priority drainage improvement works were identified. Based on the recommendations of the
drainage master plan, one contract for drainage system improvements and upgrading was
awarded and work completed.

       2.     Tumkur

6.       This component covered (i) water supply and extension and augmentation of existing
distribution systems; (ii) sewerage, construction of new underground sewage systems and STPs;
and (iii) improved facilities for solid waste management and development of a new disposal site.
28     Appendix 1



Storm water drainage improvements, based on drainage master plans prepared under the
Project, were combined with the upgrading of municipal roads.

7.      Development of the water supply system included improvements and upgrading of the
existing water distribution system of 128 kilometers (km), and construction of a reservoir at the
old water treatment plant site. A single contract was awarded and work was completed.

8.      The sewerage program includes construction of a new sewage system together with an
STP to serve the core area of the town and key residential areas. The work was divided into
four contract packages covering (i) construction of a sewer system for Districts 5 and
6B (65 km); (ii) construction of a sewer system for Districts 6A, 7 and 9 (85 km); (iii) construction
of a sewer system for District 10 and outfall (40 km); and (iv) construction of an STP and pump
stations (24.57 mld). Work was completed.

9.      The solid waste management program comprised improvements to the operational
efficiencies and development of a new solid waste disposal site. A single contract was awarded
for construction of the disposal site and the work was completed.

       3.      Ramanagaram and Channapatna

10.     This component included (i) water supply covering development of a new water
treatment plant, supply system and reservoirs to serve Ramanagaram and Channapatna, plus
extensions to the existing water distribution systems; (ii) sewage systems covering construction
of a new sewer system and treatment plant for Ramanagaram; (iii) improvements to the solid
waste management facilities and development of a new disposal system for each town; and
(iv) ancillary works for providing electricity to the water and sewer facilities. All the works have
been completed. However, the STP has not yet been commissioned due to the absence of a
flow of sewage. A separate program for providing sewer line connections and water connections,
including fixing water meters, was launched in the final quarter of 2003. The work was not
completed at the time of the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM). However, KUIDFC and the
Government have promised to continue the work and ensure flow to the STP and
commissioning of the same.

11.     A new combined water supply system was designed to service Ramanagaram and
Channapatna with an initial supply of 15 mld, which is adequate to meet projected demand up to
2011, and capable of being upgraded to 25 mld to meet expected demand in 2026 without
additional civil works. The works were divided into five contract packages and these have since
been completed, as follows: (i) construction of intake works and a water treatment plant (15 mld);
(ii) construction of a clear-water supply main (45 km); (iii) construction of intermediate pump
stations and reservoirs; (iv) construction of the Channapatna distribution system (66.6 km); and
(v) construction of the Ramanagaram distribution system (63 km, under a single contract with
the sewer system).

12.     For Ramanagaram, improvements and extensions to the existing sewer system and
construction of a new STP were undertaken, including extending the sewer system works to
cover a broader area within the town. The work for Ramanagaram was divided into two contract
packages that included (i) construction of the Ramanagaram sewer system (51 km, under a
single contract with the water system works); and (ii) construction of an STP and pump stations
for Ramanagaram (7.56 mld). The action for providing house connections was also initiated and
work was in progress at the time of the OEM.
                                                                                     Appendix 1     29


13.     The solid waste management programs for Channapatna and Ramanagaram comprised
improvements to the operational efficiencies in both towns, and development of new disposal
sites. A single contract was awarded for construction of a joint disposal site, which has been
completed.

       4.      Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation

14.     Because of the similar needs in each of the Project towns, KUIDFC acted as the
coordinating agency for procuring the solid waste management equipment. Four contracts were
awarded under international competitive bidding procedures for major equipment, including
garbage collection vehicles, dumper placer hoists and containers, loader backhoes and tractors
and trailers. One local purchase contract was awarded for procurement of locally manufactured
equipment such as tricycles and hand pushcarts. All supply is complete, and the equipment has
been delivered to each municipality as follows.

       (i)     Six-ton dumper placer vehicles with hydraulic hoists and containers: (a) Mysore
               has six trucks and 36 containers; (b) Ramanagaram has one truck and
               10 containers; (c) Channapatna has one truck and 10 containers; and (d) Tumkur
               has one truck and 10 containers.
       (ii)    Three-ton tipper trucks: Mysore has eight and Ramanagaram and Channapatna
               have one each.
       (iii)   Tractors and trailers: Mysore has nine sets of tractor/trailers plus one tractor with
               a levelling attachment while Ramanagaram has one tractor with a levelling
               attachment.
       (iv)    Loader backhoes: Mysore and Tumkur have one each.
       (v)     Minor solid waste management equipment was distributed to all four towns.
       (vi)    Additional equipment for the composting plant at Mysore was procured under a
               separate equipment procurement package.

B.     Part B: Roads, Bridges, Truck Terminals and Bus Stands

       1.      Mysore

15.      This component included six contracts covering (i) upgrading and improvement of
Mysore city roads (48 roads for 58 km), (ii) widening and strengthening of the Mysore
intermediate ring road (19 km), and (iii) construction of two city bus terminals. The work was
carried out only on one bus terminal as the land for the other could not be acquired.
Two contracts for the outer ring road and truck terminal were awarded, but during execution the
work on the truck terminal was removed from the scope because it was found that the potential
for the truck terminal to be used was insufficient. In lieu of this, a western portion of the ring road
was taken up. The work has since been completed. One contract for construction of an
underpass on the outer ring road was awarded by the Ministry of Railways. The work on three of
four underpasses is complete, while work continues on one underpass.

       2.      Tumkur

16.      This component originally included four contracts covering (i) construction of municipal
roads and drains (18 roads for 24 km), (ii) construction of the southern bypass road (10.5 km),
(iii) construction of the Tumkur truck terminal (22 acres); and (iv) construction of a railway
crossing for the southern bypass. An additional package for the improvement of road works was
30     Appendix 1



envisaged and awarded. The start of this package was delayed by about 4 months due to
intervention by the High Court as the awarding of work was challenged by one of the bidders.

       3.      Ramanagaram and Channapatna

17.     This component included five contracts covering (i) improvement of municipal roads and
drains for Ramanagaram (23 km), (ii) widening and strengthening of the Bangalore-Mysore
highway 17 at Ramanagaram and Channapatna (9 km), (iii) construction of a new two-lane
bridge on highway 17 at Ramanagaram, (iv) construction of a new bus terminal at
Ramanagaram (2.11 acres), and (v) improvement of municipal roads and drains for
Channapatna (29 km). An additional package for the improvement of road works was envisaged
and awarded. The start of this package was delayed by about 4 months due to intervention by
the High Court as the awarding of work was challenged by one of the bidders. Consequently the
work is continuing.

       4.      Mandya and Maddur

18.     This component included three contracts covering (i) improvement of municipal roads
and allied works in Mandya (30 km), (ii) improvement of municipal roads and allied works in
Maddur (12 km), and (iii) improvement of storm water drains in Mandya. All the works have
been completed.

C.     Part C: Poverty Reduction: Slum Upgrading, Low-cost Sanitation, Residential
       Sites and Services, Cultural Center and Women's Training Center

       1.      Slum Upgrading

19.      Slum areas were taken up for provision and upgrading of basic urban services such as
water supply, sanitation, roads, drains, solid waste disposal facilities and street lighting, as well
as social facilities such as public toilets, community centers and anganwadis (social welfare
workers), where applicable. All facilities included in the programs were identified by the
consultants, municipalities and implementing agencies with the full participation of the
communities, using local nongovernment organizations (NGOs) and community-based
organizations as key facilitators. Six contracts were awarded for (i) work in seven Channapatna
slum areas, (ii) two slum areas in Tumkur, (iii) eight slum areas in Mysore under Phase I,
(iv) four slum areas in Tumkur, (v) six slum areas in Ramanagaram, (vi) a slum improvement
contract covering six slums in Mysore for Phase II, and (vii) slum improvement works at Mandya
and Maddur. Additionally, two contracts were awarded for improvement of a low-income area,
Gousianagar, in Mysore. Work on all these packages has been completed.

       2.      Low-Cost Sanitation

20.     The project included a provision for about 23,700 low-cost sanitation units for low-
income houses in the four project towns and provided for a strong role for local NGOs to
participate in the beneficiary identification and community participation aspects of the program.
A particular emphasis was placed on using NGOs to motivate and educate women beneficiaries
in the proper use of the facilities.
                                                                                Appendix 1    31


       3.     Residential Sites and Services

21.     The Project included provision for developing a total area of about 252 hectares of land
for residential purposes with roads, water supply, drainage and sanitation facilities in the
four project towns. At least 60% of the developed sites were to be allocated to low-income
groups at affordable prices and the balance to middle-income groups. Four contracts were
awarded including (i) 3,800 sites at Mysore, with work completed and plots sold; (ii) 1,831 sites
at Tumkur, with work abandoned and the contract closed because land was not available after
an initial expenditure of Rs1.75 million; (iii) 935 sites at Ramanagaram, with work was
completed; and (iv) 931 sites at Channapatna, with work was completed. Ancillary works for
providing electricity to Mysore, Ramanagaram and Channapatna sites were also scheduled to
be taken up under separate contract packages. Of these, only one package for Mysore was
tendered, but this had to be terminated as the contractor did not mobilize. In Ramanagaram and
Channapatna, it was decided to drop the works from the Project. The electrical services for
Tumkur residential sites and services were also included under the original scope of the Project.
However, following decisions by the High Court and the Empowered Committee of the Project,
this contract was excluded from the Project.

       4.     Cultural and Commercial Center, Women's Training Center and Municipal
              Building

22.     A cultural and commercial center was constructed at Ramanagaram and a women's
training centre was constructed at Tumkur. Both works are complete and have been handed
over to the municipalities. Subsequently, a contract for construction of a municipal building at
Maddur was also awarded and works were completed.

D.     Part D: Development of Industrial Sites and Services

23.     Ramanagaram and Tumkur. A total of 80 hectares of land was taken up for the
industrial sites and services at Tumkur. Work has been completed on this component. A similar
program for an industrial sites and services complex for Ramanagaram was cancelled and
dropped from the Project due to unavailability of land.
32        Appendix 2



             SELF-HELP GROUPS IN THE KARNATAKA URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE
                              DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

1.      This appendix evaluates the self-help groups and their federations, as facilitated under
the Project. It is based on a case study report that relied on field visits by a consultant to the
project towns in Karnataka during August and September 2005. 1

2.      The concept of self-help groups has operated in India over the past two decades,
predominantly applied in rural areas. Initiatives by nongovernment organizations (NGOs), policy
decisions of the Government, attention from donor agencies and support from the National
Agricultural Bank for Rural Development assisted the self-help group movement to take off.
This study assesses that the credit for introducing the concept in urban slums of Karnataka
goes to the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project (KUIDP). The Project began
helping to form self-help groups from October 1999 to December 2000, and greatly expanded
its efforts in a second phase from July 2002. Unfortunately, the second phase lasted only
18 months, as the project closed by mid-2004. Nevertheless, within these two short periods,
722 self-help groups were initiated and supported by the Project. The number had risen to
836 by the end of June 2005, when the case study started. This was a considerable
achievement given the short time that the Project had pursued the formation of such groups.

3.      The self-help group program covered 23,324 families living below the poverty line.
This constituted 40% of all families below the poverty line in urban areas of the Project.
Establishment of the groups was envisaged under the women's development and
empowerment component of the Project's community development program. This would be the
instrument to provide women with collective access to services of different governmental
programs and schemes that were hitherto usually denied them as individuals. Although self-help
groups were originally viewed as a minor component of the community development program,
they gained so much momentum that they were eventually used to launch many of the
awareness and skills training programs under the community development program. The groups
presented forums that were highly effective in reaching the overall communities. However, they
were unfortunately not involved in the slum improvement program because of certain limitations
within the Project structure. Integrating community development activities with infrastructure
provision effectively proved difficult.

4.      The self-help groups were given an option of accessing credit through (i) internal lending
from within the groups, (ii) the formal banking system, and (iii) financial agencies other than
banks, such as NGOs, federations or microfinance agencies set up by NGOs. Half of the groups
formed under the Project obtained loans from banks. An indication of the quantity of collective
funds being transacted is that a well-functioning self-help group with 15 women members would
have a sum of Rs50,000 at its disposal within 3 years. NGOs often played the role of a bank by
providing credit to the women. Some NGOs "handed over" the groups to lending agencies after
some time. However, this study does not consider such handovers as beneficial. In the long run,
it may disadvantage poor women and lead to disempowerment of the groups. Many banks,
outside of the program initiatives that are run by different individuals and NGOs, were luring
self-help groups with easy money for a variety of purposes, which have had the effect of
breaking up some of the groups formed under the Project.

1
    This appendix is largely a copy of the executive summary in: Sitaram, S. 2005. Promoting Urban Social
    Development through Self Help Groups in Karnataka. A report to the Operations Evaluation Department, ADB.
    Mysore. Available: http://www.adb.org/Documents/Evaluation/PPER/Karnataka-Urban-Infrastructure-Development
    Project/default.asp.
                                                                                 Appendix 2    33



5.      Membership of the groups has contributed to significant changes in the lives of women
in the six towns. The most important has been the escape from a reliance on moneylenders who
were charging exorbitant rates of interest. The interests on loans have reduced from 120% per
annum to 24%. Due to exposure to programs of entrepreneurial development and availability of
credit facilities, many of the women and their families have now ventured into pursuing income
generation activities. This has allowed for an increase in the household income which has
resulted in changing the consumption pattern, thereby improving the quality of life. Families are
able to address their basic needs better than before.

6.      Participation in the self-help group movement is judged to have been an empowering
and liberating experience for many of the poor women. The strongest impact has been in terms
of self-esteem and increased social mobility as many women of urban slums had never been
involved in such a program before. Interactions with other women have resulted in building
congenial relationships and have reduced conflicts. It also had the effect of spreading the self-
help group movement. Since women are exposed to more programs, such as health programs,
their level of awareness has increased. Changes in decision-making patterns are setting in,
although the program is not a panacea: most women continue to be excluded from many major
decisions that concern their households and their lives.

7.      The common belief was that participation in a self-help group would build leadership
qualities among women, thereby building their capacities to participate in larger political bodies
such as local governments. However, severe constraints on poor women's participation in local
bodies persist, such as lack of family support. There were exceptions: one NGO in Mysore
fielded many successful candidates to the local body elections. The reason for their success
may lie in the NGO's long-term intervention in urban slums and emphasis on advocacy.

8.     Even though the self-help groups are not operating in the political arena, many create
pressure on urban local bodies (ULBs), for instance to ensure drinking water supply, clean
roads and drainage systems, installation of community taps, and the removal of liquor shops
located in the slums.

9.      With the completion of the Project, most of the groups have continued but a few have
disintegrated. There have been no comprehensive evaluations of the self-help groups (this case
study only met a selection of the groups). Attempts by the NGOs and by the Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC) looked only at the financial
status of the groups. The criteria used have varied and data recording and presentation have
not been systematic.

A.     Federation of Self-Help Groups

10.     Most of the self-help groups were only recently created when KUIDFC decided to
federate the various groups in March 2004, in order to increase their chances of survival in the
long run. A three-tiered structure of federations was envisaged with 15 to 20 groups of an area
forming the cluster level federation and these in turn forming a town level federation.
NGO representatives contacted for the evaluation are of the opinion that the time given for self-
help groups to mature before federating them has been insufficient. The NGOs feel that the
federation concept was not fully appropriate. They would have preferred to draw on their own
experiences and processes.
34     Appendix 2



11.     The results of the federation of the self-help groups have been mixed across the
six towns. The problem seems to be one of internalizing the concept which is new, and of
mobilizing resources. A few of the experiments have resulted in disintegration as groups
resented handing over a revolving fund of Rs5,000 to the kitty of the federation.

12.    The question is whether the self-help groups will survive the absence of support by the
Project in the longer run. The Project has attempted to hand over the responsibility for the
groups to the Directorate of Municipal Administration, as the operational cost of maintaining
groups was high. But local authorities claimed they were not equipped to take charge of the
groups. KUIDFC in practice covered all the families below the poverty line, even those who
were not listed in the survey conducted by the Directorate of Municipal Administration.
The Directorate may not agree to extend support to groups with families that are not on the list.

13.     Although local governments and various departments of the state of Karnataka
implement programs for the urban poor and assist existing self-help groups in various ways,
there are several constraints to the progress of these programs. Inputs for group solidarity,
group affinity and the like have been very limited. Urban poverty alleviation programs such as
the Urban Stree Sakthi and the Swarna Jayanthi Shahari Rojagar Yogana emphasize women's
development and empowerment by forming self-help groups, but suffer from delays, slow
release of funds and slow pace of work. Furthermore, they form such groups only with the aim
of addressing the needs specified by the schemes and not with the concept of sustaining the
groups or strengthening the community. With the spurt of Urban Stree Sakthi groups, a few of
the groups formed under the Project have disintegrated due to frictions within the small
community of a slum. This is unfortunate: there should have been convergence between the
different self-help groups instead of conflicting interests. Lastly, the role of elected
representatives has been mixed. They may help NGOs in establishing rapport with the
community. However, their focus has been on getting political mileage from being "visible"
during the functions and meetings of the groups. There have even been some instances where
the local administration has obstructed self-help groups.

B.     Impact

14.     The Project looked at self-help groups as a tool that would achieve the twin objectives of
poverty alleviation and women's empowerment. Unfortunately, the post-project evaluation
efforts did not conduct a survey to establish whether the women of the groups and their families
have moved out of poverty. Neither did the project performance evaluation report for which this
case study was conducted. Whether poor women can exit poverty only by participating in
microfinance programs is debatable. Undoubtedly, self-help groups have not enabled many
poor women and families to move out of poverty, especially in an urban area where all daily
commodities need to be purchased and the effects of inflation are felt more acutely.

15.     It was found that access to microfinance did not always lead to women's control over the
funds obtained. Women members of self-help groups often accessed loans to invest in family
business that was usually run by a male member of the family. This fits the Indian ethos of
family being the main social unit. In future programs, gender concepts should be absorbed so
that women are not overtly burdened. A few cases were heard where the male member of a
family had a tendency to withdraw his contribution to the household when there was an increase
in the woman's income. Slowly, credit facilities of self-help groups seem to have become a
source of borrowing for men. The amounts are invested in businesses by men who do not
always share the information on profits and losses with the women. A change in attitude needs
to be fostered; otherwise women's would have less opportunity to learn.
                                                                                   Appendix 2     35



16.    One way of reducing the excessive burden of women inside and outside the household
would be to start self-help groups for men. However, the practice so far is to avoid forming such
groups. Their non-cohesiveness, and difference in work timings, are put forth to explain this.
However, as part of an experiment conducted by the Project, the NGO at Maddur facilitated the
formation of three groups for men. This had increased to 10 by the time of the case study.
The self-help groups of men even became a part of the (female-dominated) federation at
Maddur.

17.    With the closure of the Project in 2004, the NGOs and the self-help groups have suffered
a setback. The groups that were started during the second phase of the Project were barely
2 years old. A few of the NGOs continue to support the groups but in a minimal way, in order to
ensure that their earlier efforts are not lost. In effect, the federations of self-help groups should
have performed these roles, but the federations did not take off in all the towns.

18.     The self-help group movement has brought certain changes in the lives of the women.
It has allowed poor women to move from their earlier position of silence to one of gaining voice,
reduced their fatalism, improved their living standards, and increased their collective bargaining
powers. However, self-help groups cannot be taken as the answer to solve all the problems
related to poverty alleviation.

19.     Self-help groups provide women with abilities to survive in the worst situations. Whether
they can become sustainable institutions depends not only on their ability to survive, but also on
the ability to grow with the changing context. An increase in income without any subsequent
increase in access and control of resources, status and quality of life would restrict the process
of empowerment of women. Although microfinance programs often target women and although
women use microfinance, there has been nothing specific that was designed to address gender-
specific aspects of the use of financial services. No concrete ways were devised that could meet
the distinct demands of poor women for savings services. Nevertheless, for the 12,000 women
in the slums, this development is judged to have been a boon.
  36       Appendix 3



    SUMMARY OF BENEFIT MONITORING AND EVALUATION INDICATORS AND RESULTS

                                                    Mysore          Channapatna     Ramanagaram       Tumkur
 Item                                            1999     2003      1999    2003    1999    2003    1999    2003
 General (in % unless indicated)
 Awareness about the project                      04.98    68.62     3.76   74.69    4.55   72.77    5.18   26.18
 Project is beneficial                            79.85    96.19    88.47   79.21   87.10   85.85   85.44   79.86
 Improvements in neighborhood                     50.50    49.28    03.76   74.52    3.15   71.20    4.29   21.63
 Water Supply
 Access to piped water supply                     63.05    87.45    17.44   56.72   24.87   44.33   35.00   61.66
 Poor pressure in water supply                     6.86      4.07   44.93   12.99   33.72    4.67   14.10    3.48
 Acceptable water quality                         90.02    98.38    57.91   87.01   71.15   98.44   83.15   92.90
 Distribution from public water point (meters)   128.21   109.04    91.79   26.58   91.01   28.52   77.11   28.01
 Sewerage
 Satisfaction with sewage disposal system         86.42    90.01    07.63   68.75   05.22   90.49   08.81   56.58
 Storm Water Drainage
 SW drains regularly maintained                   46.70    42.87    15.98   78.88   12.21   73.30   21.21   67.83
 Adequate drainage in vicinity                    60.41    55.70    37.22   62.65   30.58   42.76   30.60   90.71
 Solid Waste Management
 Distance to nearest bin (meters)                  122        79      14      32      98      29      62       18
 Improvements as a result of project              11.22    42.47     0.54   68.54    7.54    1.19    0.22   18.59
 Roads Improvements
 Improvements in roads from project               18.97    47.51     6.67   75.22    7.55   70.86    2.33   26.72
 Has road improvement been beneficial             19.15    39.88     8.23   63.18   06.13   60.56    3.91   25.65
 Slum Improvement Works
 Rating for water supply                          18.79    61.60    24.13   44.26   19.62   49.95   25.80   57.56
 Rating for access to toilets                     16.67    52.43    15.88   26.76   16.38   40.50   19.22   46.46
 Rating for waste disposal                        16.55    47.05    19.88   35.22   18.87   45.10   21.38   45.04
 Rating for internal roads                        16.87    52.56    19.77   37.08   18.18   47.46   24.96   48.46
 Rating for storm water drainage                  16.87    48.79    21.98   39.35   18.69   48.58   20.88   48.16
 Rating for community buildings                   13.98    40.38    16.74   36.24   15.30   40.35   20.96   54.20
SW = Storm water.
Source: Intervention. 2003. Final Survey BME Programme of KUIDP. Report and Summary of Findings. Bangalore.
                                                                               Appendix 4   37


           HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND FINANCE CORPORATION LOAN TYPE
                             AND DISTRIBUTION

                                 Table A4.1: Loans by Location
 Area                                          Number               Amount (Rs million)
 Rural                                          2,858                     233.95
 Urban                                          4,653                     567.00
   Total                                        7,511                     790.95
Source: Housing Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore.

               Table A4.2: Loans by Employment and Status of Beneficiaries
 Status                                        Number               Amount (Rs million)
 Employed                                        6,368                     637.62
 Housewife                                         364                      35.40
 Pensioner                                          20                       3.63
 Retired                                            33                       4.56
 Self-employed                                     137                      24.11
 Unemployed                                         11                       1.04
 Others                                            578                      84.59
   Total                                         7,511                     790.95
Source: Housing Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore.

 Table A4.3: Distribution of Low-Income Group Loans by Income Ceiling and Period
 Period                                     Income Level            No. of Beneficiaries
 December 1996­December 1997                    4,500                       2,340
 January­December 1998                          4,950                       1,181
 January­December 1999                          5,700                         802
 January­December 2000                          5,800                         562
    Total                                                                   4,885
Source: Housing Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore.

                                  Table A4.4: Loans by Period
 Period (Months)                         No. of Beneficiaries       Amount (Rs million)
 0­60                                              328                      44.24
 61­84                                             475                      47.91
 85­120                                          1,529                     162.14
 121­156                                         1,479                     148.53
 Above 157                                       3,700                     388.13
   Total                                         7,511                     790.95
Source: Housing Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore.

                           Table A4.5: Individual Loans by Amount
 Amount (Rs)                                   Number               Amount (Rs million)
 1­25,000                                           15                       0.38
 25,001­100,000                                  1,858                     101.60
 100,001­200,000                                 4,039                     403.51
 200,001­300,000                                 1,254                     189.14
 300,001­500,000                                   223                      53.36
 500,001­1,000,000                                 115                      41.83
 Over 1,000,000                                      7                       1.13
   Total                                         7,511                     790.95
Source: Housing Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore.
38       Appendix 4



                              Table A4.6: Rate of Interest of Loans
     Interest Rate (%)                          Number                Amount (Rs million)
     Up to 12.50                                    235                     27.48
     12.51­13.50                                  1,508                    159.92
     13.51­14.50                                  1,165                    110.13
     14.51­15.50                                  2,533                    275.97
     15.51­16.50                                  1,649                    167.56
     16.51­17.50                                    392                     44.53
     17.51­18.50                                     29                      5.38
        Total                                     7,511                    790.95
 Source: Housing Development and Finance Corporation, Bangalore.
                                                                                 Appendix 5     39


                FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF KARNATAKA URBAN
                       INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

A.     Analytical Scope

1.     The scope of the financial and economic analysis is focused on the financial
sustainability of urban investments in terms of the financial and economic benefits generated
from the projects as well as the financial and fiscal capacity of the urban local bodies (ULBs) to
service the project debts and ensure the sustainable provision of urban services. The financial
analysis is limited to those revenue-generating projects that were appraised during the project
preparation, such as water supply, residential sites and services and truck terminals. Economic
analysis of new road projects is done based on the incremental increase in land value and
resource savings generated by the investments. The economic and financial analysis was
based on ADB Guidelines for Economic Analysis of Projects (1997), Guidelines for the
Economic Analysis of Water Projects (1998) and Financial Management and Governance
Guidelines for Investments by ADB.

2.        During project preparation, analysis was done of (i) the financial viability of the water
supply projects in Mysore, Channapatna and Ramanagaram; (ii) the truck terminal in Mysore;
(iii) the residential and industrial sites and services in Channapatna, Ramanagaram and Tumkur;
and (iv) the cultural and community center in Ramanagaram. They were reported to be
financially viable. The estimates on financial internal rates of return (FIRR) vary from 15.5% in
the case of the Mysore water supply project to 2.6% in the case of the cultural and community
center in Ramanagaram. However, at the time of the project completion report (PCR) and
project performance evaluation report (PPER), the truck terminal in Tumkur had not been
occupied and was being converted to residential sites and services, while all the residential sites
and services projects were either sold and not occupied (Mysore), completed but not sold
(Channapatna and Ramanagaram), or were not completed. These subprojects are therefore not
included in the financial analysis. Since the shops of the cultural and commercial center have
also not been occupied, the financial analysis of this investment has not been undertaken.
Hence, financial analysis for the PCR was carried out only for the water supply schemes in
Channapatna, Mysore and Ramanagaram.

B.     Financial Analysis

3.     The financial cash-flow statements include all base costs, including price and physical
contingencies, interest during construction, and operation and maintenance (O&M) costs which
include personnel, administrative overheads, electricity, chemicals and miscellaneous expenses.
In the absence of project-specific O&M accounting, a nominal rate of 4% of capital cost was
used to account for O&M. Since the project investments were completed by 2004, no physical
contingencies and price fluctuations were included. Financial projections were done at 2005
constant prices over a period of 25 years with no salvage value assumed thereafter.

4.       Incremental capital cost and operating expenses were used to estimate the cost stream.
Incremental revenue from the subproject was estimated based on the water sold as per
incremental and non-incremental water demand from existing and new consumers and
connection charges. Since the Channapatna, Mysore and Ramanagaram water generation and
main trunk transmission systems were designed for a larger capacity, it was assumed that the
incremental demand for water up to 2011 would be met by these subprojects. As part of
institutional reform, the Mysore Municipal Corporation revised the water tariff with effect from
1 January 2005 and initiated auditing and regularization of illegal connections. In addition, water
40      Appendix 5



distribution and revenue collection of the Channapatna and Ramanagaram water supply
subproject was handed over to the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board in 2005.
Water tariffs were revised by the two local governments from Rs45 to Rs100 per month per
connection with effect from 2003.

5.       While the report and recommendation of the President included the FIRR estimates of
the subprojects, no estimates of the weighted average cost of capital were made. As a result, it
is difficult to determine the cost of capital for discounting the net benefit streams as well as to
compare the FIRRs to determine the financial viability of the subprojects. The financing plan
(Table A5.1) shows that the weighted average cost of capital is 2.1% in real terms. Actual
capital expenditure is some $8.62 million short of the estimated base cost, which is mainly
attributed to the valuation of foreign exchange, delays in project implementation, and
rescheduling of some of the investments.

                                      Table A5.1: Project Financing
                                                ($ million)
                                                   Local Currency
Component                            FX Cost           Cost               Total        %       Cost of Capital
Bank Loan to Government of India      32.08            44.3               76.38       61.91         4.90
Bank Loan to HDFC                                     20.00               20.00       16.21         8.40
Government of Karnataka                               27.00               27.00       21.88         8.40
Contribution in Kind and Cash
    Total                             32.08            91.3              123.38      100.00         6.20%
                                                     a
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) in Real Terms                                               2.1%
GoI = Government of India, HDFC = Housing Development and Finance Corporation.
a
  WACC = {(1+0.62)/(1+0.04)}-1, where the inflation rate is assumed as 4%.
Sources: ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in India.
        Manila; and ADB estimates.

6.     The resulting FIRRs are shown in Table A5.2. The high capital investments and low
service coverage are among the main reasons for the negative FIRR in Ramanagaram and
Channapatna.

            Table A5.2: Results of Financial Internal Rates of Return Calculations
                                              (%)
      Water Supply Subproject                                            Appraisal            PCR/PPER
      Mysore Water Supply Subproject                                          15.5               4.3
      Ramanagaram and Channapatna Water Supply                                 7.6               (5.1)
     ( ) = negative, PCR = project completion report, PPER = project performance evaluation report.
     Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
     Sources: Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban
                 Infrastructure Development Project in India. Manila; and ADB estimates.

7.       The main reasons for the decrease in the FIRRs are the non-implementation of some of
the important institutional and service cost-recovery measures assumed during appraisal.
During appraisal, it was assumed the water tariff would increase annually at an average of 13%
over the project period (251% in aggregate). The overseeing agency was expected to introduce
a sewerage charge of 30% in 1999. The non-revenue water is assumed to reduce from 30% in
1995 to 20% by 2001. Almost all of these policy measures have not been implemented during
the project period. In addition, some 40% to 45% of the connections in the project towns are
illegal. Thus, during the latter part of 2004, the ULBs took steps to audit the illegal connections
and initiated the process of regularization. Another reason for the poor financial viability of the
                                                                                                 Appendix 5       41


Ramanagaram and Channapatna water supply project is the fixed monthly tariff structure and
the low collection in relation to water demand. In comparison, the Mysore Municipal Corporation
has initiated a special drive to collect water charge arrears, These efforts have recently shown
positive results. The cost recovery in Ramanagaram and Channapatna has also increased after
management of the system was handed to the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage
Board.

C.        Economic Analysis

8.      Economic analysis of the project components has been conducted at 2005 prices.
Economic costs are calculated from the actual financial costs and include base costs but not
any transfer payments such as taxes and custom duties. Economic costs are valued in domestic
numeraire. Appropriate shadow pricing has been applied for tradable materials and unskilled
labor to estimate their economic values. The tradable component of the capital costs and O&M
costs are valued at a shadow exchange rate factor of 1.11 (0.9 of the standard conversion
factor), taking into consideration no foreign exchange fluctuation. The standard conversion
factor of 0.9 was used to convert financial estimates to economic terms. In the economic
analysis of the water supply subprojects, the opportunity cost of water estimated during the
project preparation, Rs.0.35 per cubic meter (m3), was used. The total economic cost of the
Project includes economic base and O&M costs as well as the opportunity cost of water.

9.     Quantifiable benefits of improved water supply include non-incremental water
consumption valued at the current average supply price of water from non-piped sources of
Rs.2/m3 to Rs.15/m3, and the incremental consumption valued at the demand price of water of
Rs.5/m3. 1 A moderate increase in willingness to pay was assumed until the Project meets the
design capacity.

10.    Economic analyses of Mysore's outer ring road and Tumkur's southern bypass road
have been carried out based on increases in incremental land values adjacent to the road
discounted for estimates of increases in land values due to the natural growth of the cities.
The main purpose of the new roads is to open up the new areas for development, thereby
decongesting the city centers as well as to develop the urban fringes. In both projects, the
immediate impact area has been taken as 250 meters on either side of the road corridor.
Conservative assumptions have been used to determine the impact area, directly benefited
population and the incremental growth in land value.

11.     No economic analysis was made for the investments in the rehabilitation and minor
improvements to the existing road systems, mainly because no significant quantifiable
incremental benefits were generated by these subprojects. Similarly, economic analysis of the
solid waste management and sewerage subprojects were not carried out, as it was impossible
to quantity the intangible benefits from the solid waste management and sanitation projects with
limited spatial coverage.

12.    Major indicators of the economic analysis, including sensitivity indicators, are
summarized in Table A5.3. The Mysore water supply project, as well as the ring road projects,
generate substantial economic benefits. As compared to the water supply projects, economic


1
    The economic benefit from the incremental demand for water is based on willingness to pay analysis conducted by
    the project preparation team. The average willingness to pay of Rs5/m3 is used as the demand price of water. It is
    assumed the demand price will increase at the rate of household income growth, assumed to be 2% per year, and
    incremental connections will be provided until 2011.
42      Appendix 5



returns of the new road projects are not significantly affected by changes in the O&M cost and
marginal changes in the land value.

                Table A5.3: Economic Internal Rates of Return and Sensitivity Indicators
                                              (%)
                                                           - 10% in land        +10% in O&M          +10% Annual
 Projects                           Base Estimate              value               Cost             Tariff Revision
 Water Supply
 Mysore
 EIRR                                     16.1             Not applicable               16.6               23.4
 Ramanagaram/
 Channapatna
 EIRR                                     (0.8)            Not applicable               (0.7)                3.9
 New Roads
 Mysore Ring Road
 EIRR                                     73.0                   71.0                   73.0
 Tumkur Bypass Road
 EIRR                                     96.0                   95.0                   96.0
 Discount rate               12.0
( ) = negative, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, O&M = operation and maintenance.
Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

D.      Summary and Recalculation of EIRRs

13.    Table A5.4 summarizes the FIRRs and EIRRs contained in the RRP and PCR and
recalculated as necessary for the PPER.

                             Table A5.4: Comparison of FIRRs and EIRRs
                                                          RRP               ADB PCR              PPER
             Project Component                      FIRR      EIRR      FIRR    EIRR     FIRR       EIRR
             Mysore
               Water Supply                         15.5        13.6    4.3      16.4     4.3       16.4
               Truck Terminal                       14.1
               Intermediate Ring Road                           21.5
               Outer Ring Road                                  53.1            73.0                45.0
             Ramanagaram/Channapatna
                Water Supply                        7.6         10.3    (5.1)            (5.1)    Negative
                                                                                0.75
                  Community/Commercial                 2.6
                  Center
              Tumkur
                  Southern Bypass Road                         32.9            96.0            38.0
              Four Project Towns
                  Industrial Sites and                16.0
                  Services
                 Residential Sites and                14.8
                 Services
            ( ) = negative, ADB = Asian Development Bank, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR
            = financial internal rate of return, PCR = project completion report, PPER = project
            performance evaluation report, RRP = report and recommendation of the President.
            Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
            Sources: ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
                         Development Project in India. Manila; ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of
                         the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loans and Technical
                         Assistance to India for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project.
                         Manila; and ADB estimates.
                                                                                 Appendix 5     43


14.     The financial calculations and assumptions of the ADB PCR were reviewed and
accepted by the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM), as well as the EIRR for the Mysore
water supply. However, the OEM re-evaluated the EIRRs for the Mysore outer ring road and the
Tumkur bypass road because the ADB PCR calculated substantial increases compared with the
EIRRs at appraisal. Since both roads opened up new areas for residential and industrial uses,
and in the absence of vehicle counts and operating costs, the methodology used by the ADB
PCR and the PPER is based in increases in raw land costs. However, the ADB PCR did not
distinguish between increases in land costs due to normal outward growth of the cities and the
incremental increase due to the construction of the two roads. The latter was estimated based
on conversations with local officials, engineers at the Mysore Urban Development Authority
(MUDA) and Tumkur Urban Development Authority (TUDA), and local residents. The results of
the re-evaluation are therefore significantly lower than those of the ADB PCR, with an EIRR for
the Mysore outer ring road of 45% and for the Tumkur bypass road of 38%.

E.       Affordability and Subsidy of Water Subprojects

15.     The revised water tariffs in Channapatna, Mysore and Ramanagaram are affordable to
low-income households. While low-income households that consume less than 25m3 of water
per month pay only 2.4% of their household income (Rs2,500 per month), households in
Channapatna and Ramanagaram pay about 4% of their income. This is affordable but above
the rate the households are willing to pay for assured water supply, although local governments
would increase the basic rates annually if adequate and assured water was provided to the local
community. While the tariff structure in Mysore Municipal Corporation (MMC) is sustainable, the
same cannot be said about Channapatna and Ramanagaram. The flat rate of Rs100 per month
for all households, despite almost 76% of the connections being metered, is regressive.
This should be revised to ensure that all categories of households pay at least 4% to 5% of their
household income on water charges.

F.       Fiscal and Financial Sustainability of Project Towns

16.     A major part of the financial sustainability analysis is based on the projected financial
positions of project towns. The debt-servicing capacity of the original four project towns is
determined by the projected net cash-flow estimates derived during the project preparation
process. Some of these projections are based on institutional and management reforms outlined
in the loan covenants. A comparison of the projected financial positions with the actual
performance of the project towns from 1999 to 2005 shows wide variations in the estimates,
which explain the fiscal stress experienced by most of the towns in servicing the project debts
(Table A5.5).

           Table A5.5: Comparison of Financial Projections and Actual Performance
                                      of Project Towns
                                         (Rs million)
     Municipal Financial Profile    2003­2004      MMC         TMC        CMC         RMC
     Tax Receipts                    Appraisal   571.25        107.11    23.57          16.58
                                      Actual     122.30         51.33     5.83           5.59
     Water Charges                   Appraisal   179.07a         8.57     3.20           2.47
                                      Actual     107.20          4.07     0.84           1.68
     Operating Revenue               Appraisal   843.08        146.33    72.37          44.63
     (Excluding fiscal transfers)     Actual     343.12         66.70    29.03          25.00
     Operating Expenditure           Appraisal   485.22         84.52    41.52          24.54
                                      Actual     564.65         87.69    19.83           6.72
44       Appendix 5



     Municipal Financial Profile       2003­2004       MMC          TMC         CMC         RMC
     Net Cash Flow                      Appraisal       9.63           3.51   (21.05)       (38.47)
     (Revenue + Capital)                  Actual      (23.46)       (15.14)      8.96         16.40
     Debt Servicing Capacity
     Debt Servicing as % of
       Operating Revenue (2005)        2003­2004       43.00         58.00      68.00       116.00
     KUIDP-Related                     2004­2005      390.40        104.40      61.20        86.00
     Debt Servicing + Over Dues
     ( ) = negative, MMC = Mysore Municipal Corporation, TMC = Tumkur Municipal Corporation, CMC =
     Channapatna Municipal Council, KUIDP = Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project, RMC =
     Ramanagaram Municipal Council.
     a
       The estimate includes both incremental water charges and revenue from truck terminal.
     Note: Numbers in parenthesis are negative.
     Source: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project.

17.     The property tax reforms introduced by the state of Karnataka during 2002 have
significantly improved the tax receipts of most of the project towns. Although the transition from
an annual ratable value to a capital value basis under a self-assessment scheme format is not
easy, it has significantly improved the tax receipts of most ULBs in the state. However, the
projections made during project appraisal are too high and not realistic. For example, while the
projected tax receipts of MMC for 2003­2004 was Rs 571 million, the actual realization was only
21% of the projected estimate. That this is also true in the case of other towns means that the
revenue enhancement plan proposed by the Project has not been satisfactorily implemented.

18.     Based on the loan repayment schedule prepared by KUIDFC, the debt repayment
obligation of the project towns ranges from 43% of operating revenue in MCC to almost 116%
for the Ramanagaram Municipal Council. Since this is not sustainable given the present
revenue base of the project towns, all debts will be paid by the state. This is in accord with the
Karnataka State Decree of 2001, which stipulates that the state will pay all project debts, while
any project revenue will accrue to KUIDFC for further investment in project-related O&M or
similar state projects. While well meaning, the decree goes against the principle of sustainable
debt financing.
    MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
    REPORT FOR THE KARNATAKA URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
                           PROJECT IN INDIA
                       (Loans 1415- and 1416-IND)



         On 11 January 2008, the Officer-in-Charge, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.     Overall Assessment

       1.     We appreciate OED's evaluation of the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
       Development Project and its overall satisfactory rating. We note that the
       recommendations of the PPER are consistent with our own findings, and the
       issues and lessons identified in the PPER are already being applied wherever
       appropriate in the implementation of the ongoing projects and the design of the
       new projects.

       2.       As the PPER observed, significant delays were common for integrated
       urban development projects because they are inherently complex and their
       implementation requires close coordination between multiple agencies, and
       enhanced institutional capacities and public support. The resulting time and cost
       overruns were found too costly, despite the proven advantage of the integrated
       design of urban projects. To overcome these difficulties, Government of India
       (GOI) and ADB undertook a comprehensive review of urban projects in 2003­
       2004. As a result of the review, the design of integrated urban development
       projects is now strengthened by incorporating advance support for upfront
       capacity building of implementing agencies and institutional strengthening of
       state line departments.

       II.    Comments on Issues, Lessons, and Follow-up Actions

       3.     We agree with the PPER's observation that effective operation &
       maintenance (O&M), along with adequate financing, is essential for project
       sustainability. We are now introducing several innovative measures for effective
       O&M. For example, O&M will be outsourced using a performance-based public-
       private partnership (PPP) contract under the recently approved third loan to
       Karnataka. Under the PPP contract, the private contractor will finance, construct,
       and manage the project facilities. ADB loan financing also includes the O&M
       expenses up to 10 years.

       4.       On the issue of sustainable cost recovery in para. 90, experience in India,
       like in other DMCs in South Asia, shows a difficulty to carry on with reforms
       especially at the beginning of project implementation. Given the long history of
       getting social services below the cost of production, it is often found that
       consumers are reluctant to pay the full costs and local governments are unwilling
       to charge at the cost recovery level. Incorporating even the smallest changes in
       tariff structure generally takes years, therefore, there is a need for modest but
       more focused incremental reform. Policy changes, such as increases in water
       supply and sewerage tariff, are likely to be more acceptable if these are
       preceded by infrastructure development, improvement of services and extensive
stakeholder consultation. Public awareness campaign for demand side
management is also crucial to obtain the public support for the project. In addition,
the introduction of double-entry accounting system and computerization of local
government functions greatly contributed to the enhanced efficiency of the
government system.

5.      We agree with the PPER's observation in paras. 96 and 97 that capacity
building and staffing of urban local bodies (ULBs) with adequate resources to
operate and maintain the completed project facilities generally received limited
attention. Based on this lesson, in order to maximize sustainability of assets
created under the project, a time-bound institutional and capacity development
program has been adopted in the later projects. Furthermore, the number of
subsectors and subprojects, the absorptive as well as implementation capacities
of the ULBs have been carefully considered in designing new projects.

6.       We agree with the PPER's suggestion in paras. 94 and 95 that hands-on
implementation support and bridging TAs would facilitate project implementation
and reduce start-up delays. GOI and ADB recently instituted several measures
to address start-up delays in consultant recruitment and procurement. These
measures include: (i) regular, quarterly tripartite portfolio review meeting;
(ii) establishing project management and implementation units at the time of
project appraisal; (iii) strengthening the managerial and institutional capabilities
of such units; (iv) assist in developing tender documents, selection of consultants,
and pre-qualification of contractors; and (v) familiarize project staff with ADB
policies and procedures.

7.      The quarterly tripartite portfolio review meeting involving oversight and
line agencies of the Government and ADB at a senior level discusses
implementation issues and agrees on corrective actions on each individual
project. The quarterly review has become an important forum for project
performance review, dissemination of best practices, and enhanced
communication among GOI, executing agencies, and ADB. The frequency and
intensity of review missions have also increased substantially, which helped
higher performance in contract awards and loan disbursements.

8.      The PPER suggests two follow-up actions, which include (i) ensuring
effective O&M for all project facilities; and (ii) monitoring the implementation of
the ULB management action plans so that the project ULBs become more
financially self-sustaining. We fully support the follow-up actions. As explained
above in this memo, these actions are already being applied in the design of new
projects in the urban sector.
