          ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
        Operations Evaluation Department




PROGRAM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORT


                                   IN


                                INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response.
Performance Evaluation Report




Program Number: PPE: IND: 29051
Loan Number: 1717-IND
June 2007




India: Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management
Program




Operations Evaluation Department
                       CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                          (as of 11 June 2007)

                Currency Unit      ­    Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                      Re1.00       =    $0.016
                       $1.00       =    Rs61.61


                                ABBREVIATIONS

ADB         ­   Asian Development Bank
ADTA        ­   advisory technical assistance
BOT         ­   build-operate-transfer
CIP         ­   core investment program
COSS        ­   country operational strategy study
DFID        ­   Department for International Development (United Kingdom)
DMF         ­   design and monitoring framework
DPE         ­   Department of Public Enterprises
DPEP        ­   district primary education program
EA          ­   executing agency
ECPR        ­   Empowered Committee on Public Sector Undertaking Reform
EFC         ­   Eleventh Finance Commission
EPA         ­   Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
ERC         ­   electricity regulatory commission
FRBMA       ­   Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act
GDP         ­   gross domestic product
GoMP        ­   Government of Madhya Pradesh
LGB         ­   local government body
LTACC       ­   Loan and Technical Assistance Coordination Committee
MCDD        ­   mission on control of diarrheal diseases
MOU         ­   memorandum of understanding
MPERC       ­   Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission
MPHB        ­   Madhya Pradesh Housing Board
MPPHC       ­   Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation
MPPRMP      ­   Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program
MPRDC       ­   Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation
MPSAIDC     ­   Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation
MPSCB       ­   Madhya Pradesh Slum Clearance Board
MPSEB       ­   Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
MPSEC       ­   Madhya Pradesh State Export Corporation
MPSFC       ­   Madhya Pradesh State Financial Corporation
MPSFDC      ­   Madhya Pradesh State Fisheries Development Corporation
MPSIC       ­   Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation
MPSIDC      ­   Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation
MPSLandDC   ­   Madhya Pradesh Land Development Corporation
MPSLDC      ­   Madhya Pradesh Leather Development Corporation
MPSRA       ­   Madhya Pradesh State Reorganization Act, 2000
MPSRTC      ­   Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation
MPSTC    ­   Madhya Pradesh State Textile Corporation
MPSTDC   ­   Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation
MTFF     ­   medium-term fiscal framework
NABARD   ­   National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development
NBFC     ­   nonbanking finance company
NPA      ­   nonperforming asset
NSDP     ­   net state domestic product
O&M      ­   operation and maintenance
OCR      ­   ordinary capital resources
OED      ­   Operations Evaluation Department
OEM      ­   Operations Evaluation Mission
PAT      ­   profit after tax
PCB      ­   Pollution Control Board
PCR      ­   program completion report
PIA      ­   poverty impact assessment
PPER     ­   program performance evaluation report
PPMS     ­   project performance management system
PRMC     ­   public resource management committee
PPP      ­   public-private partnership
PSU      ­   public sector undertaking
PWD      ­   Public Works Department
RRP      ­   Report and recommendation of the President to the Board of
             Directors
SAL      ­   structural adjustment loan
SBFAU    ­   State Budget and Fiscal Analysis Unit
SBI      ­   State Bank of India
SDP      ­   state domestic product
SFC      ­   State Financial Corporations Act
SFRF     ­   states' fiscal reforms facility
SIDBI    ­   Small Industries Development Bank of India
SLR      ­   statutory liquidity ratio
SME      ­   small and medium-sized enterprise
SPFRC    ­   State Public Finance Reforms Committee
SRC      ­   Staff Review Committee
SRF      ­   state renewal fund
SSA      ­   Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (national primary education scheme)
SSN      ­   social safety net
TA       ­   technical assistance
TCR      ­   technical assistance completion report
TFC      ­   Twelfth Finance Commission
UNDP     ­   United Nations Development Programme
VAT      ­   value-added tax
VRS      ­   voluntary retirement scheme
                                              NOTES

      (i)     The fiscal year (FY) of India and its government agencies runs from 1 April to
              31 March of the following year. FY before a calendar year denotes the year in
              which the fiscal year begins, e.g., FY2000 begins on 1 April 2000.

      (ii)    In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                            Key Words
asian development bank, development effectiveness, indian finances financial reforms, indian
public enterprises reforms, indian state owned enterprises reforms, lessons, madhya pradesh
finances financial reforms, operations evaluations departments, policy evaluations, public
resources management, social safety nets, technical assistance



Director General      B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director              R. K. Leonard, Director, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED

Team leader           P. M. Robertson, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 1,
                      OED
Team members          M. O. Nuestro, Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
                      B. Q. Cafirma, Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation Division 1,
                      OED

                         Operations Evaluation Department, PE-702
                                           CONTENTS
                                                                                              Page

Basic Data                                                                                        iii
Executive Summary                                                                                  v
I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                               1
       A.   Evaluation Purpose and Process                                                        1
       B.   Expected Results                                                                      2
II.    DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION                                                                  2
       A.   Formulation                                                                           2
       B.   Rationale                                                                             5
       C.   Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                                           6
       D.   Scheduling and Design Changes                                                         7
       E.   Results                                                                               8
       F.   Consultants                                                                          19
       G.   Loan Covenant                                                                        20
       H.   Policy Framework                                                                     20
III.   PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT                                                                    21
       A.   Overall Assessment                                                                   21
       B.   Relevance                                                                            21
       C.   Effectiveness                                                                        22
       D.   Efficiency                                                                           24
       E.   Sustainability                                                                       24
IV.    OTHER ASSESSMENTS                                                                         26
       A.   Impact                                                                               26
       B.   Asian Development Bank Performance                                                   28
       C.   Borrower Performance                                                                 28
       D.   Technical Assistance                                                                 29
V.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                                                    30
       A.   Issues                                                                               30
       B.   Lessons                                                                              33
       C.   Follow-up actions                                                                    33
APPENDIXES
1.   Analysis of Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program Design                        35
2.   Status of Compliance of Conditions and Covenants                                            45
3.   Impact of Bifurcation                                                                       79
4.   Fiscal Consequences of Multilateral Adjustment Lending to States in India                   82
5.   Reforming Public Sector Undertakings                                                       102
6.   The Use of Madhya Pradesh Environment and Rehabilitation Policies in Asian                 117
     Development Bank Sector Loans
7.   Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net in Madhya             120
     Pradesh

Attachment:    Management Response

The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
Tapas Sen and Hari Sridhar were the consultants. To the knowledge of the management of
OED, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this
report.
                                                  BASIC DATA
       Loan 1717-IND: Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program
Program Preparation/Institution Building
                                                                                  No. of
 TA                                                                              Person-    Amount    Approval
 No.                           TA Name                             Type          Months     ($'000)     Date
2943      Support for the Government of Madhya                   ADTA            62a         780b   15 Dec 1997
          Pradesh Public Finance Reform and
          Institutional Strengthening
2944      Strengthening Local Government in Madhya               ADTA            42          700       15 Dec 1997
          Pradesh
3338      Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform         ADTA            52c         600d      14 Dec 1999
          and Social Safety Net in Madhya Pradesh
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, No. = number, TA = technical assistance.
                                                                          As per ADB
Key Program Data                                                        Loan Documents                 Actual
Total Program Cost ($ million)                                               250.0                     250.0
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization ($ million)                                      250.0                     250.0
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Key Dates                                                            Expected                    Actual
Reconnaissance                                                                         30 Nov­12 Dec 1997
Fact-Finding                                                                             23 Mar­6 Apr 1998
Appraisal                                                                                    17­30 Jul 1998
Loan Negotiations                                                                           14­16 Apr 1999
Board Approval                                                                                 14 Dec 1999
Loan Agreement                                                                                 14 Dec 1999
Loan Effectiveness                                                  13 Mar 2000                15 Dec 1999
First Tranche Release                                               16 Dec 1999                16 Dec 1999
Second Tranche Release                                              30 Sep 2000                27 Feb 2002
Third Tranche Release                                               31 Mar 2002                17 Mar 2003
Program Completion                                                  31 Mar 2002                17 Mar 2003
Loan Closing                                                        30 Sep 2002                17 Mar 2003
Months (effectiveness to completion)                                    24.5e                     39.0
Borrower                          India
Executing Agency                  Finance Department of the Government of Madhya Pradesh
Type of Mission                                                  No. of Missions           No. of Person-Days
Reconnaissance                                                           1                          61
Fact-Finding                                                             1                          64
Appraisal                                                                1                          75
Review                                                                  10                         220
Consultation/Project-Specific Contact                                    2                         110
Program Completion                                                       2                          28
Operations Evaluation                                                    1                          40

a
    Of the 62 person-months, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) financed 44 person-months of domestic consultants
    and 9 person-months of international consultants. The state government provided the services of a domestic
    economist/public finance expert as economic adviser to the State Budgeting and Fiscal Analysis Unit (SBFAU) for
    9 person-months.
b
    The amount pertains to ADB amount only.
c
    Of the 52 person-months, ADB financed 33 person-months of domestic consultants and 10 person-months of
    international consultants. The state government was to provide the services of an expert as head of a technical
    secretariat for the full duration of the public enterprise reform process to be implemented over 9 months.
d
    The amount pertains to the ADB amount only.
e
    These dates come from the ADB project performance management system (PPMS) program performance report.
    Although the Program lasted 3 years, the report and recommendation of the President (RRP) recorded the loan as
    commencing in March 1999, and being completed in March 2002. The Loan Agreement became effective on
    March 2000 and the Program closed in September 2002. The PPMS was not changed to reflect the dates based
    on the approval in December 1999.
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        With gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaging about 3.5% per annum for almost
four decades after independence, the slow pace of economic growth was of increasing concern
to the Government of India. As a result of reforms to liberalize the economy in the early 1980s,
economic growth was stimulated to some 5% per year. However, the gross fiscal deficit of the
Government and state governments almost doubled through the 1980s, to reach 9.4% of GDP
by FY1990. Economic reforms created a competitive environment for domestic manufacturers,
and began to put pressure on the large number of central government and state level public
sector undertakings (PSU) that had been proliferating in commercial as well as social
development fields, under the Government's socialist policies. Containing the fiscal deficits of
the central and state governments became the focus of structural adjustment reforms initiated in
the 1990s. At the state level, this included the need to improve the efficiency of public
expenditure and create an environment to encourage private sector participation in economic
growth--in particular, for infrastructure development.

        In 1996, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) revised its India country operational
strategy and agreed with the Government, for the first time, to support state governments to:
(i) broaden and deepen economic and administrative reforms that were lagging behind at state
level, (ii) accelerate infrastructure development and industrial restructuring, (iii) maximize
synergy and the multiplier effect of ADB's policy dialogue and project interventions, and
(iv) improve ADB operational efficiency. ADB's state level strategy of supporting public resource
management reforms--particularly fiscal consolidation, PSU reform, and enabling private sector
participation--to establish conditions for sector specific loans, was first implemented in Gujarat
with the approval of the two-year, $250 million Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management
Program (GPSRMP) loan in December 1996.

        In early 1997, a second ADB state selection mission visited six states, and
recommended Madhya Pradesh as the next state for ADB to apply its state level strategy.
Unlike Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh was India's most populated state, with high levels of poverty,
poor infrastructure, and a limited industrial base. However, a strong and long-standing political
commitment to social development in the state developed urgency for fiscal reform. Design of a
proposed loan to support the government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) reform agenda began
with two technical assistance (TA) projects approved in late 1997, to assist ADB and the GoMP
design, and then implement the loan. Although the design was finalized to meet the originally
scheduled approval in late 1998, a combination of international sanctions against India in
response to its nuclear tests, and the holding of state elections in late 1998, resulted in approval
being pushed to late 1999. This decision was to have a deleterious effect on ADB-GoMP
relations, which required a sensitive response through 1999.

       In early 1999, GoMP published a white paper outlining the scope of its reform agenda,
which was consistent with the proposed $250 million Madhya Pradesh Public Resource
Management Program (MPPRMP). The 3-year loan, including an attached TA, was approved by
ADB's Board of Directors in December 1999, funded by ordinary capital resources. Although
there were some abstentions, the Board agreed that the MPPRMP met the basic human needs
sanctions criteria imposed in response to India's nuclear tests.

      The MPPRMP's expected impact was improved social development and sustainable
economic growth through improved public resource management, and increased public
expenditure to social sectors for the benefit of the people of the state. The Program's three
outcomes remained consistent with ADB's state level strategy of 1996: (i) a well-managed
vi


sustainable medium-term public finance framework enabling enhanced resource allocation to
social sectors, (ii) PSUs restructured to contribute to the economy by efficiently and effectively
using state resources, and (iii) private sector investment developing key sectors of the state
economy. Reflecting in part the state context, the MPPRMP explicitly proposed that the fiscal
space created by reform would enable increased resource allocation to social sectors.

        The GoMP Department of Finance was the Program's Executing Agency, with a policy
level public resource management committee (PRMC), chaired by the chief minister, overseeing
GoMP's reform agenda. Two empowered committees chaired by the chief secretary--on public
finance reform and PSU restructuring--managed reform implementation and reported to the
PRMC. A technical secretariat was designed to provide guidance on technical aspects of the
PSU reform but it was not established during the life of the Program because of exogenous
resource constraints. The PRMC also took on the role of the program steering committee.

       The program loan had three tranches: $100 million disbursed on effectiveness, followed
by two tranches of $75 million each. The release of the second tranche was delayed by
5 months while ADB, the Government, and GoMP sought assurance that GoMP's legal status
was unaffected by the bifurcation of the state in November 2000. Bifurcation affected both fiscal
targets and PSU reform, as the division of assets and liabilities between the two states was
extremely difficult to resolve, and in some cases unresolved as of 2006. In spite of these delays,
the Program was completed in 39 months--3 months later than planned. The completion date
of ADB's project performance management system (PPMS) was 9 months less than the time
required for a 3-year program based on the Board approval date, and the Loan Agreement
closure date was 3 months less.

        The MPPRMP was rated "relevant," as it was consistent with the reform agenda of both
the Government and GoMP, and ADB's country strategy. The program had strong political
support, and momentum was maintained through changes of government. The overall program
logic was sound with respect to the three outcomes, but the minimal support to local body fiscal
reform, and the extremely limited social service interventions, had a token appearance. Generic
risks were assessed, but there was no explicitly reference to the possibility of the state being
bifurcated nor to the impact of the Government's Eleventh Finance Commission awards, even
though these were being prepared at time of the design. Some feasible mitigation measures
were proposed but failure to ensure the institutional arrangements for PSU reform were in place
compromised their achievement. Lessons in the program design were drawn from the Gujarat
program, other agency subnational programs, and international experience.

        The Program was rated "less effective," as two of the three outcomes were not achieved.
There was a marginal but not sustained reduction in the fiscal deficit during the program,
despite the effect of bifurcation. Social sector expenditure did not increase, although the state's
allocation was not generally adversely impacted by fiscal reforms, primarily because of the
Government's significant vertical programs in health, education, and poverty alleviation.
Interventions to simplify taxes and computerize tax administration and treasury accounts were
successful, and the benefits began to be seen in 2006. A study of the counterfactual position,
noted the limited analysis period, but found that the loan did not lead to any significant
improvement in the overall fiscal situation in Madhya Pradesh in the short term.

       Overall PSU reforms remain unfinished, with eight PSUs operationally closed. However,
as they are not yet financially closed, the treasury is yet to receive any benefits. Corporate
governance reforms have not positively affected management performance. Difficulties in
                                                                                                   vii


settling the division of assets and liabilities between Madhya Pradesh and the new Chhattisgarh
state remain after 6 years, further hampering reform of PSUs selected for divestment.

        Reforms to create an enabling environment to attract private sector investment were
more successful. The establishment of an independent electricity regulatory authority and the
unbundling of the state electricity board had a positive effect in the power sector. ADB has
furthered reforms with two loans to this sector in 2001 and 2006. Private sector investment in
constructing and maintaining roads and bridges increased significantly, resulting in a large
number of toll roads in the state. ADB provided a road sector loan in 2002. The approval of state
policies on the environment, and rehabilitation and resettlement were also positive steps, even if
the latter is not deemed robust enough to meet ADB standards.

       The MPPRMP was rated "less efficient" because the expectation of increased revenue
from tax and the sale of PSU shares and assets to contribute to the GoMP share was
overambitious, although the adjustment costs were revised down by $70 million to $530 million
to account for bifurcation. The number of employees receiving voluntary retirement payments
was only 55% of the estimated amount, and GoMP decided against providing any social safety
net assistance. Although policy and management committees were efficient, the lack of a
technical secretariat constrained the efficient management of PSU reforms, with TA consultants
performing tasks instead of government officials. With two of the three TA projects rated "partly
successful," overall the TA resources were "less efficiently" used.

        MPPRMP is rated "less likely sustainable." The tax administration and treasury systems
provide a solid foundation for GoMP to maximize the benefits from the newly introduced value-
added tax (VAT), particularly if additional targeted support is provided to the computerized
systems. If the one-time entries of the last 3 years, 2003­2005, (which negatively affected the
fiscal deficit) can be contained, then there is a positive fiscal outlook with (i) potential increases
in VAT revenue, and (ii) benefits from meeting Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
Act targets. This may well create the opportunity to increase social sector allocations and move
closer toward Millennium Development Goals. PSU reforms remain on GoMP's agenda. If the
appropriate support can be provided to complete the reforms initiated under the Program, and
with other PSUs, then the reformed PSUs could begin to contribute to the economy rather than
be a drain on it. Infrastructure improvements, resulting in a significant increase in the number of
toll roads under different management, have raised an opportunity to rationalize toll ways and
improving traffic flows across the state. With a recently approved power sector loan, it is likely
that constraints in this sector will be addressed, thereby encouraging economic growth.

       Based on the above assessment, the MPPRMP is rated "partly successful."

        The socioeconomic, environment, and anticorruption impacts have been varied.
Although the expected increase in social sector allocations was not met, a range of the
Government's programs supporting improved education and health care outcomes, along with
targeted employment generation poverty alleviation programs, ensured that total social sector
expenditure was maintained. Given the high levels of poverty in the state, considerable effort
will be required to reduce poverty. The approval of environment and rehabilitation policies was
an important step in establishing statewide standards. While not explicitly identified as such, a
number of reforms establish a basis for further institutional and administrative actions to limit
opportunities for corrupt practices. The TA assessed by the Operations Evaluation Mission
(OEM) was rated "partly successful" as the TA did not achieve its outputs and outcome, despite
the fact that the consultants produced quality advice and adjusted to the failure to establish the
technical secretariat.
viii



        ADB's performance is rated "less satisfactory." The delay of over 12 months in approving
the loan created significant frustration in GoMP before the program began. When funds from a
development partner were not available for a key implementation institution, ADB was not able
to find an alternative. The India resident mission provided continuous, high quality, monitoring
and policy dialogue support during extended periods between missions from ADB headquarters.
The Borrower's (GoMP) performance is rated "satisfactory." GoMP's reform policy bodies
provided the necessary oversight and management support, and the Executing Agency
administered the program efficiently. Inadequate resources constrained the effectiveness of the
nodal PSU agency, and the GoMP's economic policy unit.

        A number of issues can be identified from the Program: (i) the initiative to support the
GoMP to formulate environment and rehabilitation policies is extremely positive; (ii) the scope
and sequencing of TA for complex reforms, which are often subject to delay in implementation,
raises challenges for ADB; (iii) the method of setting nominal fiscal targets needs to be carefully
reviewed, along with mechanisms to respond to the impact of exogenous factors, e.g., to ensure
that changes in government policy are not at variance with loan conditions; (iv) a balance is
required between revenue and expenditure reforms, and where PSU reforms include closure of
PSUs, sufficient time and resources should be provided to at least achieve financial closure;
and (v) the importance of ADB's resident mission to maintain continuous support to complex
reforms can not be overstated.

         Lessons include the following: (i) although the 3-year design time frame was a positive
lesson from GPSRMP, a challenge remains for ADB to sustain involvement given the long-term,
iterative nature of reform. The experience since MPPRMP of using cluster loans and project
loans for institutional and capacity development needs to be assessed; (ii) increased effort is
required in design to assess political economy exogenous factors, and agree on mechanisms to
ensure that reform targets can be realigned with government policies should the need arise; (iii)
balancing the scope of reforms, including explicitly targeting reforms that will further the
government's anticorruption efforts, will have significant flow-on effects; (iv) ADB needs to
formalize management arrangements to ensure continuous policy dialogue from within the
country in complex reform programs that are not delegated to resident missions; and (v) the
Board needs to review how it monitors its concerns are addressed by Management during
program implementation.

        In formulating the India country partnership strategy, the OEM recommends that ADB's
state level support strategy, as revised in the 2003­2006 country strategy and program, should
be reviewed--including assessing (i) the opportunities to support priority aspects of ongoing
state level public resource management reforms, and (ii) the most appropriate funding
modalities to achieve jointly agreed outcomes.



                                                            Bruce Murray
                                                            Director General
                                                            Operations Evaluation Department
                                               I.       INTRODUCTION

1.     In 1996, the India country operational strategy study1 (COSS) of the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) was revised to include an agreement with the Government of India to direct a
portion of financing to states. The strategy was to support fiscal reforms in preparation for
sector-specific loans. This strategic shift in ADB operations in India began with the approval by
ADB's Board of Directors of a $250 million loan for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource
Management Program 2 (GPSRMP) in December 1996, which was the first program loan
provided by a multilateral development bank to a subnational government in India.3 In late 1997,
ADB began discussions with the government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) for a similar loan;
2 years later, the Board approved the second state level program loan, also for $250 million
from ordinary capital resources (OCR), for the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management
Program (MPPRMP).4

A.         Evaluation Purpose and Process

2.      The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) is being conducted 3 years after closure of
the MPPRMP to assess the achievement of outcomes and impact as defined in the Report and
Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors (RRP). The counterfactual
position--the effect on fiscal stability in the absence of the Program--is explored, and the
performance of the technical assistance (TA) supporting public sector undertaking (PSU) reform
is assessed and rated.5 The OEM uses the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
human development report expenditure ratios to assess changes in public expenditure on social
development. 6 The program completion report (PCR), which rated the program "successful,"
notes the constraints from exogenous factors such as the bifurcation of Madhya Pradesh,
natural disasters, central government policy changes, and market factors, on achieving fiscal
and public sector undertaking 7 (PSU) reform targets. The design referred to risks, including
generic exogenous factors, and incorporated some mitigating measures. An OEM to India was
conducted in October­November 2006 with consultants experienced in public finance and fiscal
analysis, and corporate governance and PSU reform in India.




1
    ADB. 1996. Country Operational Strategy, India. Manila. 17 April.
2
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved
    on 18 December).
3
    The World Bank was to follow with public sector resource management program loans to Uttar Pradesh (2000),
    Karnataka (2001), and Andhra Pradesh (2002).
4
    ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program. Manila (Loan 1717-IND, for $250 million,
    approved on 14 December).
5
    ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net
    in Madhya Pradesh. Manila (TA 3338, for $600,000, approved on 14 December).
6
    The (i) public expenditure ratio ­ the percentage of state income going into public expenditure; (ii) social allocation
    ratio ­ percentage of total expenditure allocated to social services; (iii) social priority ratio ­ percentage of social
    expenditure devoted to human priority concerns (education, health, water, and sanitation); and (iv) human
    expenditure ratio ­ percentage of state income devoted to human priority concerns (the product of the above three
    ratios). These ratios are not used in any of the three Madhya Pradesh human development reports (1995, 1998,
    and 2002).
7
    Public enterprises are referred to as PSUs in Madhya Pradesh. In Gujarat, they are state-owned enterprises
    (SOEs); in Kerala, state level public enterprises; and in Assam, public sector enterprises.
2


B.       Expected Results

3.      The MPPRMP impact (goal) was improved social development and sustainable
economic growth through improved public resource management and increased public
expenditure in the social sector for the benefit of the people of the state.8 Key impact indicators
include (i) medium-term sustainability of public finances; (ii) increased revenue; (iii) social sector
expenditure increased; (iv) improved financial performance of PSUs; (v) private sector
investment in key sectors, particularly power and roads; and (vi) improved environmental
sustainability. The MPPRMP was designed to achieve four outcomes (objectives): (i) a well-
managed, sustainable, medium-term public finance framework enabling enhanced resource
allocation to social sectors; (ii) PSUs restructured to contribute to the economy by efficiently and
effectively using state resources; and (iii) private sector investment developing key sectors of
the state economy.

4.      The fiscal consolidation outcome would be achieved with four outputs: (i) financial
management institutions strengthened, (ii) medium-term fiscal framework for FY1999­2003
implemented, (iii) improved revenue generation, and (iv) improved expenditure efficiency and
effectiveness. The PSU outcome would be achieved with five outputs: (i) institutional
mechanisms in place to implement the PSU restructuring policy and program, (ii) selected PSUs
privatized, (iii) selected PSUs restructured, (iv) selected PSUs closed, and (v) cooperative
sector reform initiated. Two outputs would achieve the outcome of increased private sector
participation: (i) an enabling policy and regulatory framework in place; and (ii) key power, road,
and housing sector reforms initiated.

                                  II.      DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A.       Formulation

5.      Following the shift to state level lending and the approval of the GPSRMP, ADB fielded a
state selection mission in early 1997, which visited six states.9 The Mission conducted intensive
dialogue with agencies including the World Bank, which was also pursuing a state level strategy
and had provided $400 million, mainly to water management and social development projects in
the state. The following factors influenced the Mission to recommend Madhya Pradesh as the
second focal state: (i) the commitment of GoMP to implementing fiscal reforms, (ii) poorly
developed infrastructure, (iii) its position as the most populous state in India with relatively high
poverty levels, and (iv) strong political commitment to social development. 10 The state level
strategy of supporting fiscal reform prior to sector-specific loans was pursued. It was agreed that,
given the broad-based policy reforms with adjustment costs over a relatively short time frame, a
program loan would be the appropriate instrument with an explicit focus on social dimensions
(health and education) as opposed to Gujarat.

6.     GoMP had not undertaken an extensive study of its fiscal position, so ADB was not able
to draw on an in-depth analysis as it did in Gujarat where the program was designed by ADB
8
   The OEM has reconstructed the impact, outcomes, and outputs from the RRP, design and monitoring framework,
   and policy matrix (Appendix 1, Table 1.3) for the purposes of this program performance evaluation report (PPER).
9
   The mission visited Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Tamil Nadu. The
   selection criteria were the same as those used by ADB's 1994 mission that selected Gujarat and included the
   following: (i) demonstrated commitment to reform; (ii) level of need in terms of population and infrastructure;
   (iii) satisfactory record of project and policy implementation; and (iv) financial capacity, ability, and willingness to
   take OCR terms and manage foreign exchange risks.
10
   Madhya Pradesh was the first state in India to prepare a state human development report, with UNDP assistance
   in 1995, followed by updates in 1998 and 2002.
                                                                                                                     3


staff and counterparts without the support of TA. In Madhya Pradesh, with loan approval
originally planned for the third quarter of 1998, two 12-month TA were proposed in mid-1997 as
part of the loan preparation and implementation strategy. A fact-finding mission in October 1997
confirmed the objectives and scope of two TA projects--one focusing on public finance, the
other on strengthening local government--which were approved by the President in December
1997.11 These advisory TA projects (ADTA projects) were dual-purpose, providing information
and building capacity in key institutions in preparation for loan implementation, while assisting
GoMP to begin the reform process. While the scope of the public finance TA was reflected in
the scope of the fiscal reform measures supported by the subsequent loan, the loan contained
only one covenant to further local government fiscal reform.

7.       As planned, the MPPRMP was substantially designed by mid-1998, although not
approved until December 1999. Consequently, experience from GPSRMP--the only other
similar subnational program in India--was limited. However, the design recognized that
(i) reform programs should focus on strong policy measures from the outset, creating a broad
base to build on and reflecting the Government's commitment; (ii) capacity development and
institutional strengthening are critical to maintaining reform momentum and require targeted TA;
(iii) the link between public finance and power sector reform (in particular tariff revision) and
ensuring at an early stage of comprehensive reforms that an appropriate regulatory and pricing
framework is in place for the power sector; (iv) regular monitoring and close interaction between
the GoMP and ADB is important to assess progress on compliance; (v) the high poverty levels
in Madhya Pradesh emphasis the need for the Program to address social sector policy issues,
provide an effective social safety net (SSN), and reform cooperative institutions; and (vi) provide
adequate time to achieve reforms by designing a 3-year program. Although there was a
significant body of literature on PSU reform by the mid-1990s, there is no direct reference in the
RRP to this experience. Yet, the PSU reform measures mainly address these key lessons.

8.       Loan processing was to fall victim of a combination of geopolitical considerations--
international sanctions imposed on the Government in response to conducting nuclear tests in
May 1998, and state government elections--and concerns that the Program may be used in
campaigning for state elections scheduled for November 1998. A draft RRP was prepared by
May 1998, and the June management review meeting recommended that the July appraisal
mission assess (i) the implications of proposed national level policy changes, and (ii) the
institutional capacity of the state to implement and pursue the proposed reforms, while deferring
the GoMP and central government request to increase the loan amount to $300 million to a later
date. In the meantime, the Board representatives of the Group of 7 (G7) countries voiced their
concerns to the President that, as international sanctions were in place, all loans to India must
meet basic human needs criteria as defined in a memorandum of the deputy secretary of the
US Treasury.12


11
   ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance
   Reform and Institutional Strengthening. Manila (TA 2943-IND, for $780,000, approved on 15 December). ADB.
   1997. Technical Assistance to India for Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh. Manila (TA 2944-
   IND, for $700,000, approved on 15 December).
12
   Morrow, D. and M. Carriere. 1999. The Economic Impacts of the 1998 Sanctions on India and Pakistan. The
   Nonproliferation Review. (Fall): 10. Available: http://www.cns.miis.edu/pubs/npr/vol06/64/morrow64.pdf. Morrow
   and Carriere argued that the overall economic effects of sanctions "had a marginal--but not negligible--effect on
   the nation's economy [and] would have had a greater effect if they had remained in place for several years and
   thereby affected significantly not just the commitments but also the disbursements of official creditors such as the
   World Bank." The GPSRMP incentive tranche to the second tranche release was approved by the Board during the
   sanction period, with some Board representatives of G7 countries arguing that the sanctions should apply as the
   Program did not fit the basic human needs criteria, and a tranche release should be treated as a new loan. Others
4



9.      In preparation for the loan and technical assistance coordination committee (LTACC)
meeting,13 staff consulted with G7 country executive directors to confirm that the proposed loan
met these criteria. 14 Although there was general agreement that the proposed loan met the
basic human needs criteria, the proposed stand-alone TA to support PSU reform did not,15 and
the program loan approach was problematic for some. These executive directors needed to
revert to their capitals prior to the Board meeting, which would take some weeks when the
processing time was limited by the state government election timetable. 16 In order to meet
commitments to GoMP that the loan would be negotiated by September 1998, staff proposed
that the loan should be processed up to completion of loan negotiations so that it could be
submitted to the Board by early October, or failing that, when sanctions were lifted. Staff argued
that GoMP had demonstrated its strong commitment by already implementing some politically
sensitive reforms involving considerable adjustment costs. Further, the policy reform agenda
had been finalized with GoMP, and deferring loan negotiations could be interpreted as a
weakening of ADB's commitment to supporting reforms. It was also noted that the World Bank
had recently approved an economic restructuring program similar to the MPPRMP with Andhra
Pradesh government.17

10.     While the above discussions were going on, in mid-August 1998, the findings of the
Appraisal Mission that all first tranche conditions were expected to be achieved by the end of
the month (a precondition for loan negotiations) were presented to the staff review committee
(SRC). It was reported that both the Government and GoMP were very keen for loan
negotiations to take place before the end of August 1998 to avoid problems with electoral rules.
The SRC agreed to defer a decision on the loan amount and timing to the LTACC meeting, after
which loan negotiations were envisaged for late August or early September, followed by a
proposed Board meeting in early October. This schedule was not maintained. First, as GoMP
was later informed, the LTACC meeting could not be arranged in late August as the President,
as chair, was on mission. Second, in early September, the President expressed his concern that
the risk of the loan being used for political purposes in the upcoming elections was too great,
and the option of proceeding to loan negotiations was put on hold.

11.     The state elections were held and the ruling Congress Party was reelected.18 However,
ADB's decision to delay processing the loan led to considerable frustration in GoMP, which
expressed its dismay in a strongly worded letter to the Government's finance secretary
requesting assistance in getting the approval process on track. The fallout included a senior
GoMP official involved in loan formulation being reassigned and the technical secretariat, which
had been established and staffed by August 1998, being disbanded never to be reestablished.19
The credibility of the ADB team was seriously undermined and considerable time was spent
rebuilding relationships with counterparts who were somewhat wary through 1999. In February

   argued that the loan was approved prior to sanctions, the tranche was not a new loan, and therefore sanctions did
   not apply.
13
   The LTACC meeting, then chaired by the President, was the final Management meeting to discuss a loan prior to it
   being submitted to the Board for consideration.
14
   Two loans were being prepared at the time. The Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project (1647-IND,
   for $250 million) was also discussed with G7 directors, met the criteria, and was approved on 5 December 1998.
15
   There was a view by some that the criteria did not apply to TA.
16
   Electoral commission rules prohibit major policy announcements during a period of 60 days prior to an election.
17
   The Andhra Pradesh Economic Restructuring Project, approved in June 1998 for $543.2 million, aimed to provide
   resources to meet priority needs in human development (primary health, nutrition, and primary education); and in
   the maintenance of economic assets affecting the rural poor (irrigation, rural roads, and core access roads).
18
   Madhya Pradesh was the only state where the incumbent party maintained its majority.
19
   The director resigned in November 1998.
                                                                                                                     5


1999, on advice from ADB, GoMP published a white paper outlining specific policy measures in
its reform agenda, including reform of sales tax, reduction of subsidies through improved cost
recovery and increased electricity tariffs, and restructuring PSUs. One week later, GoMP
revised electricity tariffs, including a substantial increase in agricultural tariffs. By March 1999,
ADB staff reported to the LTACC20 that all prior actions and first tranche conditions had been
fully complied with, and loan negotiations were held in April. However, 8 months passed before
the Board approved the loan in December 1999.

12.      Two issues dominated the Board discussion of the proposed loan: (i) whether the
sanctions imposed in response to India's nuclear tests restricting funding to projects addressing
basic human needs applied, and (ii) if the Program was consistent with ADB's program loan
lending policy. Directors representing five countries abstained, three on the grounds that the
Program was not addressing basic human needs, and two that the volume of program loans in
1999 already significantly exceed the current Board-approved target for the year. An alternative
position--that the Program met the basic human needs criteria with over half of the counterpart
funds being explicitly earmarked for incremental expenditure in basic health, primary education,
and rural sanitation, and the remainder being used to mitigate the social impact of public
enterprise reform--was noted. Directors agreed with the 3-year, three-tranche approach, but the
institutional capacity to implement complex reforms and sufficiency of TA support were raised.
They called for close monitoring involving the resident mission, including the social impact,
gender inequities, and the provision of measures to promote the access of vulnerable groups to
social services. 21 They were concerned about the debt-carrying capacity of this very poor state
to ensure that the client is not placed in a riskier financial position than it would be without the
loan. Directors noted that the large number of government entities involved would pose a
serious risk to project success and sustainability, questioning the effectiveness of a coordination
committee to drive the reforms.

B.       Rationale

13.     In 1998, Madhya Pradesh was India's largest state, covering over 13.5% of India's
landmass with 77 million people of whom over 30% were scheduled tribes and castes--the
most economically disadvantaged. However, with per capita income of Rs7,500 ($176), Madhya
Pradesh was one of India's poorest states, with an agriculture-based economy, the third highest
level of poverty in 1999 at around 38%, and wide gender gaps in access to resources and social
services. Even after bifurcation of the state in 2000, Madhya Pradesh was India's second
largest state by population and area. 22 The state's fiscal problems date back to the early 1980s,
but they rapidly deteriorated in the second half of the 1980s when a major upward revision of
public employees' salaries took place through the awards of the fourth pay commission. In the
second half of the 1990s, the fifth pay commission awards stimulated another round of public
employee salary revisions, again straining state public finances which were still struggling to
recover from the effects of the earlier round.23

20
   As reported in the mission leader's statement to the LTACC, 12 April 1999.
21
   For example, the preparation of a project administration memorandum introduced to the Project Administration
   Instructions (PAI 1.05) on 1 July 1996, aimed at assist the Client and ADB to monitor implementation accurately.
22
   The state was bifurcated in 2000 with the new state of Chhattisgarh being formed from 16 eastern districts of the
   former Madhya Pradesh (some 30% land area) with over 25% of the former state's population, including a large
   proportion of scheduled tribes and castes. As a result, Madhya Pradesh became India's second largest state with a
   population in 2006 of over 60 million.
23
   Sen. T. 2000. Reforming state finances and intergovernmental fiscal relations in India. National Institute of Public
   Finance and Policy. New Delhi. Sen argues that, although these were important proximate causes, there were
   other reasons.
6


14.       The finances of states in India in general and relatively poor states like Madhya Pradesh
in particular, are heavily dependent on fiscal transfers from the Government. These transfers
come through three channels: (i) the finance commission (sharing tax revenues), (ii) the
planning commission (loans and grants for economic and social development expenditure), and
(iii) discretionary transfers from central government ministries (vertical programs) which seldom
pass through state budgets. The Eleventh Finance Commission (EFC) was in the process of
making its recommendations when MPPRMP was approved. Its report, submitted in 2000 for an
award period from FY2001 to FY2005, substantially increased the amounts received as the
state's share in central government taxes. It recommended sharing all central taxes instead of
only two--personal income tax and union excise duty--as had previously been the norm. This
recommendation was implemented through a constitutional amendment. However, grants
dropped from FY1999 levels after a small increase in FY2000 and subsequent years, from all
three sources noted above. The net increase in current transfers from the Government was thus
modest.

15.      Rising fiscal deficits at the state level through the 1990s drove India's aggregate fiscal
deficit to a high level (9.46% of GDP in FY2000 and 9.21% in FY2001). The Government was
concerned about the macroeconomic implications of the rising fiscal deficit, particularly the drag
on aggregate savings and investment, with its adverse implications for growth. However, the
fiscal deficit level of the central Government was higher than all states combined. Further, the
state level deficits ensured low capital expenditures on infrastructure, increasing infrastructural
bottlenecks and dampening private investment. To stimulate economic growth, it was
increasingly necessary to undertake careful fiscal reform that would efficiently boost the state's
receipts and reduce unproductive expenditure. There was broad agreement among the
Government, independent researchers, and the multi- and bilateral development agencies on
this issue. The World Bank and ADB were already supporting state level reform, and the
Government was attempting to encourage state level fiscal reforms through a system of
memoranda of understanding (MOU) with individual states; this produced mixed results.24 The
fiscal condition of Madhya Pradesh was typical of most states, with the added problem of low
levels of social development badly in need of state government attention.25 GoMP was acutely
aware of this situation, which provided the main impetus for fiscal reform in the state.

C.       Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

16.    The reform adjustment costs were estimated at about $600 million for 1999­2002. PSU
reforms accounted for about 70%, of which non-personnel outlays accounted for 50%, and
voluntary retirement and social safety net costs another 20%. Revenue losses from tax reform
measures were estimated at $185 million, around 30%. The state government request to
increase the loan from $250 million to $300 million, in line with the department's projections,
was presented to the various ADB internal management committee meetings. However, the
President decided that the loan limit would be unchanged at $250 million.26

17.    The MPPRMP was a three-tranche $250 million loan to the Government. The rupee
counterpart funds generated from the loan proceeds were transferred to GoMP by the
Government to government of Gujarat on a 70:30 loan-grant ratio with the loan carrying 11.8%

24
   See Sen. 2000 (footnote 23) and Rao, G. M. 2002. State Finances in India: Issues and Challenges. Economic and
   Political Weekly XXXVII (31): 3261­3271.
25
   In India, social services are primarily in the domain of the state government, not the central Government. However,
   in practice, the central Government is the main player with respect to poverty alleviation through vertical programs,
   but not other social services.
26
   This issue was presented at the Management Review Meeting, SRC, LTACC meetings.
                                                                                                                 7


interest and 15 years maturity. The exchange rate risk was assumed by the Government. The
transfer was treated as additional to the annual center-state fiscal transfers. It was estimated
that the effect of bifurcation reduced adjustment costs by $70 million to around $530 million. The
tax revenue loss was estimated to decline from $185 million to $150 million, and the PSU
adjustment costs to decline by $35 million or higher depending on the ultimate restructuring plan
for selected PSUs. Accordingly, the loan size was justified on the basis of the revised
adjustment costs for the truncated Madhya Pradesh state.

18.     The Government requested that the portion of the loan under the initial Loan Agreement
that had not been disbursed as of 26 February 2002, be subjected to the terms and conditions
of ADB's London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) based lending facility. ADB and the
Government agreed that, as of 26 February 2002 (the transformation date), the loan would
comprise (i) a pool-based loan of $100 million, and (ii) a LIBOR-based loan in the amount of
$150 million. Therefore, the initial Loan Agreement was amended and restated to provide for the
application of different terms and conditions to (i) the portion of the loan disbursed as of the
transformation date, and (ii) the portion of the loan that remained undisbursed as of the
transformation date.

19.    The GoMP finance department was the Executing Agency (EA). A policy level public
resource management committee (PRMC), chaired by the chief minister, was established to
advise and oversee implementation of the reforms. Two empowered committees--on public
finance reform and PSU restructuring, both headed by the chief secretary with secretaries of
relevant departments as members (finance, commercial taxes, and public enterprises
department)--managed reform implementation reporting to the PRMC. A technical secretariat
was to be established to provide guidance on technical aspects of the PSU reform. However,
this was never established during the life of the Program. A special purpose project steering
committee was not established; rather, the PRMC assumed this role.

D.         Scheduling and Design Changes

20.     The program period was originally envisaged to be approved in 1998. This was revised
in early 1999 to April/May 1999. The loan was finally approved in December 1999 for a 3-year
period, which meant it should have been completed in December 2002. However, ADB's project
performance management system (PPMS) program performance report, following the dates in
the RRP, recorded the Program as commencing in March 1999, completed in March 2002, and
therefore closed 6 months later in September 2002. The Loan Agreement dated 14 December
1999 refers to the final date for withdrawals from the loan account as 30 September 2002,
33 months from effectiveness.

21.     The program loan was to be disbursed in three tranches, with the first tranche of $100
million released on 16 December 1999 when the MPPRMP was declared effective. The second
tranche of $75 million was disbursed in February 2002 and the third tranche of $75 million was
disbursed in March 2003, upon compliance with the corresponding tranche conditions. Both
releases were behind the planned schedule primarily because of the effect of bifurcation. It took
some time for ADB, the Government, and GoMP to be assured that the legal status of GoMP as
defined in the original Loan and Program Agreements was unchanged. This led to a delay of
5 months in releasing the second tranche.27 Bifurcation continued to impact PSU restructuring
27
     An ADB mission in February 2002 sought clarification from GoMP as to whether GoMP alone was obliged to fulfill
     the contractual obligations stipulated in the Program Agreement after 1 November 2000, and whether GoMP
     consequently was alone entitled to draw on and had to repay the second and third tranches of the ADB loan
     provided to India under the Loan Agreement. Although the mission recommended that the Program agreement be
8


through the remainder of the Program, resulting in a 9-month delay in the release of the final
tranche on 17 March 2003, with program completion and loan closure some 39 months after
approval.

22.     No design changes were affected during implementation. Although a concern was raised
after bifurcation that the Loan Agreement may need to be revised, this was not necessary. In
response to a clarification from GoMP on the interpretation of "closure" with regard to some
PSU loan conditions and covenants, ADB confirmed that "closure" according to the second
tranche condition may be interpreted as operational closure rather than full legal closure in
terms of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, settlement of workers' dues, or settlement of
creditors dues through closure under the Companies Act, 1956.28

E.      Results

23.    The OEM redefined the Program's impact, outcome, and output statements for the
purposes of this PPER to reconcile the inconsistencies and ambiguities between the
descriptions in the RRP text, design and monitoring framework (DMF), and policy matrix
(paras 3­4). The Program's DMF is provided in Appendix 1 Table A1.1, followed by a
comparison of the Program's structure in the text, DMF, policy matrix, and Loan Agreement
(Tables A1.2 and A1.3); and OEM's reconstruction of the key DMF statements (Table A1.4).
Appendix 2 summarizes the status of compliance by condition and covenant at the time of
tranche release, PCR, and OEM.

        1.       A Well-Managed Sustainable Medium-Term Public Finance Framework
                 Enabling Enhanced Resource Allocation to Social Sectors

24.     Financial Management Institutions Strengthened. To establish the institutional
arrangements underpinning GoMP's fiscal reforms, three covenants were agreed. As part of
loan effectiveness, GoMP established a policy level PRMC chaired by the chief minister to
advise and oversee the implementation of state reforms including the establishment of an
enabling environment and the respective policy, institutional, and regulatory issues. The PRMC
acted as a steering committee for the MPPRMP and provided guidance to two technical
empowered committees--on public finance reform and PSU--headed by the chief secretary
reform. All three committees met as required during the life of the Program. In June 1999, a
second covenant was met when the State Budget and Fiscal Analysis Unit (SBFAU) was
established in the finance department to provide improved budget planning, monitoring, and
economic policy analysis--including implementation of the medium-term fiscal framework and
advice to the empowered committees.29 However, the unit was inadequately staffed to perform
these functions, with an economic advisor (consultant) and one mid-level official. Rather than
provide the kind of economic policy advice that was envisaged, it was limited to providing the
state finance commission with financial information. At the time of the OEM, only the official
remained. The final covenant to computerize and network the finance department's treasury
operations--to improve the effectiveness of payment and audit systems and expenditure control
through an upgraded management information system--was successfully implemented,

   re-executed with GoMP, and the Loan agreement with the Government be restated and amended, this was not
   deemed necessary and the second tranche was released on 27 February 2002.
28
   Manes, Eric. 2001. Back-to-Office Report of Review Mission for Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management
   Program. Manila (Loan 1717-IND, 13 February).
29
   The State Budget and Fiscal Analysis Unit (SBFAU) was established on 7 June 1999 with the support of Technical
   Assistance to India for Support to the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance Reform and Institutional
   Strengthening, approved 15 December 1997 for $780,000.
                                                                                                                          9


significantly improving expenditure management beyond the life of the Program. Although it was
not explicitly referred to as such, this action has significant anticorruption implications.

25.     Medium-Term Fiscal Framework for FY1999­2003 Implemented. The MPPRMP
projected nominal fiscal deficit levels to be achieved as tranche release conditions. For loan
effectiveness, the primary deficit was to be below 3.4% of state domestic product (SDP) and
capital expenditure to be at least 1.6% of SDP in the FY1999 budget. By the first tranche, the
primary deficit was to be below 1% of SDP and capital expenditure at least 2% of SDP in the
FY2001 budget. By the final tranche, progress in fiscal consolidation would be evidenced by the
primary deficit being below 0.7% of SDP, and capital expenditure at least 2.3% of SDP in the
FY2002 budget.

26.     The effect of three exogenous factors during the program period on the state's fiscal
condition undermined these projections. First, the net increase in transfers from the Government
as a result of the EFC was less than expected. Second, the state was bifurcated in November
2000, carving out the new state of Chhattisgarh from the previous Madhya Pradesh--affecting
revenue, power availability, and expenditure responsibilities. Revenue decreased mainly
because much of the high value mineral bearing areas of the state were in Chhattisgarh, thus
negatively affecting the tax and non-tax (royalties) receipts of the truncated Madhya Pradesh.
Similarly, a larger share of the power plants went to Chhattisgarh on the basis of location,
leaving the truncated Madhya Pradesh with a serious power shortage. The issuance of
Ahluwalia bonds30 for power sector debt also affected the state's revenue base. In terms of
expenditure responsibilities, there were mixed effects. The smaller Madhya Pradesh had a
larger share of the population in comparison to its area, which implied larger public expenditure.
Moreover, a large majority of government employees--given the choice of Chhattisgarh or
truncated Madhya Pradesh--chose the latter, causing a disproportionately high salary burden
on Madhya Pradesh. Conversely, most of the comparatively underdeveloped districts of the
state, generally with a higher than average scheduled tribe population, went to Chhattisgarh,
thus reducing the development expenditure in these areas (Appendix 3 analyzes the impact of
bifurcation). The final factor was widespread floods in August 2000, which raised expenditure
needs while adversely affecting revenue.

27.      A summary of the fiscal situation in Madhya Pradesh for the decade FY1995­2004
(Appendix 4, Table A4.4) shows that, with the exception of the last 2 years of the series, the
deficit figures peaked in FY1998 at 3.3% SDP, followed by a fiscal correction of 1.5­1.9% until
FY2002, coinciding with the MPPRMP. Although neither the fiscal deficit nor capital expenditure
figures projected for the respective tranche releases were met, there was an improvement in the
fiscal condition during the life of the MPPRMP, despite the effect of exogenous factors. However,
the fiscal deficit deteriorated after the MPPRMP closure--mainly because of a series of one-
time entries. For example, in FY2003, almost the entire increase in the deficit can be traced to a
jump in the non-plan revenue, roughly the same as current expenditures on economic services.
Again in FY2004, the sharp drop in revenue deficit, changing to a surplus, is mainly attributable
to a large (probably one-time) receipt in the power sector. Similarly, the 6.3% fiscal deficit--

30
     In 2000, the Government formed an expert committee chaired by Montek Ahluwalia to settle outstanding state
     electricity board dues to central power sector PSUs. The Ahluwalia committee recommended issuing bonds
     (referred to as "Ahluwalia bonds") to restore the financial viability of state electricity boards. The bonds were for a
     15-year period with a 5-year moratorium on payment of the principal, and issued through the Reserve Bank of India
     at a tax-free interest rate of 8.5% with lock-in restrictions and with 10% being released into the secondary market
     per annum. To improve their financial standing, the state electricity boards would accept reform-based performance
     milestones such as establishing a state power regulator, metering distribution feeders, and improving revenue
     realization.
10


despite a revenue surplus--was due to a large increase in capital expenditure on economic
services. In 2005, GoMP enacted the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act
(FRBMA), agreeing with the Government to reduce the fiscal deficit to 3% SDP by FY2008. With
the fiscal deficit reduced to 4.08% in FY2005 and expected to be 3.69% in FY2006, GoMP is on
track to receive incentives, including a loan waiver from the Government for complying with the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act conditions.

28.       Improved Revenue Generation. This output was to be achieved by rationalizing the
sales tax system, reforming stamp duty in line with recommendations of the 1996 and 1997
state finance minister's committee on stamp duty, and improving cost recovery of water and
utilities charges. Revenue generation did not improve during the life of the Program, but positive
changes occurred after program closure in 2004; with the adoption of value-added tax (VAT) in
2006, significant additional revenue is expected.

29.     Rationalizing the sales tax system was to be achieved through five covenants, leading to
a second tranche condition to introduce VAT. Prior to effectiveness, GoMP had widened the tax
base by reducing the number of goods exempted from tax (under Schedule I of the Madhya
Pradesh Commercial Tax Act, 1994) from 93 to 39 items, and reduced the number of sales tax
rates from six to four (2%, 4%, 8%, 12%). Some amount of computerization and training of tax
commissioners and tax officers on commercial taxes and taxation policy took place, but several
facets of sales tax and VAT administration are yet to be computerized. Although the Madhya
Pradesh assembly passed the VAT legislation on 7 August 2002, making it one of the first
states to prepare legally for VAT, it was not introduced until April 2006 because of restrictions
from the Government. Therefore, it is appropriate to review the entire administrative structure
and computerized system for VAT.

30.     Reform Stamp Duty. Three covenants were agreed with reform of the stamp duty
system in line with recommendations of the state finance minister's committee on stamp duty
(1996), including reducing the maximum rate on conveyances and rationalizing stamp duty on
capital market instruments achieved prior to effectiveness. Although the valuation system for
stamp duty was reorganized with central and regional valuation cells, and a new methodology to
assess properties for levy of property tax introduced, the valuation systems for property tax and
for stamp duty continue to be different. The covenant to implement property tax reform for local
government, including preparation of ready reckoners for tax assessment does not appear to
have had a significant impact on local bodies' finances despite substantial independence
granted to them. The own resources of even urban local bodies continue to be totally
inadequate to meet their expenditure responsibilities, resulting in poor operation and
maintenance (O&M) of assets.

31.     Improve Cost Recovery. An effectiveness covenant to adjust water charges to cover at
least 50% of O&M expenditure was met, and by the beginning of FY2002 it was reported that
about 70% of O&M expenditure was covered by water charges. A cabinet order, passed on
31 July 2002, raised O&M charges by a further 5% for FY2002 and stipulated additional
increases of 5% annually for the subsequent 5 years, meeting the second tranche condition of
covering at least 75% of O&M expenditure. However, at the time of the OEM, irrigation water
charges are reported to have fallen below the prescribed level. No recent figures are available
for charges levied for water supply by urban local bodies, but they are reported to be well below
the prescribed level. As the utilities commission was not established, a time-bound action plan
and coordinated system of managing utility user charges for enhanced sustainability was not
achieved. Utility rate revisions have been undertaken in the power and water sectors by the
respective regulatory authorities on an ad hoc basis.
                                                                                                                  11



32.     Improved Expenditure Efficiency and Effectiveness. This would be achieved by a
number of sequenced conditions and covenants to rationalize and prioritize expenditure,
reallocate expenditure to social services, and shift priority from current to capital expenditure.
The rationalization and prioritization of expenditure would be achieved through strengthening
expenditure management by preparing and monitoring the implementation of a core investment
plan (CIP); and approving policy, legislation, and administrative orders to control the numbers of
state government employees. Prior to loan effectiveness, GoMP had rationalized the industrial
incentive scheme by increasing the negative list, and prepared a policy and draft legislation to
prohibit absorption of employees of PSUs into the civil service. The legislation was passed in
December 2000 (a second tranche condition) introducing competitive, merit-based
appointments to government positions. The third tranche condition to adopt a flexible wage
policy by enabling local governments to have service conditions and salary scales for their
employees, separate from the state government, was met through an administrative order.
However, this has resulted in large numbers of teachers and primary health workers being
engaged under unattractive contractual conditions. It is reported that the standard of education
and health delivery has significantly lowered as few contracted teachers or health workers have
been adequately trained or are qualified, other than being residents of the village in which the
school or health center is located.31

33.     A CIP was prepared for 2000­2004 but it was not sustained as GoMP adopted the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2005, which requires the state to prepare a
3-year rolling medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) with accompanying rules that specify the
path to a zero revenue deficit, and a maximum of 3% fiscal deficit as a ratio of SDP by FY2008.
In FY2005, the state prepared an outcome budget that, despite its title, contained few
meaningful performance measures--perhaps because this was the first such budget to have
been prepared. A gender budget was also reported to be under consideration.

34.     Reallocate Expenditure to Social Services and Shift Priority from Current to
Capital Expenditure. Prior to effectiveness, with TA support, GoMP undertook a study on the
policy and regulatory frameworks of health and education sectors--including the level of user
fees in social service facilities; and cost of services to identify potential for further resource
reallocation toward primary and preventive health care, and elementary education. Attempts to
clear the backlog of capital expenditure and shortfall of non-personnel expenditure in health
centers through increased annual budget allocations were not successful during the program
period. Although a plan was prepared to ensure that the present levels of social sector outlays
are protected from budgetary cuts, the social allocation ratio32 shows a reduction from FY1999
levels in subsequent years (23.7% in FY2004 compared with 34.2% in FY1999), but the social
priority ratio is fairly steady (Appendix 4, Table A4.4). However, some social sector
expenditure--including the central share of the national primary education scheme (SSA) and of
some of the health schemes such as Reproductive and Child Health II--was moved off budget.
Meeting national norms still appears to be a long-term goal, but the gap between national
averages and state indicators is closing very slowly. The third tranche condition--to include

31
    A primary and upper primary school dropout rate of over 20% reflects, among other things, quality of teaching,
   learning, and confidence of parents in keeping their children in school. Surveys of primary health care stations in
   rural areas show that 90% did not have a female medical officer, 40% of doctor posts were vacant in 2002­2003,
   and 20% did not have a doctor in 2005. Sen, T. Financing Human Development in Madhya Pradesh. Draft paper
   National Institute of Public Finance and Policy. New Dehli.
32
   Calculated in accordance with UNDP human development report standards. The social allocation ration measures
   social sector expenditures as a ratio of total expenditures. The social priority ratio measures the percentage of
   social expenditure devoted to human priority concerns (education, health, water, and sanitation).
12


appropriate additional budgetary allocation equivalent to the Government's share to ensure the
sustainability of the district primary education program after termination of assistance from the
Government--was overtaken by the introduction of the Government's SSA scheme, which
covers the entire state. Consequently, the total expenditure on education (the Government plus
GoMP share) is substantially higher than before its introduction. However, only the GoMP's own
expenditure and its 25% share of SSA expenditure is shown in the budget figures. The two
covenants to address health issues, through support to the activities of the mission on control of
diarrheal diseases, were achieved. The mission was extended beyond the 40,000 target to
51,000 villages. As 20,000 villages became part of the new Chhattisgarh state, the third tranche
covenant was not appropriate. The mission ended after achieving its target.

35.      The second tranche condition--that state government employment, other than technical
positions in essential social services and police, be reduced through natural attrition, and such
posts abolished with resources saved through natural attrition to be reallocated to poverty-
reducing social services--remains under judicial review, with some of the daily wage workers
having to be reinstated from 2004. Some 60,000 posts were identified and the policy of natural
attrition continues. New schoolteachers are no longer employees of the state government.
However, expenditure contractions generally do not appear to have been large enough to either
control deficits or increase social sector expenditures. In general, although deficits have been
controlled and GoMP social sector expenditures have been maintained, the overall level of
social sector expenditures increased through the program period.

       2.      Public Sector Undertakings Restructured to Contribute to the Economy by
               Efficiently and Effectively Using State Resources

36.     Fourteen of the state's 31 PSUs--ranging in size, purpose, and viability--were selected
for reform. A combination of a policy-level committee, an advisory technical secretariat, and an
enhanced line department would ensure transparency and accountability. Appendix 5 analyzes
the reform, including a detailed update of the status of the targeted PSUs.

37.     Institutional Mechanisms in Place to Implement the PSU Restructuring Policy and
Program. An empowered committee on public enterprises restructuring, headed by the chief
secretary with principal secretaries of key GoMP departments, was established prior to loan
effectiveness. Its mandate was to review and approve: (i) the extent of shareholding to be
divested in those enterprises identified for privatization or divestment, (ii) acceptance of the bid
of successful bidder in case of privatization, (iii) price at which shares will be offered to public in
case of divestment, (iv) restructuring plans to be adopted for enterprises being restructured, and
(v) enterprises to be closed. A technical secretariat was established in August 1998 to act as an
advisory body to the empowered committee, with responsibility to (i) undertake preparatory and
technical analysis of PSUs; (ii) conduct valuation of PSUs; and (iii) provide TA on reform options,
including restructuring and divestment. However, one of the impacts of ADB's decision to delay
processing the loan until a year later was the disbanding of the technical secretariat and its staff.
When the loan was approved in late 1999, the technical secretariat had not been reestablished
and was never established during the life of the Program. In the absence of the technical
secretariat, the departments of finance and public enterprises prepared a note on PSU reform
experience to meet the second tranche condition to this effect.
                                                                                                                    13


38.     The United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) was very
interested in supporting reforms in the state, and it proposed a substantial grant project33 to
complement the MPPRMP. A portion of this project was to finance the costs of the technical
secretariat--consultants and operational costs. DFID did not proceed with the project,
influenced in large part by the Government's decision in 2000 not to allow bilateral donors to
provide grant funds directly to state governments for policy-based reforms. Given the protracted
nature of the negotiations and the apparent importance of the technical secretariat to this
component of the MPPRMP, it is difficult to understand why ADB did not make available the
necessary grant resources to fund the technical secretariat.

39.     The state renewal fund (SRF) committee was established in 1998 to manage the
financial resources for the voluntary retirement scheme (VRS) to be provided to retrenched
employees to mitigate the adverse social impact of PSU restructuring. It was reconstituted as
the cabinet subcommittee, and the VRS extended until FY2002 when GoMP decided to
discontinue it on the grounds that the VRS was setting a precedent for government to continue
to underwrite the costs of restructuring rather than the PSU. A cabinet subcommittee on the
VRS was established in 2001 to oversee VRS implementation. GoMP met a second tranche
condition by allocating Rs1.5 billion for the SRF in the FY2000 budget. The SRF was activated
in September 2000. Rs200 million was disbursed in FY2000 for VRS. Rs1.5 billion was
allocated in the FY2001 budget and Rs1.6 billion was disbursed. In FY2002, another
Rs.1.5 billion was budgeted and Rs938 million was disbursed. Although budget allocations were
made for the SRF in FY2003 and FY2004, no disbursements took place. The average payout
on VRS was Rs180,000­Rs370,000 ($4,090­8,409) per employee. Madhya Pradesh State
Financial Corporation (MPSFC) funded a VRS for its employees. A total of 9,000 employees,
including 5,000 from Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (MPSRTC), were
retrenched and received VRS payments. This is just over half the design estimate of 16,500.

40.     An SSN committee was established in January 2000 and a SSN scheme was finalized in
2001, including the retraining of displaced employees using existing industrial training institutes,
training centers, and other institutions. The SSN also identified a counseling service to help
former PSU employees use the cash compensation received from the VRS payment for
investment and entrepreneurship. The scheme included monitoring of displaced employees and
provision of placement services, and it was expected that the technical secretariat to be
established under the MPPRMP would implement the SSN. In the absence of the technical
secretariat, the VRS committee took responsibility for preparing the SSN. However, in 2002,
GoMP decided not to implement the SSN on the grounds that it would set an example for all
public and private bodies wishing to downsize, and would have cascading cost implications.
Although a small survey was conducted by a TA that identified workers' concerns and perceived
needs with respect to the SSN, no systematic socioeconomic surveys were undertaken of
retrenched employees during the life of the Program or beyond.

41.    The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) was designated the nodal state
government agency responsible for coordinating PSU reforms, including (i) ensuring specific
corporate governance measures were being implemented, and (ii) preparing annual reports on
the progress of reforms. However, only one annual report for FY2003 was published, in
September 2005. The DPE reported to the OEM that it is constrained by lack of timely
information from respective PSUs. Despite plans to strengthened DPE by appointing qualified

33
     There was reference in the program files to a £70 million project, of which about £1 million was to be allocated to
     the technical secretariat. GoMP reported to the OEM that it was currently in discussions with DFID to revive the
     technical secretariat. DFID confirmed that discussions were ongoing but did not say when they may be concluded.
14


professionals, it remains a small department with limited human and financial resources, and
without the power to enforce compliance by respective PSU administrative departments with
their responsibilities.

42.     The corporate governance measures proposed included: (i) appointing professional PSU
managers on a competitive, merit basis; and establishing procedures to make managers
accountable for PSU performance; (ii) increase PSUs' operational autonomy by introducing
financial criteria on return on investment for dividend payment and an investment limit for which
PSUs do not need approval from GoMP; and (iii) authorizing enterprise-specific salary scales,
including differentiation in remuneration linked to productivity and the financial performance of
individual PSUs. The last two measures were approved by GoMP prior to loan effectiveness,
but the professionalization and accountability of PSU management was only achieved on paper.
A committee was established to screen candidates, and recommends appointments for higher-
level positions. PSU performance-based MOUs, with activity-specific targets laid down along
with the percentile rankings of each activity serving as a scorecard of the performance of PSUs
and their managing directors, were signed annually between the PSUs and GoMP. A
performance review committee, chaired by the finance department with powers to recommend
action against managing directors in case of noncompliance with targets, reportedly undertook
regular quarterly reviews. However, there is still no accountability of managers of PSUs that
continue to lose money, as there is no substantive implementation of the MOU.

43.     Selected PSUs Privatized. Although GoMP planned to partially divest its shareholding
in five PSUs, it did not succeed in divesting its stake in any of the enterprises. Further, over the
period FY2001­2003, the performance of these PSUs has been disappointing, without
exception. Mainly because of the provisioning for nonperforming assets, Madhya Pradesh State
Industrial Development Corporation's operating performance has shown a significant
deterioration, with a net loss of Rs2.78 billion recorded in FY2003 compared with a net loss of
Rs460 million in FY2001. Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation's
performance has also deteriorated, with a net loss of Rs7.7 million recorded in FY2004
compared with a net profit of Rs3.1 million in FY2000. This resulted from operating losses, as
revenues have been more or less static. Madhya Pradesh Financial Corporation recorded a net
loss of Rs280 million in FY2003 compared with a net profit of Rs20 million in FY2001 because
of reduction in revenues and relatively fixed interest costs. The net losses of MPSRTC
increased from Rs650 million in FY2001 to Rs1 billion in FY2003, primarily because of a decline
in revenues coupled with rising fuel costs and relatively fixed employee costs. This resulted in a
decision to close it rather than divest. Four of the five PSUs continue to be a drain on scarce
state budget resources.

44.     Selected PSUs Restructured. The proposal to lease or sell Madhya Pradesh State
Tourism Development Corporation Limited (MPSTDC) was shelved. Of the 70 tenders initially
received for sale of individual properties, 22 were found to be eligible but no offers were
received from hospitality sector companies so the offers were rejected. Following significant
investments by the Government in MPSTDC properties over the past 4 years, the upkeep of the
properties improved and the road infrastructure at major tourist locations was upgraded,
resulting in the increased arrival of tourists. As a result, the operating performance of the
company improved, with net profit of Rs270,000 recorded in FY2003.

45.      Selected PSUs Closed. Eight enterprises were identified for closure. The program
design did not specify what closure entailed, and there are at least three interpretations:
(i) closing down operations of the PSU and retrenching all but a core team of staff necessary to
achieve financial closure; (ii) closing finances of the PSU, including receipt of the funds from the
                                                                                                                   15


sale of assets and meeting all creditor's obligations, and may include a court-appointed
liquidator being involved; and (iii) the legal closure of the PSU in accordance with the relevant
law. This led to GoMP requesting clarification from ADB on the interpretation of "closure" with
regard to meeting tranche conditions and non-tranche covenants. It was mutually agreed that
"closure" would mean the operational closure of the respective PSUs. While GoMP has
succeeded in effecting the operational closure of the selected PSUs, the final liquidation of the
enterprises and the recovery of proceeds from sale of assets has not been completed. In the
case of Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation, after achieving operational closure,
GoMP decided to revive it again to manage a police modernization program funded by the
Government to construct police housing in the state.

46.     Initiate Reform of Cooperatives Sector. A report on the financial performance of
cooperatives sector was prepared with the assistance of TA consultants in July 2001. GoMP
enacted enabling provisions for cooperative societies based on the model multipurpose
Government of India National Cooperative Development Corporation Act, 1962 and relevant
acts in other states. Under this act, all previous GoMP control and restrictions have been
removed. Cooperatives have been given full operational freedom in their business. New
cooperatives, not receiving loan or share capital from GoMP or government guarantees, can
register under this act and existing cooperatives can apply for conversion to this act. A number
of respondents reported to the OEM that cooperatives continue to be open to political
manipulation and capture by local elites. To implement the recommendations of the
Government of India's Vaidhyanathan Committee on cooperatives, 34 GoMP signed an MOU
with the central Government and the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development to
revive cooperatives in the state.

           3.        Private Sector Investment Developing Key Sectors of the State Economy

47.      The intent of this outcome was to create a legislative, regulatory, and policy environment
that would attract private investors, and follow up ADB sector loans in key infrastructure sectors.
With a mix of conditions and covenants, the MPPRMP focused on three sectors--power, roads,
and housing. Support was also provided to prepare environment and resettlement policies. The
focus in the power sector was to establish an adequately resourced electricity regulatory
authority as mandated by law, and to formulate a power sector master plan. Road sector
interventions focused on approval of a roads policy and establishing a utilities pricing
commission for road tariffs--with various covenants encouraging investment plans, establishing
a private sector cell within the Public Works Department (PWD), and analyzing distance-based
toll rate options and experiences with build-own-transfer (BOT) arrangements. Housing sector
interventions were aimed at amending the State Accomodation Control Act, 1961 and
establishing a state rent tribunal. The power and road interventions were far more successful
than housing. GoMP approved both an environment and a resettlement policy.

48.     Power Sector. Two conditions--focusing on establishing an adequately financed state
electricity regulatory commission and a covenant to prepare a power sector CIP on the basis of
a power sector master plan--were agreed and met. In 1998, the Government passed the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act providing for the establishment of autonomous central
and state energy regulatory commissions to regulate power utilities and set tariffs. The
Government envisaged that the regulatory commissions would be accountable for transparent

34
     The committee was formed under the chairmanship of Prof A. Vaidhyanathan as per the announcement made by
     the Finance Minster. This task force was appointed by the Government to look into matters relating to co-operative
     banks.
16


and economically sound regulation, which would contribute to improving the financial status of
state electricity boards and utilities operating as PSUs with poor corporate governance and
financial management records.

49.      Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC) was established in
June 2000 as a statutory authority mandated to regulate power generation, transmission, and
distribution systems; rationalize tariffs; set standards; and issue and regulate licenses--to
promote private sector participation and improve the efficiency of the power sector. The Madhya
Pradesh Electricity Act, approved by the Madhya Pradesh legislative assembly in November
2000 and made effective in July 2001, was at the time the most progressive power sector
reform act in India. In addition to subsuming and expanding the powers of MPERC, it included
provision for: (i) restructuring Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, (ii) metering all
consumers, (iii) rationalization of tariffs so that all classes of consumers would pay at least 75%
of the cost of supply over 5 years, (iv) budget provision for MPERC for 5 years, and
(v) arbitration with the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission. This provided a sound legal
and institutional basis for ADB to approve a $200 million sector loan in 200135 to support further
reform in the power sector, including implementation of a power sector investment plan,
followed by another in 2006.36

50.      Roads Sector. The enabling environment was defined by a second tranche condition to
announce a state roads policy and three associated covenants: (i) to prepare a road sector CIP,
(ii) establish a private sector cell in the PWD, and (iii) prepare a plan to establish a utilities
pricing commission for road and transport tariff setting. These were to be followed by a third
tranche condition to establish the utilities pricing commission; and a covenant to prepare a
report on PWD experience with public-private partnership (PPP) arrangements including policy,
regulatory, and institutional recommendations.

51.      By August 2001, the Government had formulated a road development policy to improve
the road network and maintenance, and encourage private participation through three preferred
schemes: (i) BOT; (ii) maintain, operate and transfer; and (iii) PPP. The policy noted that
17 bridges and 4 bypasses had already been constructed under BOT, with 2 maintain, operate
and transfer concessions also under implementation. The policy referred to enabling legislation,
including an amendment to the Indian Tolls (Madhya Pradesh) Act, 1932, enabling the levying
of tolls on new construction and upgraded roads and bridges. The road development policy
addresses toll rates. Although it does not outline how tolls will be determined, it does note that
toll rates would be increased by 25% from the beginning of FY2000, and mandates a 25%
increase every 3 years thereafter. The policy was updated in 2004, with toll rates established for
different forms of transport on a per kilometer (km) basis with a 7% annual increase. The
Madhya Pradesh Highway Bill, 2001, established the road development corporation as a
statutory highways authority responsible for implementing roads projects and other matters
associated with the construction and maintenance of state roads. The private sector cell set-up
under the MPPRMP was transferred from PWD, which is essentially an administrative
department, to the roads development corporation, which has operational responsibility.

52.     The road policy was followed by a master plan (2001­2010) totaling some $1 billion,
including $570 million for road rehabilitation and reconstruction, and $430 million for road
35
   ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Loan to India
   for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program. Manila (Loan 1869-IND, for $200 million, approved
   on 6 December).
36
   ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendations to the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility India: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program. Manila.
                                                                                                              17


maintenance. This was included in the roads component of the state's 10th Five Year Plan
(2002­2007) with a total budget of $655 million, including the $570 million to rehabilitate
4,770 km of state highways and district roads, and $85 million for maintenance. In line with the
covenant, an annual roads sector CIP was prepared in 2000 for inclusion in the FY2001 budget.
However, the CIP was not institutionalized as a budget planning tool, as it was discontinued
after the program closed.

53.      The MPPRMP was instrumental in establishing a policy, and focused institutional
capacity for private sector participation. The state has aggressively pursued PPP in the road
sector to the point where it was suggested to the OEM that it is saturated by toll roads and there
is a need to rationalize the management of tolls. The follow-on ADB-financed road sector
project37 makes no reference to the role of the MPPRMP, although it refers to the policy and
institutional frameworks in place.

54.      Housing Sector. The housing sector was identified to address problems in urban areas
resulting from unauthorized housing construction, growth of slums, and inadequate legislation,
particularly the State Rent Control Act. The aim was to improve the regulatory framework for
private sector investment, and enable the state to access housing finance through the
Government's institutions and programs.38 This would be addressed through three covenants. It
was expected that, prior to the second tranche release, the draft amendments to the State
Accomodation Control Act prepared prior to loan signing would be promulgated--including
provisions to exempt a portion of the rental housing market from provision of the act, permit rent
revisions based on market trends, expedite the judicial process for dispute resolution and
establish a rent tribunal. This was to be followed by another covenant to establish a rent tribunal
prior to the third tranche release. The rent tribunal would also have undertaken a review of the
initial impact of the amended act on the level of rents and investment in the housing sector.
However, the act was not amended nor was the tribunal established.

55.     Although the amendments were drafted and the recommendations of a select committee
of the legislature were incorporated in a revised draft, they were not debated by the legislature.
As the enactment of the amendment is a precondition for the tribunal, and the amendment did
not reach the legislature, the "substantial" rating should be at best partial to acknowledge the
considerable work done to prepare a draft for legislative approval. As the tribunal could not be
established it is difficult to see how even a partial rating could be given. In summary, although
the Program made little headway in establishing an enabling environment in the housing sector,
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board was able to access about 9% of the loan funds available for
state governments from the Housing Finance Project.39

56.     Environment Policy and Action Plan. Environment interventions focused on two
conditions, leading to the approval of a state environment policy and action plan; and two
covenants to improve the monitoring capacity of the state Pollution Control Board (PCB). The
policy and time-bound action plan were to be announced as a second tranche condition,
followed by implementation of the action plan for the third tranche release. The environment
policy was prepared by the Housing and Environment Department after a 2-year consultation

37
   ADB. 2002. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Loan to India
   for the Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program. Manila (Loan 1958/1959-IND, for $180 million,
   approved on 5 December).
38
   One such program was funded by ADB. 1997. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
   Directors on the Proposed Loan to India for the Housing Finance Project. Manila (Loans 1549/1550/1551-IND, for
   $300 million, approved on 25 September).
39
   ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Housing Finance Project in India. Manila.
18


process with nongovernment organizations, concerned government departments, specialists,
and people's representatives. It was approved in 1999, meeting the second tranche condition.
This was followed by an action plan outlining key actions that concerned government
departments would take to address identified issues.

57.      The initiative to prepare a state environment policy was an extremely positive
contribution to ensuring the state government had a policy outlining principles and standards to
guide development, in light of the projected increase in public and private sector investment
over the coming decades. The MPPRMP was designed well before either the Rome or Paris
declarations (2003 and 2005) and, perhaps not surprisingly, there is no reference in the RRP
that the rationale for this initiative was to develop country systems that would preclude the need
to apply ADB standards. 40 ADB provided sector loans to power in 2001 and 2006 (footnotes 35
and 36), and roads in 2002 (footnote 37). None of these refer to the GoMP environment policy,
although their respective summary initial environmental examinations refer to relevant
legislation and regulations of the Government (in particular, the environmental impact
assessment notification). Appendix 6 analyzes the use of the state's environment and
rehabilitation policies.

58.     Environmental Monitoring. To complement policy formulation, the Program aimed to
strengthen the state's PCB environmental monitoring capacity through two covenants. The first,
undertaken prior to September 2000, included implementing measures to strengthen the
monitoring capacities of PCB and its regional offices. This was to be followed by an integrated
training program for PCB staff and industrial associations on environmental monitoring and
environmental management by June 2001. Both covenants were fully complied with through
implementation of a national environmental capacity building project for state PCBs, by the
Government of India's Ministry of Environment and Forest, and the central PCB. This project
included environmental monitoring training for PCB technical staff who established an e-
governance program through the PCB website. 41 Citizens' complaints of polluting units are
received, investigations are conducted, and polluting units are put on a list and monitored. The
website continues to be regularly updated, including the status of court cases.

59.     Rehabilitation Policy. Although there is scant reference in the RRP to the rationale for
including the formulation of a policy on resettlement and rehabilitation, GoMP's development
policy letter explicitly mentions the need for this, along with an environment policy. As with the
environment policy, two conditions were agreed. A draft policy on rehabilitation to address the
social impacts of economic development was to be completed by March 2000 for the second
tranche, followed by finalizing the policy by March 2001 for the third tranche. The Department of
Rehabilitation prepared a model rehabilitation policy in 2002 for people displaced by projects.
The policy provided a framework for rehabilitation measures, replacing the previous ad hoc
system of special orders and resolutions. Although the draft policy was submitted to ADB for
comment in October 2000, there is no record in ADB's files of any comments provided to GoMP
on the draft policy.



40
   Through ADB. 2005. Strengthening Country Safeguards Systems. Manila (RETA 6285, for $800,000, approved on
   12 December), ADB is developing a corporate approach for the application of country safeguard systems. This
   involves an analysis of equivalence between country safeguard systems and ADB safeguard policies and
   requirements; and the country's capacity to implement country safeguard systems in terms of implementation
   practices; track record; and the capacity of relevant national, subnational, and sector institutions. India is a case
   study country.
41
   Available: http://www.mppcb.nic.in.
                                                                                                                       19


60.     The GoMP cabinet discussed the draft policy in July 2001 and requested provision of
more compensation to resettled persons. The policy was revised and approved in September
2002. A copy was provided to ADB, which accepted that the condition had been fully complied
with. It is not until the policy had been approved that ADB's files record comments. An
assessment of the policy by ADB's Regional Sustainable Development Department in
August 2002, in the context of the third tranche progress report, stated that the policy includes
"provision for sufficient compensation and other assistance to project-affected-persons to
restore their livelihood, progress in the spheres of community participation in project planning
and implementation." 42 In February 2003, there is reference to the new policy being an
improvement on the previous use of project-specific special orders, noting it is based on 14
principles, including that displaced persons acquire the previous level of their life and that they
should improve their status within a reasonable time; special attention should be paid to
scheduled tribes and scheduled castes; compensation should be paid to land owners and
leaseholders within a specified period, allotment of land if available; sufficient civic amenities
should be provided in new settlements; and displaced persons should access employment in
project-related activities. However, it is noted that the standard of restoring livelihoods may be
lower than the entitlements under the 1979 Narmada water disputes tribunal ruling. The OEM
notes that a recent review of the application of rehabilitation measures for families affected by
the Sardar Sarovar Project (Namada Dam) is very critical of (i) the application of the measures,
and (ii) the findings of an oversight group commissioned by the Government and endorsed by
the Supreme Court to survey damage-affected villages and report to the court and prime
minister.43

61.     Neither the first power sector nor road sector projects required any resettlement.
However, the power sector loan approved in December 2006 (footnote 36) did require
resettlement. In this case, the RRP summary resettlement plan contains a comparative analysis
of the Madhya Pradesh rehabilitation policy, the Government's national policy on resettlement
and rehabilitation for project-affected persons, and ADB's Involuntary Resettlement Policy
(1995) against 18 policy principles. The Madhya Pradesh policy matches ADB's in 13 principles.
Of the five where a difference is identified, only the principle related to entitlements under the
GoMP policy is judged not to fulfill ADB specifications. Comments on the other four principles do
not appear to be significant. There is no commentary on the findings of the comparative
assessment, other than a statement that the resettlement framework will be revised if there are
major changes to relevant policies and laws during project implementation. This implies that the
Madhya Pradesh policy is not acceptable. The framework assumes that ADB's policy will be
implemented.

F.       Consultants

62.    Consultants were engaged in accordance with the Guidelines on the Use of Consultants
by Asian Development Bank and Its Borrowers (2006, as amended from time to time) in the two
stand-alone and the TA attached to the Program.44

42
   File correspondence 22 August 2002.
43
   Levien. M. 2006. Narmada and the Myth of Rehabilitation. Economic and Political Weekly. XLI (33): 3581­3585.
   Levien argues that the scale of the project, displacing over 35,000 families (500,000 people), meant that providing
   the legally required rehabilitation of 2 hectares of cultivatable, irrigable land, and community resettlement sites with
   civic amenities was simply impossible to meet given the land shortage in India, let alone restoring people's
   livelihoods. The issue, then, is not necessarily the rehabilitation measures per se, but their implications for large-
   scale development projects affecting such large numbers of people.
44
   ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance for Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net in
   Madhya Pradesh. Manila (TA-3338, for $600,000, approved on 14 December).
20



G.       Loan Covenant

63.      GoMP fully complied with 12 of 15 second-tranche conditions and substantially complied
with the remaining three. Of the 22 non-tranche release covenants to be completed prior to the
second tranche release, 19 were fully complied with, two substantially complied with, and one
partially complied with. GoMP fully complied with nine of 13 third-tranche conditions,
substantially complied with three, and partially complied with one. GoMP also fulfilled 18 of 22
non-tranche covenants, substantially complied with three, and partially complied with one. A
waiver of full compliance for the condition to establish a utilities pricing commission for roads
and transport tariff setting, and operationalize the commission, was approved by the Board
(Appendix 2 updates the status of compliance of covenants).

64.      The Loan Agreement also contained three covenants under the title of environment:
(i) the Borrower (the Government) shall cause the state to ensure that the technical secretariat
carries out an environmental assessment of the public enterprise reforms in accordance with all
applicable laws of the state; (ii) the Borrower shall ensure that, in formulating infrastructure
policy and regulatory reforms, the state shall make adequate provisions for enforcement of
environmental mitigation measures consistent with the applicable state laws and monitoring of
environmental impact in key infrastructure sectors; and (iii) the Borrower shall cause the state to
support the environmental sustainability of economic growth by adoption of a state environment
policy which will stipulate a time-bound action plan for implementation of market-based
instruments for environmental management. The technical secretariat was never formed, so this
covenant was not met. The state adopted an environment policy with an action plan; and the
road, draft water, and draft science and technology policies are incorporated in environmental
considerations.

H.       Policy Framework

65.     Within 11 months of the MPPRMP being effective, the Government decided to bifurcate
Madhya Pradesh, transferring a number of districts to create the new state of Chhattisgarh.45
Appendix 3 outlines the impact of bifurcation. Following the recommendation of the EFC, the
Ministry of Finance designed a medium-term fiscal reforms program requiring the states to
reduce the ratio of revenue deficits to their total revenues by 5% every year to gain eligibility for
receiving a portion of grants. There were problems in the design of this performance-linked
grants program,46 and the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) recommended replacing it with
an incentive-based debt-restructuring program. To be eligible to qualify, the states are required
to pass a FRBMA entitling them to restructure and consolidate market loans and loans from the
Government at a substantially reduced interest rate. A state could also avail of the benefits of
waiver of loan repayment due for the next 5 years beginning FY2005, directly linked to the
reduction in its revenue deficit. GoMP has enacted a FRBMA.




45
   Two other new states were formed at this time through the same bifurcation process. Jharkhand was created out of
   the southern districts of Bihar, and Uttarakhand from northwestern districts of Uttar Pradesh.
46
   Rao, G. M. 2004. Linking Central Transfers to Fiscal Performance of States. Economic and Political Weekly May 1:
   1820­1825. Rao argues that the size of incentive-linked transfers is too small to influence state fiscal performance,
   multiple schemes segment the incentive, and the scheme design is faulty, failing to address the causes of
   deteriorating state fiscal performance.
                                                                                                                        21


                                     III.     PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT

A.         Overall Assessment

66.     The OEM rates the MPPRMP overall "partly successful."47 GoMP's political commitment
to reform has not been fully translated into action, despite the influence of exogenous factors on
achieving key fiscal consolidation outcomes. GoMP's fiscal deficit decreased from a high of
6.3% in FY2004 to 3% of SDP in FY2008, as charted in the FRBMA, 2005. However, this is the
same level as the starting point in the MPPRMP (from 3.7% SDP in FY1999 to 0.7% in FY2002).
There are positive signs in revenue generation, with the introduction of the VAT, but there has
been no significant change in GoMP's resource allocation to social sectors and PSU reforms
are stalled. Private investors have responded positively, particularly in the road sector. However,
while the approval of a state environment and rehabilitation policy is positive, with the exception
of the recently approved energy sector loan (footnote 36), ADB has not referred to either policy
when it has been relevant to follow up on projects. With two of the three TA projects rated
"partly successful," and the other "successful," the overall use of these resources was neither
effective nor efficient. The performance of the Borrower was rated "satisfactory," and ADB's
rated "partly satisfactory." The OEM differs from the PCR's overall rating of "successful."

B.         Relevance

67.      The MPPRMP is rated "relevant" (footnote 47). It was consistent with the Government's
overall economic reform agenda with the states, with the Ninth Five Year Plan (1995­2000),
and other national level policies--in particular, the emphasis on social services and a
decentralized mode of delivery. ADB's 1998 COSS reinforced the state level focus, with Madhya
Pradesh selected to follow Gujarat. The Program was consistent with ADB's institutional
development objectives of supporting economic growth and the focus in India on alleviating
infrastructure constraints by supporting the development of an effective policy, regulatory, and
institutional environment and improving infrastructure availability and quality of service;
promoting upgrading and protection of the environment; and targeting social sector interventions.
The Madhya Pradesh chief minister fully supported the fiscal reform agenda, recognizing that
the state's difficult financial position required exogenous support to undertake the required
reform measures. The MPPRMP was consistent with the GoMP white paper of February 1999,
documenting the severity of the financial crisis and a reform strategy. ADB provided leverage to
push through reforms in an environment where the status quo was valued. Whether there was
consensus or not, there was no strong opposition at the time the Program started. However,
bureaucratic support appeared to be negatively affected by the delays to program approval in
1998. A change of government resulted in some parts of the reform program being delayed
(e.g., the judicial reversal of the GoMP order on retrenchment of casual workers, and
introducing VAT) in response to the strong opposition of traders. This was successfully
overcome through a taxpayer awareness program, suggesting that overall there was cross-party
commitment to the necessity of reforms.

68.     The overall program logic was sound with respect to the three outcomes--fiscal reform,
PSU reform, and creating an enabling environment--but not with respect to the minimal support
to local body fiscal reform, and the extremely limited social service interventions. A reasonable

47
     Overall performance is based on four criteria: relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
     was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: "irrelevant" (0), "less relevant" (1), "relevant" (2), and
     "highly relevant" (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with "highly successful" 
     2.7, "successful" 1.6 < S < 2.7, "partly successful" 0.8 < PS < 1.6, and "unsuccessful" < 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines
     for Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
22


assessment of risks was made, although the possibility of bifurcation of the state was not
explicitly referred to. Feasible mitigation measures were proposed, although not all were
implemented, particularly the institutional arrangements for PSU reform. The latter failure made
managing a complex PSU reform more difficult. A 3-year time frame is the minimum required to
embed the key foundations for fiscal reforms, including PSU reform. However, the 12-month
time frame of TA projects was too short. There is little documentary evidence of consideration of
alternative fiscal policy options, particularly on the expenditure side (e.g., state pension liabilities,
or instituting expenditure performance measurement and reporting systems). As the MPPRMP
was essentially designed by mid-1998, although not approved until December 1999, the limited
experience from ADB's only other similar subnational program in India (GPSRMP) and the
World Bank's state level power sector and economic restructuring project in Andhra Pradesh,
was drawn on in the design. Although there was no direct reference to the considerable
international experience of PSU reform,48 a range of PSU reform options were assessed and
implemented, consistent with some of the key lessons from that experience.

69.     Institutional limitations were recognized, and assistance was proposed to build capacity.
TA to support revenue reforms such as sales tax and VAT reform was relevant, triggering
computerization of budget and treasury functions, while also preparing the tax department for
the eventual introduction of VAT. TA support for PSU reform was "relevant" but insufficient. The
TA for local government information systems was not complemented by policy reforms in the
loan, did not target the most pressing local government fiscal constraints, and was not sustained.
The VRS and SSN had sufficient funds on paper, but the technical secretariat designed to
implement PSU reforms was not established, and GoMP did not provide the PSU nodal line
department with adequate resources and powers to manage this aspect of the reforms.

C.       Effectiveness

70.      The Program is rated "less effective," 49 as two of the three outcomes were not met.
Although the fiscal deficit targets agreed in tranche conditions were not attained, they were
substantially met after adjustment to account for exogenous factors. A study of the
counterfactual position conducted an econometric analysis of structural adjustment loans on
individual states (Appendix 4).50 After controlling for exogenous factors, the study finds that, in
the short term, the loan has not led to any significant improvement in the overall fiscal situation
in any of the states. The response to fiscal stress is influenced by the structure of incentives
faced by states, and political economy factors. The analysis of revenue and fiscal deficits
showed significant interstate variations, with the fiscal deficit deteriorating when off-budget
deficits caused by power sector losses are correctly included. However, the study did not find a
significant relationship between the level of development expenditure and the size of revenue or
fiscal deficits in states. In Madhya Pradesh, the attempted expenditure compression was not
significant. The tax performance does not show any significant improvement, nor did the loan
result in enhancing non-tax revenues from user charges and returns from state enterprises. As


48
   For example, the 1989 issue of World Development, Volume 17 (5) was entitled "Privatization" and included
   eight articles on PSU reform, focusing primarily on issues relating to privatization in the developing world. Although
   the experiences being discussed were at national level, many of the lessons were equally applicable to state level
   PSUs.
49
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: "ineffective" (0), "less effective" (1), "effective" (2), and "highly
   effective" (3).
50
   The states of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Kerala (ADB); and Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh
   (World Bank) were compared with the balance of the 15 major states in India, none of which had received state
   level multilateral loan support.
                                                                                                23


the period of analysis was limited, the study noted that the results could change over the
medium term when the reform measures impact fully on the state's revenues and expenditures.

71.     The simplification of taxes and computerization of tax administration and treasury
accounts was a very positive reform. Given limits on increasing revenues, expenditure growth
had to be contained, mainly at the cost of investments and O&M costs of physical infrastructure,
rather than cutting expenditure on social services. Despite some constraints on human
development expenditures (vacant posts of teachers and doctors accumulated for a long time),
the relevant ratios show that social sector expenditures generally were not adversely impacted
by the fiscal reform, but social sector expenditures did not increase over the period as proposed.
Without the implementation of significant central government vertical programs in health,
education, and poverty alleviation--complementing the state's allocation--social development
indicators would have worsened. As it was, they improved marginally from an acknowledged
low base over the program period.

72.     Once GoMP clarified that, for the purposes of tranche conditions "closure" meant
operational closure, it succeeded in closing all eight PSUs selected. However, this level of
closure made it relatively easy to revive a PSU, if considered politically expedient to do so, as
was the case with the police housing corporation. Efforts to improve corporate governance and
restructure PSUs were less than satisfactory. The lack of a technical secretariat, and an under-
resourced nodal line agency constrained the effectiveness of PSU reforms--particularly the
monitoring and accountability for corporate governance changes, which were effected on paper,
but not in practice. There were considerable difficulties in agreeing on the apportionment of
assets and liabilities of key PSUs after bifurcation, leading to protracted negotiations that could
only be resolved at the highest levels of government. Even if the technical secretariat had been
established, it would have had little bearing on this process. GoMP was unable to restructure or
divest any of the five selected PSUs, and over 2001­2003 their performance has, without
exception, been disappointing.

73.     A small number of critical legal, policy, and institutional reforms created an enabling
environment for private sector participation in the power and road sectors. The electricity
regulatory authority was established and a power sector master plan was formulated. A roads
policy was approved and a private sector cell within PWD was established, later transferred to
the Road Development Corporation. Housing sector interventions were less successful. The
approval of state environment and resettlement policies was a positive step in promoting the
environmental sustainability of economic development, although the latter is not deemed
sufficiently robust to be applied in ADB sector loans.

74.      In common with many ADB policy-based loans, the description of the Program in the
RRP text, DMF, and policy matrix is inconsistent. It appears that the policy matrix was
essentially the design tool, and the DMF was completed last to meet a template requirement.
Although the design contains a detailed analysis of the education and health sectors, it did not
adequately identify and address these potential influences. Generic assumptions and risks were
identified but mitigation measures were not well developed to address risks.
24


D.       Efficiency

75.     The Program is rated "less efficient."51 The loan was provided to assist GoMP to finance
the adjustment costs, including lost tax revenue and PSU reform liabilities estimated to be $600
million, later revised down to $530 million after bifurcation. To expect that GoMP would be able
to cover the balance by increased receipts and sale of PSU shares and assets was overly
ambitious. Tax revenues have increased substantially only since FY2004 (VAT was not
implemented until 2006) and realizations from sale of assets of PSUs was delayed by the slow
pace of liquidation. In all, almost 9,000 employees received VRS, compared with a design
estimate of 16,500 employees with an estimated cost of $57 million. The OEM was informed
that the VRS is estimated to have provided for around 65% of the remuneration that was being
earned by employees prior to retrenchment. Although this was said to be sufficient to enable
them to take up alternative employment, an independent survey was not conducted to confirm
this. Contrary to MPPRMP design, the SSN did not proceed--further reducing adjustment costs.
With two TA rated "partly successful" and one "successful," these resources were less efficiently
used. In terms of process efficiency, the respective policy and management committees
provided appropriate levels of oversight, but the failure to establish a technical secretariat
constrained the efficient management of PSU reforms and resulted in TA consultants
performing tasks that should have been conducted by government officials.

E.       Sustainability

76.      The Program is rated "less likely sustainable."52 The MPPRMP provided the impetus for
substantial reform, in particular providing a better appreciation of the direction needed and
encouraging GoMP to articulate its reform program through a white paper. The macroeconomic
scenario of India was not favorable to reform during the first 2 years of the Program, but started
improving thereafter, coinciding with the last phase of the MPPRMP. Appendix 4, Table A4.4
provides a summary of the fiscal situation in Madhya Pradesh over a decade from the mid-
1990s. Barring the last 2 years of the series, the highest deficit figures are for FY1998, followed
by a fiscal correction until FY2002, coinciding with the MPPRMP. Exogenous factors, such as
the widespread floods in August 2000 followed by bifurcation of the state in November 2000,
affected the state's fiscal condition. The post-MPPRMP years show some deterioration, but the
deficit figures may be the result of one-time entries. For example, in 2003­2004, almost the
entire increase in the deficit can be traced to a jump in the non-plan revenue (roughly the same
as current) expenditures on economic services. In 2004­2005, the sharp drop in revenue deficit
is mainly attributable to a large (probably one-time) receipt in the power sector. Similarly, the
fiscal deficit of 6.01% of SDP, despite a revenue surplus, is the result of a large increase in
capital expenditure on economic services.

77.     The Government of India, on its part, allowed reduction of interest liabilities through debt
swapping, and more recently the substitution of plan loans by cheaper market loans. In addition,
some centrally sponsored schemes were substantially revised to fall more in line with the states'
interests, and expanded in scope (notably the schemes relating to elementary education, health,
and power). The growth of the Indian economy has been strong in recent years. Higher incomes
have helped generate healthy tax revenues, while the significant drop in market interest rates
compared with the 1990s has helped contain interest obligations at a much lower level than
before. The state has exhibited fairly high levels of fiscal deficit in the last 2 years despite these
51
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: "inefficient" (0), "less efficient" (1), "efficient" (2), and "highly
   efficient" (3).
52
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: "unlikely sustainable" (0), "less likely sustainable" (1),
   "sustainable" (2), and "most likely sustainable" (3).
                                                                                                                   25


favorable factors. This is due to a decision to clean up the books with respect to Madhya
Pradesh State Electricity Board, make substantial capital expenditures in various areas, and
retire a substantive amount of outstanding debt. None of these are likely to continue beyond
1 or 2 years, but the positives are more long term.

78.     The exogenous factors that contributed to the continuation of the reforms include
incentives provided by the EFC and TFC, various central government schemes, and a favorable
macroeconomic situation creating space for reform. By allowing for normative levels of
expenditures on salaries and imputing normative rates of return on investments in public
enterprises in the assessment of expenditures and receipts for the computation of deficit grants,
both the finance commissions provided incentives for the reform agenda supported by the
MPPRMP. In particular, they provided further incentives in the form of loan write-offs and
rescheduling, on the basis of reforms undertaken with adoption of the FRBMA, 2005, 53 and
linking a part of the grants to fiscal reform in accordance with the EFC. Further, following the
Government's lead, the state has produced an outcome budget for FY2005, but this not a
performance measurement tool. A gender budget is reportedly under consideration. The
GoMP's proposal to introduce a detailed medium-term expenditure framework, beginning with a
few selected departments, is a positive but limited development from the MPPRMP budget
planning support, and needs to be adopted by all departments to be effective.

79.     Two major reforms have been sustained despite initial setbacks. VAT has finally been
introduced despite missing the target during the MPPRMP because of constraints from the
Government, and stamp duty reforms have stood the test of time.54 However, computerization of
the treasury has been the most successful reform, and is likely to be highly sustainable. The
computerization process, started in 1989, was given a significant push by the MPPRMP, further
supported by the EFC and GoMP's own funds. Computerization has been an ongoing process;
the presently functional unified system became operational in 2004, and new features were
added to the system to make it more comprehensive and useful. To a substantial extent, the
MPPRMP can be credited with providing the thrust to completely overhaul the old system, and
introducing an optimized new system.

80.    In the case of local governance and finances, the intended reforms have not come about,
even in the medium term. Although the ADB program envisaged building a linked local
government finances database, as of now, even receipts and expenditures of urban local bodies
at an aggregate level are not readily available. As a result, the state finance commission has to
collect this information itself, every time it is set up, causing considerable delay in producing its
report. The major reforms in the property tax system--shifting to the unit area-based system55 to
assess the annual ratable value in 1997 and a system of self-assessment by taxpayers in
Madhya Pradesh--predated the MPPRMP. Overall, own revenues are completely inadequate
for discharging the responsibilities of urban local bodies resulting in only those services that are
specifically funded by higher-level governments being attended to properly. For example, while
the municipal bodies are responsible for urban water supply, user charges levied are

53
   Adoption of a Financial Responsibility and Budget Management Act specifies a path to the committed levels of zero
   revenue deficit and a maximum of 3% fiscal deficit as a ratio of SDP by the final year, FY2008. This has been
   mainly the result of incentives attached to the adoption of such an Act in terms of debt rescheduling/write-off, as
   mandated by the twelfth finance commission.
54
   The rate rationalization is yet to be fully carried out; the rate on conveyance is still above the 6% recommended by
   the chief ministers' committee.
55
   This system consists of dividing the city into various zones based on market prices for property, and valuing
   property at different basic rates for each zone, supplemented by specific property characteristics such as size and
   type of construction.
26


inadequate to meet O&M costs. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that connections are not
metered, and there are no funds to install meters.

81.      GoMP's commitment to improve physical infrastructure--including roads, power, and
irrigation--while seeking greater coverage and better quality of social services (such as
education and health) remains. The strong commitment to contain wages and salaries has been
reviewed, particularly in education where the construction of almost 20,000 new primary and
middle schools required the engagement of over 50,000 new teachers. The commitment to
more widespread and qualitatively improved educational services resulted in the state passing
an Education Guarantee Act, 2002, that required a major recruitment drive for schoolteachers,
which is ongoing. Key technical support institutions were not sustained, although GoMP is
negotiating with DFID for support to reestablish a form of the technical secretariat to further PSU
reforms. Without this support, it is unlikely that PSU reforms will progress significantly, and the
location of the technical secretariat will influence its overall sustainability.

                                IV.     OTHER ASSESSMENTS

A.     Impact

82.      Socioeconomic Impact. Despite GoMP's long commitment to social priorities, Madhya
Pradesh is below Indian averages in most social indicators. Madhya Pradesh is predominantly
rural, with scheduled castes and scheduled tribes making up over 35% of the population. With
about 38% of the over 60 million people in the state below the poverty line, Madhya Pradesh
has the third highest level of poverty in India despite consistent improvements against the
human development index over the past two decades. The overall literacy rate of 63.7% is
almost equal to the national average, but female literacy at 50.3% is 25.8% less than male
literacy, which is one of the highest gaps in India. Madhya Pradesh is 11th by per capita income
among India's 15 larger states. The Program was expected to impact on poverty reduction, with
the reform efforts expecting to foster social development and in particular increase resource
allocations to social sectors to support human development. As the fiscal deficit projections
were not met during the program period, or to date, the expected fiscal space to increase
allocations did not come about. On the positive side, expenditure in social services was not
sacrificed to meet deficit shortfalls (Appendix 4, Table A4.4). The Government's vertical poverty
alleviation programs for education, health, and employment has taken some expenditure
pressure off the GoMP budget.

83.     Madhya Pradesh has reasonably steady, if slightly declining, social expenditure ratios
over a 10-year period from FY1995­2004 despite (i) the impact of bifurcation in FY2000 and
FY2001, which had an effect across the board; and (ii) the tightening of public expenditures as a
part of fiscal reforms. The public expenditure ratio, measuring the percentage of state income
that goes into public expenditure, was marginally higher in FY2004 than 10 years earlier. It
showed a decline in FY2001 during the program period, but hovered about 4% lower than the
UNDP norm of 25%. The social sector ratio, measuring the percentage of total expenditure
allocated to social services, has shown a 10% decline over the decade after reaching a high
point of 34% in 1998 and 1999. However, it dropped to 23% in FY2004, well below the UNDP
norm of 40%. The social priority ratio, which measures the percentage of social expenditure
devoted to human priority concerns (education, health, water and sanitation), has been
consistently in the mid- to high 50% range, above the UNDP norm of 50%, peaking during the
Program in FY2001. The human development ratio, the product of the above three ratios,
measuring the percentage of state income devoted to human priority concerns, follows the
same trend. It had a marginal overall decline but a small rise in the year prior to the Program;
                                                                                                              27


this was held for the first 2 years and then declined.

84.    The VRS and SSN, including retraining and counseling, were designed to mitigate the
negative socioeconomic impact of PSU reforms. Severance pay was provided to retrenched
employees, but GoMP did not proceed with the SSN so employees were given no further
support to deal with retrenchment and finding alternative employment. The planned study to
assess the socioeconomic impact of PSU reforms on employees or on others affected by PSU
closure, was not conducted so there is no independent assessment of the impact.

85.     GoMP approved a rehabilitation policy under the Program in September 2002 to address
the social impacts of economic projects, protecting the rights and entitlements of people forced
to resettle.

86.     A poverty impact assessment (PIA) is conducted during preparation of policy-based
program loans to assess the direct short- and long-term impact of policy measures on the poor
in terms of demand for labor; net public transfers; and prices of, and access to, goods and
services. The PIA identifies a series of assumptions and associated mitigation measures in
defining potential impact. The 1995 PIA format was revised prior to preparation of the MPPRMP
to include impact on the nonpoor. Although the PIA appendix is referred to in the RRP (para. 97),
the PIA analysis is not reflected in the DMF or drawn on in any depth in the RRP. The PIA was
completed as a template requirement in the formulation process, rather than as a design tool
linked directly to the DMF. Consequently, analysis of the value of the PIA has limited
applicability and the GoMP allocation to social services was not increased during the life of the
Program (para. 83 and Appendix 4).

87.    Impact on Environment. The Program was categorized as environmental category C.
Environmental implications of the proposed policy and institutional reforms were reviewed
during program design. The Madhya Pradesh state environment policy (1999) was approved
before implementation. Although the Program included provision of training on environmental
monitoring for PCB staff, the training was provided under a central government program
supported by ADB.56

88.     Impact on Anticorruption. In the late 1990s, the profile of the impact of corruption on
the public sector was rising, as evidenced by the reaction in the development community to
formulate policy positions and provide assistance to developing member countries directly
supporting anticorruption initiatives. ADB's governance policy,57 approved in 1995, recognized
that corruption needed to be addressed through a governance framework. In 1998, ADB
approved an Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date). ADB's RRP template had not
been revised to include anticorruption aspects when the MPPRMP was being designed, and the
RRP did not specifically identify how policy actions might support GoMP's anticorruption
endeavors. However, in retrospect, the MPPRMP included a number of measures that would
contribute to reducing the incidence of corrupt practice by government officials--particularly
improvements, including computerization, of the tax administration system. The intent behind
the MOU approach to improving the corporate governance of PSUs, by establishing
performance benchmarks for enterprises as well as managers, was to improve accountability.
Efforts to control the number of government employees were initial steps in civil service reform,


56
   ADB. 2000. Technical Assistance to India for Environmental Management at the State Level. Manila (TA 3423-IND,
   for $3,620,000, approved on 22 March).
57
   ADB. 1995. Governance: Sound Development Management. Manila.
28


with the potential to identify ghost employees58. Establishing central and regional valuation cells
and introducing a methodology to assess properties for levy of property tax and stamp duty was
designed to improve revenue generation in a transparent manner. The intent of establishing a
system for monitoring implementation of the CIP, with periodic review of project performance,
was to put in place an expenditure performance review process. However, this did not occur.

B.       Asian Development Bank Performance

89.     The performance of ADB is rated "less than satisfactory." 59 After the reconnaissance
mission in November­December 1997, it was 2 years before the loan was approved by the
Board and made effective. ADB's decision to delay processing in late 1998 as originally agreed
with GoMP, for fear of the loan being used in a forthcoming state election campaign, had a
deleterious effect on the relationship and required considerable staff time to rectify. The
provision of multipurpose advisory TA had some merit if the original approval schedule had
been maintained. However, with the delays, the TA was insufficient to support program
implementation. Further, the TA supporting local government reform was not focused on the
most pressing constraints. It was neither complemented by the loan-supported reform agenda,
nor was the specific intervention sustained. ADB's decision to await approval of a large DFID
funded project, of which a small proportion was to finance the technical secretariat, rather than
provide the necessary TA resources was unfortunate, as the secretariat was never to be
established.

90.    Monitoring of program performance by headquarters staff was on an irregular basis.
However, the role of the ADB India resident mission staff in supporting program monitoring was
extremely important, even though the loan was not delegated. Resident mission staff provided
the kind of "daily" support such reform programs require particularly when, in 2002,
headquarters missions were often short and none were fielded from October 2002 to March
2003, prior to preparation of the third tranche progress report. While project officers handling the
program changed twice during implementation, staff members specializing in public resource
management were assigned to the MPPRMP each time.

C.       Borrower Performance

91.       The Borrower's performance is rated "satisfactory" (footnote 59). GoMP officials and
executive leadership demonstrated ownership of reforms, taking difficult decisions to fulfill the
conditions of the first tranche by August 1998 as agreed, although ADB's delay in approval took
its toll. Similarly, second and third tranche conditions were met, with delays caused by the
difficulties in settling issues associated with bifurcation. At appraisal, GoMP's limited experience
and institutional capacity to implement comprehensive financial reforms were identified as risks
that could limit the development impact of the Program. TA was provided to strengthen
institutional capacity. However, consultants cannot replace government officials, and the fact
that the technical secretariat was not established, and the SBFAU and DPE were inadequately
resourced, was problematic. The EA administered the Program efficiently.




58
   Employees who are recorded as bona fide, such as staff who have died but remain on the records or people whose
   names are put on the records but do not attend the place of work yet receive salaries and other benefits.
59
   Based on a four-point scale of "unsatisfactory," "less than satisfactory," "satisfactory," or "highly satisfactory."
                                                                                                        29


D.      Technical Assistance

92.    A total of $2.08 million was provided through three TA projects to complement reform
and capacity-building initiatives supported by the MPPRMP. Two were approved in
December 1997, 2 years prior to the eventual approval of the Loan Agreement. These focused
on strengthening local government information systems, and assisting GoMP to establish fiscal
reform and institutional strengthening initiatives. The third, focusing on PSU reform, was
attached to the Loan Agreement.

93.     Strengthening Local Government. 60 The 73rd amendment to the Indian Constitution
introduced local government at the panchayat (village) level, including significant roles in
implementing government projects. Madhya Pradesh was the first state to directly elect village
level gram panchayats (local government). These have become reasonably strong, although it
is reported that they have been captured by local elites.61 To improve governance of district
level local government bodies (LGBs) in Madhya Pradesh, a TA was approved to (i) develop the
resource-raising capabilities of LGBs through policy support and training; (ii) improve
information gathering at the district level, to enhance rational decision making at local and state
levels; and (iii) strengthen training facilities of LGBs, facilitating dissemination of best practices
throughout LGB administration. The TA provided equipment and capacity building on data
collection and processing to various government agencies, with 33 person-months of consulting
services provided from June 1998 to December 2000. The consultant team designed and
installed a statistical package for more efficient fiscal data management in 31 district level
directorate of economics and statistics offices, and trained over 100 officers. Although the TA
completion report (TCR) rated the TA "successful,"62 the key constraint to LGB capacity was,
and remains today, the LGB's ability to manage funds--including maintaining accounts. With
one part-time locally engaged administration officer in a gram panchayat, given little training
support but having to deal with many vertical programs, it is not surprising that LGB fiscal reform
has not been successful. Although the TA aimed to build a database on local finances, at the
time of the OEM even receipts and expenditures of urban local bodies at an aggregate level are
not readily available. As a result, the state finance commission has to collect this information on
its own, every time it is set up, causing considerable delay in producing the report. In summary,
the TA has not proved sustainable. As the MPPRMP did not complement the TA with policy
conditions supporting improved local government governance, it is unclear how the TA was to
contribute to the MPPRMP's reform outcomes. The OEM did not conduct an in-depth
assessment, but considers that the TA was at best "partly successful."

94.      Fiscal Reform and Institutional Strengthening. 63 The TA to support fiscal reform
focused on (i) strengthening the sales tax administration, including staff member training to
facilitate transformation of the sales tax system to VAT; (ii) strengthening the stamp duty and
registration directorate, establishing a state level central valuation cell and district valuation cells
for valuation of assets, and training staff members on the new valuation system; (iii) assessing
the institutional, policy, and regulatory frameworks for improvement of social services,
particularly health and education services; (iv) establishing an SBFAU and training staff

60
   ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh. Manila
   (TA 2944-IND, for $700,000, approved on 15 December).
61
   Manor. J. 2001. Madhya Pradesh Experiments with Direct Democracy. Economic and Political Weekly.
   March 3:715­716.
62
   ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance Completion Report on Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh.
   Manila.
63
   ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance
   Reform and Institutional Strengthening. Manila (TA 2943-IND, for $780,000, approved on 15 December).
30


members to strengthen the analytical capability for budget planning and monitoring as well as
revenue and expenditure analysis and projections; and (v) training staff members from the
finance department and key infrastructure departments on expenditure prioritization and CIP.
GoMP established an economic reform committee to oversee the TA, with the support of two
empowered committees on public finance reform and PSU restructuring. An international
consulting firm provided international (9 person-months) and national (35 person-months)
consultants whose performance was rated "satisfactory," even though the consultant team
members changed and the interaction between the consultants and the EA was reportedly weak.
The consultants' report provided a comprehensive analysis and review of GoMP's public
finances. Savings from the original budget enabled the engagement of an international
consultant to assist GoMP to design the proposed VAT system. The TA was rated "successful"
by the TCR 64 and an Operations Evaluation Department (OED) Technical Assistance
Performance Audit Report,65 which found the most successful interventions were in tax, SBFAU,
and computerization of treasury functions. The outcomes of interventions in key expenditure
departments--such as in health, education, public works, and water resources--were relatively
less visible. The OEM agrees with the rating of the above two assessments.

95.      PSU Reform. 66 This TA, attached to the MPPRMP, aimed to support GoMP's efforts to
develop and implement a comprehensive and socially sustainable program of public enterprise
reform. It had three objectives: (i) to establish effective institutional mechanisms for restructuring
and divestment of PSUs, including assistance in designing and implementing the SSN;
(ii) capacity building for undertaking PSU reform; and (iii) improving corporate governance,
including strengthening accounting and information systems of PSUs. This TA was subject to an
in-depth review conducted by the OEM (Appendix 7). The TA was rated "relevant," as it was
consistent with the GoMP reform agenda and ADB's India strategy. The TA produced quality
reports and advice but it was rated "less effective" as the institution it was planned to support
was not created, and GoMP chose not to operationalize an SSN. Its planned 12-month time
frame was insufficient to support the complex public sector undertaking reform agenda in
support of a 3-year program loan. It was rated "less efficient" and "less likely sustainable" as,
without further exogenous resources to provide the necessary technical advice to further PSU
reforms, GoMP's reform effort would be limited and the materials prepared under the TA would
be of little practical value. The OEM overall rating of "partly successful" matches that of the TCR.

                      V.       ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.      Issues

96.      Environment and Rehabilitation Policies. The inclusion of support for GoMP to
formulate environment and rehabilitation policies was a very positive initiative, particularly given
its intent to harness private sector investment in key infrastructure sectors. However, it appears
from the files that ADB provided no substantive comment on drafts of the rehabilitation policy. In
the most recent power sector loan where an analysis of the rehabilitation policy was conducted,
it found the level of compliance inadequate in one key principle compared with ADB's
Involuntary Resettlement Policy (1995), and this was sufficient to undermine its use. In the
context of Paris Declaration alignment commitments, there is an opportunity for ADB to be more

64
   ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance Completion Report on Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public
   Finance Reform and Institutional Strengthening. Manila.
65
   ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance for Fiscal
   Management and Tax Administration in India. Manila.
66
   ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net
   in Madhya Pradesh. Manila (TA 3338-IND, for $600,000, approved on 14 December).
                                                                                                  31


proactive in working with the Government to address apparent gaps in policies that ADB
supported being formulated.

97.      TA Scope and Sequencing. Two ADTA projects were approved in 1997, when the
Program was expected to be approved by the third quarter 1998. These TA were multipurpose,
providing experience for design while building institutional capacity in fiscal and local
government reform through program implementation. The TA attached to the loan was largely
constrained by the failure to establish a technical secretariat, which was a key institution in
terms of the broader PSU reforms. Given that ADB's TA resources were limited, more strategic
use of TA resources would likely have achieved better results. For example, the choice not to
provide TA support for the technical secretariat from the outset is unfortunate, given its apparent
importance in the program design. The inclusion of a TA to address one aspect of local
government fiscal reform, but not following up in the Program, is difficult to reconcile as the TA
itself had little lasting impact--partly as it was not focused on the key constraint in this area.

98.     Nominal Fiscal Targets. Setting nominal fiscal targets by judgment, rather than through
applying a rigorous modeling technique, was repeated in the MPPRMP with similar results to
the GPSRMP. ADB staff recognized that this was problematic in their presentation of the final
GPSRMP progress report to the Board, after the MPPRMP had been approved. Setting targets
can be important to focus reforms. However, where they become part of tranche release
conditions, mechanisms need to be agreed in the design to address the positive or negative
impact of exogenous factors.

99.      Balancing Revenue and Expenditure Reforms. Was the balance of revenue and
expenditure reforms sufficient to achieve an outcome of enhanced resource allocation to social
sectors? It is difficult to increase social sector expenditures (overwhelmingly on education and
health) and simultaneously require a contraction in GoMP's wage bill, when wages dominate the
sector budget and resources for capital expenditure are limited. Preparing a strategic
investment plan to prioritize expenditure was a positive planning initiative. However, lack of a
performance-based budgeting system with an accountability link of expenditure to the budget,
diluted its operational effectiveness and missed an opportunity to contribute to anticorruption
efforts.

100. Exogenous Factors. Although these were identified as risks, with specific reference to
changes in the Government's policy, mitigation measures were not adequately identified.
Although bifurcation of the state had been in the background for over a decade, it came very
rapidly in response to political considerations, and had a significant impact on the pace of
reforms. However, the impact of the fifth pay commission's awards, and the fact that the EFC
was about to deliver its recommendations, was known before the Program was approved. In
addition, experience from the GPSRMP should have alerted the program designers to the
likelihood that, for example, (i) nominal fiscal targets could be problematic; and (ii) mitigation
measures, in the form of an institutional mechanism to ensure that the relevant conditions could
be flexibility addressed, could have been identified.

101. Conditions at Variance with Policy. When a nominal fiscal deficit target is fixed in a
condition that later is at variance with the target set by the Government in its fiscal restructuring
plan for the states, resolution is required. When the program conditions were designed, the
Government had no set targets for states. However, based on the recommendation of the EFC,
the Government initiated incentive-linked grants in which each of the major states was required
to reduce its ratio of revenue deficit to total revenues by 5% every year for 5 years beginning
FY1999.
32



102. Design. The logic of three outcomes--fiscal consolidation, PSU reform, and creating an
enabling environment for private sector participation--to contribute to the impact was sound.
However, as with the GPSRMP, the description of the Program in the RRP text, DMF, and
policy matrix was inconsistent.67 The RRP text describes a Program with three outcomes in
Section B, and four in Section C. The DMF describes four outcome statements, one of which is
in neither of the text descriptions. The structure of both the policy matrix and the Loan
Agreement are consistent with the three outcomes in Section B of the text. As may be expected
with a policy-based loan, the policy matrix appears to be the key design tool, with the DMF
completed as a documentation requirement. However, a policy matrix is not constructed using
the DMF logic that each level (from activities to outcomes) must contain sufficient "conditions" to
achieve the next higher level. Rather, the policy matrix defines a set of necessary, but not
always sufficient, policy actions to produce a desired reform within a policy area.68 The policy
actions, many of which become tranche conditions or covenants, were a mix measurable
outcomes, outputs, and processes. The DMF's monitoring indicators are a mix of appropriate
indicators and activities, with some being outside the control of the state government--creating
difficulties in adjusting them to factors within and beyond its control. Generic assumptions and
risks are identified, but are not clearly distinguished to enable mitigation measures to be
developed to address risks.

103. PSU Closure. The lack of clarity over the meaning of PSU closure was resolved during
program implementation, with ADB agreeing that operational closure was sufficient. However,
without actual liquidation, the value of the assets of the disinvested entity could not be realized
and appropriated by GoMP--thereby contributing to the adjustment costs as envisaged. Without
the technical capacity including the relevant staff from a PSU's finance department, to ensure
that all the requirements for financial closure were being undertaken in a timely fashion, this
process will be drawn out and may require specialist forensic accounting expertise. Further, as
illustrated by the police housing corporation, it is relatively easy for government to revive an
operationally closed PSU, but more difficult if it is financially closed or under a court-appointed
liquidator. Of course, once legally closed, creating a new PSU is the only option. It is recognized
that legal closure is a lengthy process in India. To agree that operational closure is sufficient, is
one step too short in a PSU reform program.

104. Monitoring. ADB's role in implementation is broadly to monitor and provide technical
advice through policy dialogue. While the former can be achieved through missions, the latter
requires a more hands-on approach, one that was well performed by staff in the India resident
mission, between headquarter missions, despite the Program not being delegated. In complex
reforms, it is often difficult to keep track of the details. For example, in the case of the fairly
successful reform of stamp duties, one important part of the reform was to lower the rates in
accordance with the recommendations of the committee of chief ministers. This was not done,
yet assessments note that measures relating to stamp duty were fully implemented. This
reinforces the need for vigilance in monitoring, as well as the essential role that resident
missions play in ADB partnership with clients.

67
   Unfortunately, based on OED evaluation findings and review of draft RRPs for proposed programs, this issue
   remains today. For example, the ADB. 2005 Panel Report to Management on the Quality-at-Entry of ADB Projects
   and Country Strategies Approved 2004­2005, Manila, recently completed by OED, finds "the criterion of
   development objectives, evaluability [sic] and sustainability [in projects] was one of the weaker areas with only two-
   thirds of the projects assessed rated as satisfactory or better" (p.14).
68
   For example, policy actions to achieve a reform outcome may need to be sequenced over a period longer than a
   loan's agreed duration. The policy actions to prioritize and rationalize expenditure were not sufficient to achieve this
   output.
                                                                                               33



105. ADB Board. As with the GPSRMP, there is a correlation between the lessons reported
in the PCR and this OEM, and some of the issues raised by the Board in approving the
MPPRMP. This raises questions as to how Management responds to ensuring that Board
member's concerns are addressed during implementation, and how the Board monitors that its
concerns are being addressed when progress reports are discussed.

B.         Lessons
106. Responding to the Iterative Nature of Reforms. The lesson from the GPSRMP that a
2-year time frame is insufficient was reflected in the 3-year design of the MPPRMP--with the
Program being completed within 39 months, including the delays resulting from bifurcation.
However, the fact that a number of reforms are still incomplete in 2006 reinforces the long-term,
iterative nature of fiscal reforms. This provides a challenge for ADB in terms of its ability to
sustain involvement over a long period, its financing modalities, and its relevance to the client.
Providing sufficient TA for the duration of the Program is also a challenge, particularly when
delays in implementation have resource implications for TA. The availability of the cluster loan
modality provides the flexibility to accommodate a longer-term commitment, and respond to
changing political and reform imperatives. In addition, the use of the project loan modality for
institutional strengthening and capacity development may provide similar opportunities, even
under OCR conditions.
107. Align Reform Targets. According to the Indian Constitution state level lending program
by multilateral institutions must involve the Government of India, which is the Borrower,
onlending to the states. Mechanisms need to be in place to align reform targets between ADB,
the state government, and central Government. This also requires flexibility within ADB for
Management to make adjustments required to achieve outcomes.
108. Anticorruption. As public resource management programs address fundamental
aspects of government financial management, the opportunity to explicitly target revenue and
expenditure reforms that support government's anticorruption agenda has the potential to have
significant flow-on effects.
109. Exogenous Factors. This includes the political economy (e.g., policy change by the
Government) or natural disasters, and these will probably occur over the medium term.
Mitigation measures, particularly related to political economy factors, need to be designed in the
Program, with policy actions, conditions, and covenants individually assessed by clearly
specifying a mechanism to change conditions in response to such factors.
110. Monitoring and Policy Dialogue. Complex reform programs require continuous
monitoring and policy dialogue through the combined and well-coordinated resources of both
headquarters and the resident mission. Where Management is unwilling to delegate such
programs to resident missions, monitoring and policy dialogue arrangements need to specify
clearly the different roles and responsibilities of headquarters and resident mission staff to
maximize the use of staff resources.

C.         Follow-up Actions
111. By the fourth quarter of 2007, in formulating the India 2007­2010 country partnership
strategy, the OEM recommends that ADB's state level support strategy, as revised in the 2003­
2006 country strategy and program,69 should be reviewed to assess the opportunities to support

69
     ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program (2003­2006): India. Manila.
34


priority aspects of ongoing state level public resource management reforms, and the most
appropriate funding modalities to achieve jointly agreed outcomes.
                                                                                                              Appendix 1        35


        ANALYSIS OF MADHYA PRADESH PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM DESIGN
                   Table A1.1: Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program
                                   Design and Monitoring Framework

Design Summary                Targets/Measurable Indicators                 Monitoring Mechanism                Assumptions/Risks


A.   Goal

Assist GoMP reform         Medium-term sustainability of public        Finance department, supported         Political acceptability of
efforts to foster social   finances                                    by SBFAU, to prepare periodic         and commitment to fiscal
development and                                                        reports on fiscal trends,             consolidation and tax
sustainable economic       Capacity building for prudent               expenditure allocation to social      reforms and acceptance by
growth through             management of public expenditure and        and economic services, and tax        PSU management of
improving public           debt and strengthening resource             and expenditure policy measures       greater transparency and
resource                   mobilization, including through                                                   accountability
management and             improved tax administration                 Plan on how national norms in
enhancing public                                                       health and education could be         Capacity building on
expenditure to social      Expenditure reallocation to social          achieved                              expenditure management
sector                     sector, and protection of these outlays                                           and control to prevent
                           from budgetary cuts                         Committee to be established to        expenditure overrun and
                                                                       prepare SSN design and submit         avoid unproductive
                           Preparation of plan indicating how          report to the ADB                     expenditure crowding out
                           national norms on health and education                                            social sector allocations
                           could be met as state's financial      Technical secretariat to report on
                           constraint eases                       progress of PSU restructuring,             Program success is
                                                                  and the DPE to publish annual              contingent on stable
                           Alleviation of social impact of        report on public enterprise sector         political and exogenous
                           development                            performance                                environment; exogenous
                                                                                                             shocks, including policy
                           Strengthened corporate governance;          GoMP to report on sector core         decisions by the central
                           and improved financial performance of       investment program and                Government, could
                           PSUs                                        experience with private sector        adversely affect economic
                                                                       involvement in social and political   development, private
                           Policy, regulatory, and institutional       infrastructure                        sector environment, and
                           frameworks of key sectors (power,                                                 SRF implementation
                           roads and transport, and housing)           Sector policies; action plan for
                                                                       strengthening environmental
                           Improved environmental sustainability       management and monitoring
                           of the reform process


B.   Program
     Objectives

Enhanced resource          Expenditure allocation for enhanced         Finance department to provide         Difficulty in achieving
allocation to social       capital outlays and non-personnel           budget documents; SBFAU to            targeted improvement in
sector, within a           expenditure on health, and adequate         undertake regular monitoring, and     public finances because of
medium-term                budgetary provision for sustainability of   report to be provided to ADB on       adverse (exogenous)
framework of               DPEP within framework of fiscal             compliance with the agreed policy     conditions, and inability to
sustainable public         consolidation, reflected in reduction in    measures; plan to ensure              mobilize resources to fund
finances and               state's primary deficit from budgeted       protection of social sector outlays   increase in social sector
strengthened fiscal        3.4% of SDP to about 0.7% of SDP            from budgetary cuts                   spending
management, to
foster social              Committee to prepare SSN design;            Report on SSN design; ADB             Government support and
development and            preparation of policy on rehabilitation     review of rehabilitation policy prior commitment to SSN
satisfy basic human                                                    to finalization
needs while
mitigating social
impact of
development
          36       Appendix 1




Design Summary                  Targets/Measurable Indicators              Monitoring Mechanism                Assumptions/Risks
Improving corporate          Enhanced efficiency, improved             Technical secretariat to be          Absence of political and
governance and               financial performance, and reduced        established with ADB TA, to          labor resistance to PSU
increased efficiency         fiscal burden of PSUs on the GoMP         oversee and advise on                reform and timely
of resource use              budget; reduced role of the               implementation of PSU reform;        development of capacities
through restructuring        Government in commercial activities       DPE to publish annual report on      of concerned agencies to
public sector                and enhanced accountability and           PSU performance, including           implement restructuring;
undertakings                 transparency of PSU management            reform progress                      conducive capital market
                                                                                                            conditions and active
                                                                                                            private sector participation
                                                                                                            to ensure success of PSU
                                                                                                            divestment
Evolving enabling            Private sector participation and          More transparent process of          Consensus between
environment for              sustainable sector development in the     investment, production,              bureaucracy and private
private sector               power, roads and transport, and           distribution of profits, and         sector, to avoid delay in
participation in key         housing sectors                           personnel decisions; reduction of    the preparation and
sectors                                                                subsidies and other direct           implementation of policy
                                                                       financial support for PSUs           action plan for promoting
                                                                                                            private sector involvement
                                                                       Sector policies in roads and
                                                                       transport and housing to be
                                                                       implemented; utilities pricing
                                                                       commission and State Electricity
                                                                       Regulatory Commission to be
                                                                       established
Promoting                    Guidelines for market-based               State environment policy to be       Acceptance by industry of
environmental                instruments; strengthened technical       implemented; time-bound action       market-based instruments
sustainability of            capacity of Pollution Control Board       plan for implementation of           and enhanced
economic                                                               market-based instruments             environmental monitoring
development
C. Program
    Components
                             Key parameters of fiscal performance      Finance department to provide        Adequate strengthening of
1.        Foster social
                             (i.e., fiscal deficit, expenditure        finance bill with details on new     fiscal management and
          development,
                             allocation) to be set as benchmarks       revenue measures and                 implementation capacity
          support
                                                                       expenditure reports; ready           of finance department;
          institutional
                                                                       reckoners for property               increased fiscal pressure
          strengthening,
                                                                       assessment                           caused by lower than
          and improve
                                                                                                            programmed revenue
          public finances;
                             Capacity building and institutional and   Provision of training; preparation   growth; pressure on
          the Program will
                             procedural strengthening                  of studies, implementation of        unproductive expenditure
          include
                                                                       recommendations, and reporting
                                                                       of impact including feedback on
                                                                       required changes
     a.     institutional    Establishment of the PRMC, headed         Establish SBFAU in the finance       Timely establishment of
            strengthening    by chief minister, and the Empowered      department; draft SSN design to      SBFAU; availability of
                             Committee on Public Finance Reform,       be submitted to ADB;                 adequately experienced
                             headed by chief secretary;                computerization and networking       staff; adequate capacity to
                             management information system for         of finance department's treasury     design and implement
                             finance department; committee for         operations for improved              SSN and proper
                             design and implementation of SSN          expenditure management and           monitoring
                                                                       control
      b. adoption and        The primary deficit to be reduced from    Finance department to provide        Exogenous factors, such
         implementation      3.4% of SDP in the FY1999 budget to       finance bill with details on new     as natural calamities, and
         of medium-          1.0% in the FY2001 budget and to          tax measures and expenditure         slippages in expenditure
         term fiscal         0.7% in the FY2002 budget; capital        reports                              control may adversely
         framework for       expenditure to be at least 1.6% of SDP                                         affect fiscal consolidation
         FY1999­             in FY1999, 2.0% of SDP in FY2001,
         FY2003              and 2.3% in FY2002
                                                                                                          Appendix 1         37



Design Summary              Targets/Measurable Indicators                Monitoring Mechanism                Assumptions/Risks


  c. improved            Increased wage flexibility by evolving      TA report on policy and              Resistance to reducing
     efficiency and      policy to unlink wage setting; decline in   regulatory framework of health       the size of government
     effectiveness       budgetary subsidies; reallocation of        and education sectors; TA report     employment; line
     of resource         expenditure to social services,             on computerization and/or            departments to resist
     use, through        particularly health and education;          networking of finance                reallocation of resources
                         increased effectiveness and efficiency      department; wage policy              to social sectors; pressure
                         of the payment and audit system                                                  on increase in
                         through computerization of finance                                               unproductive expenditure
                         department

   (i) rationalized      Prepared and implemented CIP;               Develop a system for monitoring      Adequate capacity of
       and               reviewed and implemented                    implementation of CIP; evolve        relevant departments to
       prioritized       recommendations of the study on             policy and introduce legislation     develop and implement
       expenditure       industrial incentives scheme;               on prohibition to absorb PSU         CIP; resisting pressure for
                         prohibited regularization of casual         employees into state government      regularizing casual and/or
                         and/or temporary (after 1988) workers       service                              temporary workers
                         into state government and PSUs and
                         of PSU employees into state
                         government


   (ii) reallocated      Adequate provision in the FY1999            ADB TA report; action plan on        Resistance of
        expenditure      budget and annually thereafter to clear     protection of social sector          bureaucracy to adopting
        to social        backlog of capital expenditure and          outlays; budget documents            social sector-friendly
        services         shortfall of non-personnel expenditure                                           policy in view of strong
                         in existing rural health facilities;                                             pressure on the overall
                         reduced state government                                                         budget
                         employment other than technical
                         positions in essential services and                                              Improved budget
                         police through attrition, abolished                                              management and control
                         posts, and reallocation of resources                                             to enable adequate
                         saved through attrition to poverty-                                              provision for sustainability
                         reducing social services; appropriate                                            of DPEP and allow
                         budgetary allocation equivalent to the                                           increased allocation for
                         central Government share of 85%, to                                              health and education
                         ensure sustainability of DPEP;                                                   expenditure
                         prepared and implemented action
                         plan, with ADB TA support, to ensure
                         that social sector outlays are protected
                         and national norms could be met in
                         due course

   (iii) shifted         Capital expenditure raised from 1.6%        Finance bill; expenditure reports;   Revenue shortfall,
         priority from   in the FY1999 budget to at least 2.3%       CIP                                  exogenous factors such
         current to      in the FY2002 budget                                                             as natural calamities, or
         capital                                                                                          inadequate compression
         expenditure                                                                                      of unproductive
                                                                                                          expenditure may tighten
                                                                                                          resource availability for
                                                                                                          increase in capital
                                                                                                          expenditure
    38        Appendix 1




Design Summary             Targets/Measurable Indicators                Monitoring Mechanism               Assumptions/Risks
  d. mitigated          GoMP to issue notification of the           Notification of setting up of SRF;   Acceptance by
     social impact      operationalization of SRF and allocate      report to be submitted to public     bureaucracy of allocation
     of economic        appropriate resources in the FY1999         resource management                  of adequate budgetary
     development        and subsequent budgets                      committee and ADB                    resources to SRF

                        Design and implement SSN                    Establish a committee with           Full cooperation between
                                                                    responsibility for preparing and     ADB consultant team,
                                                                    implementing SSN; review SSN,        state government, and
                                                                    including socioeconomic survey       PSU management
                                                                    of affected groups                   required

                                                                                                         Weak management
                                                                                                         capacity of SSN
                                                                                                         committee in preparing
                                                                                                         guidelines for SSN

  e. strengthened
     resource
     mobilization
     through

   (i) rationalization Tax base to be widened by reducing           Finance department to provide        Acceptability by the
       of sales tax    the number of goods exempted from            new tax rate schedule; systems       business community of
       system          93 to 39 items; and reducing the             plan for full computerization of     the reform proposals,
                       number of sales tax slabs from 6 to the      sales tax administration             under which industrial
                       4 main rates of 2%, 4%, 8%, and 12%                                               concessions and tax
                                                                                                         exemptions would be
                                                                                                         reduced or eliminated

   (ii) phasing-in of   Implementation, through appropriate         Legislative bill; review of the      Higher than programmed
        VAT system      legislation, of the first stage of VAT by   impact of VAT                        revenue losses from tax
                        lowering tax on manufacturing inputs;                                            reduction/input tax relief
                        subsequently, by June 2001, full                                                 might delay improvement
                        introduction of VAT                                                              in fiscal position

   (iii) reform of      Reduced maximum rate on                     New tax rate schedules to be         Acceptability of new
        stamp duty      conveyances; and rationalized stamp         provided; annual finance bill;       valuation of property;
        system in       duty on capital market instruments          establishment of central and         timely establishment of
        line with                                                   regional valuation cells             valuation cells; adequate
        recommenda                                                                                       capacity in applying new
        tions of the                                                                                     valuation methodology
        1996 and
        1997 state
        finance
        ministers
        committee
        on stamp
        duty


   (iv) improved        Water charges to cover at least 50% of      Finance department to report on      Acceptability of increased
       cost             O&M cost by June 1998 and 75% by            revised water tariff and progress    utilities prices
       recovery         March 2001; prepared time-bound             on implementation of the action
                        action plan and implement system of         plan
                        user charges on utilities
                                                                                                        Appendix 1        39



Design Summary            Targets/Measurable Indicators                Monitoring Mechanism               Assumptions/Risks
2. To undertake        Operational and institutional               Transfer nodal responsibility for    Appropriate technical
   public enterprise   strengthening, including approval of        reform of all state PSUs from line   capacity of DPE and
   reform and          policy guidelines on public sector          departments to DPE; technical        timeliness in staff
   improve             reform; setting up empowered                secretariat to report on progress    assignment and
   corporate           committee and technical secretariat;        of implementation of PSU reform;     recruitment to strengthen
   governance, the     establishing procedures for enhanced        financial criteria requiring         DPE; resistance to closure
   Program will        accountability of PSU management            minimum rate of return on public     of PSUs and labor
                                                                   investment to be introduced          retrenchment among PSU
                       Restructuring 14 PSUs, including                                                 employees and society as
                       closure and/or merger of nine PSUs,                                              a whole
                       sale and/or lease of assets of one
                       PSU, full or partial divestment of four
                       PSUs

                       VRS, and retraining of employees
                       affected by PSU restructuring
   a. develop policy   GoMP to (i) approve policy guidelines       Technical secretariat to submit a    Setting up technical
      and              on public sector restructuring and          report on restructuring and          secretariat with
      institutional    reform; (ii) set up ECPR, headed by         divestment of PSUs and the           appropriate technical
      mechanism        chief secretary; and (iii) establish        strengthening of PSUs'               capacity to undertake
      for PSU          technical secretariat to assist in PSU      accounting systems                   PSU reform; adequate
      reform           reform                                                                           monitoring and guidance
                                                                                                        from ECPR

   b. improve          DPE to assume nodal responsibility for      DPE to establish procedures for      Staffing DPE with
      corporate        reform of state PSUs; DPE to review         enhanced accountability of           employees with
      governance       candidates for appointment of all           managing director for PSU            appropriate qualification;
      and support      functional directors on professional        performance and introduce            decisiveness in
      institutional    basis, with due regard to PSUs'             appropriate monitoring               implementation of
      strengthening    service rules                               mechanism                            accountability procedures
                                                                                                        and adequacy of
                                                                                                        monitoring for compliance

   c. increase         GoMP to introduce financial criteria        DPE to issue and publish annual      Adequate capacity of
      operational      regarding return of investment for          report on performance of PSUs        GoMP to enforce the new
      freedom of       dividend payment and establish                                                   operational framework for
      PSUs             investment limit for which PSUs do not                                           PSUs
                       need approval from government;
                       provision of performance incentives by
                       differentiation in remuneration linked to
                       productivity and PSUs' financial
                       performance

   d. restructure      49% divestment of MPSIDC                    Technical secretariat to provide
      and/or divest                                                regular reports on progress
      PSUs             49% divestment of corporate units of        made
                       MPSRTC

                       74% divestment of MPSAIDC

                       25% divestment of MPSFC under SFC
                       1951 (GoMP shareholding further
                       reduced to not more than 26%,
                       contingent upon amendment to the
                       SFC)

                       Sale and/or lease of the properties of
                       MPSTDC
     40       Appendix 1




Design Summary             Targets/Measurable Indicators               Monitoring Mechanism                Assumptions/Risks


   e. close and/or      Closure of MPSLDC, MPSExC,                 Government orders for closure of     Acceptability by labor
      merge PSUs        MPSFishDC, MPSLandDC, MPSIC                PSUs; approvals from Board for       unions and employees of
                        and MPSTC                                  Individual and Financial             closure of PSU; timely
                                                                   Reconstruction and its appellate     conclusion of legal
                                                                   authority for closure of managed     process of PSU closure;
                                                                   mills of MPSTC; GoMP to report       adequacy of resource
                                                                   to ADB on settlement of workers'     availability for voluntary
                                                                   and creditor's dues                  retirement scheme

                        Incorporate MPHB; subsequent               GoMP to approve restructuring        Synergies from merger do
                        divestment of 49% of GoMP's share in       and merger proposal                  not materialize; adequacy
                        MPHB; closure of MPSCB and                                                      in settlement of workers'
                        MPPHC                                                                           dues

   f. initiate reform   Review and assessment of constraints       Report on the financial              Full cooperation from
      of                in cooperatives sector and                 performance of cooperatives          cooperatives sector
      cooperatives      recommendations to enhance their           sector (with ADB TA support)
      sector            operational freedom and efficiency


3. To promote           GoMP to introduce legal and                GoMP to prepare power system         Development of
   enabling policy      regulatory frameworks for key sectors;     master plan and sector CIPs;         outstanding issues at the
   environment for      setting up of independent electricity      adjustment in tariffs in the power   central government level
   private              regulatory authority, utilities pricing    and roads and transport sectors;     on sector policies
   participation in     committee, and rent tribunal               report on impact of amendment        regarding private sector
   key sectors, the                                                to Rent Control Act                  participation: political and
   Program will                                                                                         public acceptability of
   support                                                                                              increasing power tariff, toll
                                                                                                        charges, and rents

                        Rationalization of routes; guidelines      State roads policy; state            Adequate capacity for
                        and procedure for private sector           transport policy; report on          developing effective
                        participation                              experience with private sector       framework for private
                                                                   projects                             sector participation

                        Institutional strengthening of PWD         A private sector cell to be          Availability of required
                                                                   established and operationalized,     expertise and experience
                                                                   which will provide report to ADB     by PWD staff
                        Improve policy framework for private
                        sector investment in housing sector by     Amendment to State Rent              Timely approval of the
                        amending the State Rent Control Act        Control Act to be enacted            amendment

   a. power sector      GoMP to (i) establish an independent       GoMP to include in the finance       Timely operationalization
      reform            MPERC; (ii) make MPERC fully               minister's 1998/99 budget            of MPERC; acceptance by
                        operational by March 2000; and             speech detailed explanation          agricultural and domestic
                        (iii) have MPERC announce its first        indicating full amount of subsidy    consumers of increase in
                        revision of electricity tariffs no later   on account of electricity            electricity tariffs
                        than 120 days after becoming               consumption to agriculture
                        operational                                sector; notification for
                                                                   establishment of MPERC; written
                                                                   directions to MPERC on
                                                                   minimum level of tariffs for
                                                                   agriculture
                                                                                                         Appendix 1       41



Design Summary             Targets/Measurable Indicators                Monitoring Mechanism               Assumptions/Risks
    b. roads and        (i) creating policy for private sector      State transport policy and state     Appropriate
       transport        participation; (ii) rationalizing routes;   roads policy to be announced         implementation of the
       sector reform    (iii) strengthening PWD's capacity to                                            denationalization of
                        process private sector projects; and        A private sector cell to be          routes; adequate
                        (iv) developing tariff setting              established and operationalized      strengthening of PWD;
                        mechanism and reviewing existing toll       within PWD                           consensus between PWD
                        rates for roads and bridges                                                      and private sponsors on
                                                                    GoMP to prepare a plan for           the contractual
                                                                    establishing a utilities pricing     arrangements for private
                                                                    commission                           sector projects

    c. housing          Providing for market-based rental           Enact amendment to State Rent        Timely approval of the
       sector reform    increases and exempting newer               Control Act; report on impact of     amendment; resistance to
                        properties from provisions of State         the amendment on the level of        rent increases
                        Rent Control Act; setting up of rent        rents and on sector investment
                        tribunal


 4. To promote
    sustainable
    development, the
    Program will
    support

    a. strengthened     Developed market-based instruments;         A state environment policy to be     Adequate capacity of state
       environmental    strengthened technical capacities of        prepared and announced; time-        agencies to formulate and
       management       the PCB and its regional offices;           bound action plan for                implement the action plan,
                        training program to PCB staff and           implementation of appropriate        and effectiveness in
                        industrial associations on                  policies, including market-based     environmental monitoring
                        environmental monitoring and                instruments for environmental        and management
                        management                                  management to be prepared

    b. mitigation of    Preparation of policy on rehabilitation     Submit draft rehabilitation policy   Timely preparation of
       social impact    to address social impacts of economic       to ADB for review                    rehabilitation policy;
       of economic      development and ensure policy                                                    adequacy of guidelines for
       development      framework for project intervention on                                            resettlement issues
                        socially sustainable basis                                                       associated with project
                                                                                                         implementation

ADB = Asian Development Bank, CIP = core investment program, DPE = Department of Public Enterprises, DPEP = District
Primary Education Program, ECPR = Empowered Committee on PSU Reform, GoMP = government of Madhya Pradesh,
MPERC = Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission, MPHB = Madhya Pradesh Housing Board, MPSLandDC = Madhya
Pradesh State Land Development Corporation, MPPHC = Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation, MPSAIDC = Madhya
Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation, MPSCB = Madhya Pradesh Slum Clearance Board, MPSExC = Madhya
Pradesh State Export Corporation, MPSFC = Madhya Pradesh State Financial Corporation, MPSFishDC = Madhya Pradesh State
Fisheries Development Corporation, MPSIC = Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation, MPSIDC = Madhya Pradesh State
Industrial Development Corporation, MPSRTC = Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, MPSTC = Madya Pradesh
State Textile Corporation, MPSTDC = Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation, O&M = operation and
maintenance, PCB = Pollution Control Board, PRMC = Public Resource Management Committee, PSU = public sector undertaking,
PWD = Public Works Department, SBFAU = state budgeting and fiscal analysis unit, SDP = state domestic product, SFC = State
Financial Corporations Act, SRF = state renewal fund, SSN = social safety net, TA = technical assistance, VAT = value-added tax,
VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
42       Appendix 1
                    Table A1.2: Comparison of MPPRMP Program Structure as Outlined in the Policy Framework,
                               Design and Monitoring Framework, Policy Matrix, and Loan Agreement
                                                                                                                                                  Loan
 Objectives and Scope         Policy Framework                        Design and Monitoring Framework                       Policy Matrix       Agreement
   (RRP Section B)             (RRP Section C)                                  (RRP Appendix 1)                            (Appendix 3)       (Schedule 5)
                                                                Impact/Outcomes                   Components
The objective is to support                          The impact was to support GoMP's
GoMP's reform efforts to                             reform efforts to foster social
foster social development                            development and sustainable economic
and sustainable economic                             growth through improving public
growth by addressing                                 resource management and enhancing
prevailing resource                                  public expenditure to social sector
and implementation                                   through three objectives:
constraints in Madhya
Pradesh, focusing on:
1. Enhancing resource         1. Capacity building   1. Enhanced resource allocation to      1. Foster social               A. Social        A. Social
    allocation to social      and institutional      social sector, within a medium-term     development, support           development,     development,
    sectors to support        strengthening for      framework of sustainable public         institutional strengthening,   institutional    institutional
    human development         improved fiscal        finances and strengthened fiscal        and improve the public         strengthening,   strengthening,
                              management and         management, to foster social            finances                       and public       and public
                              sustainable public     development and satisfying basic                                       finance          finance
                              finances               human needs while mitigating social
                                                     impact of development
                              2. Reallocation of
                              expenditures to
                              social services
2. Improving public           3. Public enterprise   2. Improving corporate governance and   2. To undertake public         B. Public        B. Public
   finances and fiscal        reform                 increased efficiency of resource use    enterprise reform and          enterprise       enterprise reform
   capabilities and                                  through restructuring public sector     improve corporate              reform and       and corporate
   management, and                                   undertakings                            governance                     corporate        governance
   fostering efficient                                                                                                      governance
   allocation through
   reform of public
   enterprises, including
   corporate governance
   reform
3. Strengthening the          4. Evolving enabling   3. Evolving enabling environment for    3. To promote enabling         C. Enabling      C. Enabling
   policy, regulatory, and    framework              private sector participation in key     policy environment for         environment      environment for
   institutional                                     sectors                                 private participation in key   for private      private sector
   frameworks for private                                                                    sectors                        sector           involvement
   sector participation in                                                                                                  involvement
   key sectors
                                                4. Promoting environmental                  4. To promote sustainable
                                                sustainability of economic development      development
GoMP = Government of Madhya Pradesh, RRP = Report and recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors.
Source: ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India for the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource
Management Program. Manila (Loan 1717-IND, for $250 million, approved on 14 December).

                                                                                                                                                               42
                                                                                                        Appendix 1          43


         Table A1.3: Comparison of the Design and Monitoring Framework and Policy Matrix

   Design and Monitoring Framework (RRP Appendix 1)                               Policy Matrix (RRP Appendix 3)

 Components                           Outputs                         Objectives                      Policy Areas
 1. Foster social    i) institutional strengthening                A. Social            A. 1. Institutional strengthening
    development,     ii) adoption and implementation of            development,         A. 2. Medium-term fiscal framework
    support,         medium-term fiscal framework for              institutional
    institutional    FY1999­2003                                   strengthening, and
    strengthening    iii) improved efficiency and                  public finance       A.7. Rationalization and prioritization of
    , and improve    effectiveness of resource use, through:                            expenditure and strengthening of
    the public       a) rationalized and prioritized                                    expenditure management
    finances         expenditure                                                        A. 8. Reallocation of expenditure to
                     b) reallocated expenditure to social                               social services and strengthening of
                     services                                                           institutional and legal frameworks for
                     c) shifted priority from current to capital                        enhanced cost recovery
                     expenditure
                     iv) mitigated social impact of economic                            A. 9. Mitigate social impact of economic
                     development                                                        development, including social safety net
                                                                                        mechanism for PSU reform
                     v) strengthened resource mobilization                              A. 3. Reform of sales tax system
                     through:                                                           A. 4. Phasing-in of VAT system and
                     a) rationalization of sales tax system                             strengthening of tax administration
                     b) phasing-in of VAT system                                        A. 5. Reform of stamp duty system and
                     c) reform of stamp duty system in line                             strengthening valuation system for
                     with recommendations of the 1996 and                               assessment of stamp duty and property
                     1997 state finance minister's committee                            tax
                     on stamp duty                                                      A. 6. Improved cost recovery
                     d) improved cost recovery

 2. To undertake     i) develop policy and institutional           B. Public            B. 1. Develop policy and Institutional
    public           mechanism for PSU reform                      enterprise reform    mechanism for PSU reform
    enterprise       ii) improve corporate governance and          and corporate        B. 2. Improve corporate governance and
    reform and       support institutional strengthening           governance           strengthen institutions
    improve          iii) increase operational freedom of
    corporate        PSUs
    governance       iv) restructure/divest PSUs                                        B. 3. Restructure and divest/privatize
                                                                                        PSUs
                     v) close/merge PSUs                                                B. 4. Merge and close PSUs; and
                                                                                        sell/lease of properties
                     vi) initiate reform of cooperatives sector                         B. 5. Initiate reform of cooperatives
                                                                                        sector
 3. To promote       i) power sector reform                        C. Enabling          C.1. Initiate power sector reform
    enabling         ii) roads and transport sector reform         environment for      C. 2. Develop policy and regulatory
    policy                                                         private sector       framework for promoting private sector
    environment                                                    involvement          participation in transport and roads
    for private                                                                         sectors
    participation                                                                       Strengthen capabilities of PWD to
    in key sectors                                                                      process private sector projects
                                                                                        Develop tariff setting mechanism
                     iii) housing sector reform                                         C. 3. Improve framework for private
                                                                                        investment in housing sector

 4. To promote       i) Strengthened environmental                                      C. 4. Improve environmental
    sustainable      management                                                         sustainability of economic development
    development                                                                         Strengthen environmental management
                     ii) mitigation of social impact of                                 C. 5. Social impact of economic
                     economic development                                               development

FY = fiscal year, PSU = public sector undertaking, PWD = Public Works Department, RRP = Report and recommendation of the
President to the Board of Directors, VAT = value added tax.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
44     Appendix 1



 Table A1.4: Reconstruction of Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program
          Design and Monitoring Framework Impact, Outcomes, and Outputs

           Impact / Outcomes                                           Outputs
Impact. Improved social development and
sustainable economic growth through
improved public resource management and
increased public expenditure to social sector

Outcome 1. A well-managed sustainable           1.1 Financial management institutions strengthened
medium-term public finance framework            1.2 Medium-term fiscal framework for FY1999­2003
enabling enhanced resource allocation to        implemented
social sectors                                  1.3 Improved revenue generation
                                                1.4 Improved expenditure efficiency and effectiveness

Outcome 2. Public sector undertakings           2.1 Institutional mechanisms in place to implement the
restructured to contribute to the economy by    public sector undertaking restructuring policy and
efficiently and effectively using state         program
resources                                       2.2 Selected PSUs privatized
                                                2.3 Selected PSUs restructured
                                                2.4 Selected PSUs closed
                                                2.5 Cooperatives sector reform initiated

Outcome 3. Private sector investment            3.1 An enabling policy and regulatory framework in
developing key sectors of the state economy     place
                                                3.2 Key power, road, and housing sector reforms
                                                initiated
FY = fiscal year, MPPRMP = Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program, PSU = public sector
undertakings.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                          STATUS OF PROGRAM COMPLIANCE

                                                        Table A2.1: Tranche Release Conditions

Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                               PCR Status                           PPER Status

I. Second Tranche

A. Social Development, Institutional Strengthening, and Public Finance Reform
(A.1) The primary deficit   Substantially complied with. The revised budget estimates      In July 2004, GoMP             The final audited figures show primary
                        a
      to be below 1.0%      for FY2001 indicated a primary deficit of 1.6% of NSDP         submitted an MOU to the        deficit to be 1.53% and capital
      of SDP in the         and capital expenditures of 1.5% of NSDP. As the state         Government under the           expenditures to be 1.51% of SDP in
      FY2001 budget,        was bifurcated on 1 November 2000, this revised estimate       SFRF. The MOU is currently     2001­2002. Both kept rising in
      and capital           refers to 7 months of the pre-bifurcated state and 5 months    being deliberated by the       subsequent years as a proportion of SDP,
      expenditure is to     of the post-bifurcated state. The bifurcation, which was not   Government for signing. The    with primary deficit dropping substantially
      be at least 2% of     envisioned at the time of program preparation, incurred        monitoring indicator used in   in 2004­2005.
      SDP by                significant fiscal costs not included in the original fiscal   the MOU is the ratio of
      September 2000.       framework. GoMP and ADB estimated that the fiscal costs        revenue balance to revenue
                            of bifurcation were 0.82% of FY2001 NSDP. This cost            receipt.
                            includes a revenue loss of 0.67% of NSDP based
                            predominately on a loss in electricity duties (0.43% of
                            NSDP), caused by higher-than-proportional high-priced
                            consumer capacity in Chhattisgarh, and a loss in own non-
                            tax revenue (0.19%), because of higher than proportional
                            mineral and forestry resources in Chhattisgarh. This
                            revenue loss can be considered a permanent loss. On the
                            expenditure side, GoMP incurred 0.15% of NSDP higher
                            expenditures, which have permanent and transitory
                            components. The permanent component is based on a
                            higher-than-proportional government salary bill (0.07% of
                            NSDP) for class III and IV staff members who were not
                            moved to Chhattisgarh. The transitory component (0.08%)
                            was due to expenditures to set up the capital at Raipur,
                            salary advances, and travel grants for those staff members
                            required to move and higher-than-proportional
                            expenditures on un-bifurcated organizations.




                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 2
                            Therefore, the fiscal costs of bifurcation account for three
                            quarters of the 1.10% of NSDP shortfall between program
                            targets and FY2001 revised estimates. Without bifurcation,
                            GoMP could have achieved the primary deficit of 1.0% of
                            NSDP and capital expenditure of 1.72% of NSDP, falling




                                                                                                                                                                        45
                            short of the targets by only 0.28% of NSDP. Other factors,
                            not associated with bifurcation, have led to a higher fiscal
                            deficit in FY2001 than originally envisioned under the
Condition                                    Status at Tranche Release                               PCR Status                    PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                    46
                              Program. The general power tariff award increase, which
                              was originally envisioned to be made within 90 days of the
                              establishment of the MPERC, did not materialize until
                              recently. There has also been slower-than-expected




                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 2
                              improvement in systems for tax and non-tax revenue
                              enhancement.

(A.2) Introduce the           Fully complied with. Legislation passed by Parliament on       Condition satisfied.   No further developments
      legislation on          12 December 2000 prevents the wholesale absorption of
      prohibition to          state PSU employees into government service. The
      absorb state PSU        legislation requires that any candidate for a government
      employees into          service post must be recruited on a competitive basis, with
      state government        due consideration for experience, qualifications, and merit.
      service.

(A.3) Review technical        Fully complied with. The plan to protect the level of social   Condition satisfied.   Social allocation ratio (social sector
      assistance              sector outlays was implemented through the first 3 years                              expenditures as a ratio of total
      recommendations,        of the Program. Since the time of program appraisal in July                           expenditures) actually shows reduction
      prepare and             1998 (FY1998) through the FY2001 budget, total social                                 from 1999­2000 levels in subsequent
      implement a plan to     expenditures increased by 11.4% in real terms, broken into                            years (23.71% in 2004­2005 as compared
      ensure that the         total education expenditures, which increased by 6.2%,                                to 34.24% in 1999­2000), but social
      present levels of       and total health expenditures, which increased by 28%.                                priority ratio is fairly steady. It should be
      social sector outlays                                                                                         noted that some of the social sector
      are protected from      Taking into account the bifurcation of the state, the                                 expenditure (central share of SSA and
      budgetary cuts,         protection of social expenditures is also sustained as a                              central share of some of the health
      integrate such plan     share of NSDP. Between FY1998 and FY2001, total social                                schemes such as reproductive and child
      in the overall CIP,     expenditures as a share of NSDP increased from 3.75% to                               health II) have moved out of the budget to
      and indicate how        4.01%, total education expenditures increased from 2.88%                              parastatals. Meeting national norms
      the national norms      to 2.94%, and total health expenditures from 0.87% to                                 appears to be still a long-term goal, as the
      on health and           1.07%.                                                                                gap between national averages and the
      education could be                                                                                            state indicators are closing only slowly.
      met as the state's      To account for yearly fluctuation and the bifurcation of the
      financial position      state, 3-year average expenditures for FY1998­FY2000,
      eases over time and     normalized for the impact of bifurcation, are compared with
      as additional           FY2001 expenditures. This comparison reveals that yearly
      exogenous               social expenditures increased by 3.6% between FY1998­
      assistance becomes      FY2000 and FY2001. Education expenditures remained
      available.              constant in real terms, while health expenditures increased
                              by 19%.
                              The investment component of the action plan is being
                              protected for FY2001­FY2004 by incorporation into the
                              statewide CIP, formalized under the Program. The state
                              CIP will be included in the November 2001 supplementary
                              budget documentation and will be an official component of
                              the FY2003 budget.
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                                PCR Status                     PPER Status
                           The plan to meet national norms in health and education
                           has been an input-based indicator in use for the past few
                           decades. Under the Program, the plan to meet national
                           norms has been formalized, and the first few years of the
                           plan have been integrated into the CIP, emphasizing the
                           need to allocate more resources as the state's financial
                           position eases over time and as additional resources
                           become available. For example, under current financial
                           conditions, the national norms will likely take about 10
                           years to meet, but could be met earlier with additional
                           resources.

(A.4) (not in RRP)         Fully complied with. Outlays are being made to meet this         Condition satisfied.   Capital expenditures have been rising
      Provide sufficient   objective. The Appraisal Mission estimated that a total of                              steadily and substantially in the first half of
      provision in the     Rs2.5 billion over 5 years was needed to eliminate the                                  the current decade; total capital outlay
      FY2001 state         backlog. Based on bifurcation of the state, in FY2001 the                               increased from 1.51% of SDP in FY2000
      budget to reduce     number of rural health centers under the control of GoMP                                to 4.59% in FY2004. In general, the
      the backlog of       was three quarters of the original. Therefore, the amount                               infrastructural requirements of the
      capital              to be allocated was Rs1.875 billion in FY2001, for an                                   education and health sector are likely to
      expenditures and     average of Rs375 million per year. In FY2001, the amount                                be fully met in another 2­3 years.
      shortfall of non-    of additional capital expenditure allocated to rural health                             However, it should be noted that
      personnel            was Rs323 million, falling slightly below the average                                   personnel problems in these sectors,
      expenditures in      expected. GoMP committed to recoup this Rs52 million by                                 particularly in remote rural areas, are still
      existing rural       increasing the average outlay to Rs388 million for the next                             acute.
      health facilities.   4 years and formalizing this commitment in the state CIP.

(A.5) During the           Fully complied with. A government order was issued on            Condition satisfied.   Under judicial review, some of the daily
      Program period,      8 January 2000 to reduce government employment by                                       wage workers had to be reinstated from
      state government     30% as a medium-term goal. As a result, no increase in                                  2004. The policy of natural attrition
      employment other     staff has occurred since the start of the Program, and                                  continues, and new schoolteachers are no
      than technical       posts in pre-bifurcated Madhya Pradesh were identified                                  more employees of the state government.
      positions in         (accounting for 12% of government employment) which                                     Expenditure contractions, in general, do
      essential social     could be abolished over the 5-year period FY2000­                                       not appear to have been large enough to
      services and         FY2004. A total 19,448 vacant posts were abolished                                      (a) control deficits and (b) increase social
      police to be         immediately. The remaining 37,000 posts were identified                                 sector expenditures. In general, deficits
      reduced through      as superfluous and have been ordered to be abolished on                                 have been controlled, but overall social
      natural attrition,   the date the incumbent retires. All departments were                                    sector expenditures could not be




                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 2
      and such posts       asked to retrench daily wage employees appointed after                                  increased, although the more important of
      abolished.           31 December 1998. As a result, various departments have                                 those seem to have received due priority.
      Resources saved      retrenched approximately 22,000 daily workers. In
      through natural      addition, the Government introduced contracts for the
      attrition to be      education department in place of permanent government
      reallocated to       staff to allow for flexibility and increase incentives. During
      poverty-reducing     FY2002, total government salaries for the state have




                                                                                                                                                                     47
      social services.     decreased for the first time (comparing bifurcated Madhya
                           Pradesh in FY2002 with hypothetically bifurcated Madhya
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                    PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                  48
                            Pradesh in FY2001).
(A.6) Use SRF funds for     Fully complied with. GoMP made an Rs1.5 billion provision     Condition satisfied.   GoMP had made available required funds
      restructuring         for the SRF in the FY2001 budget, and the SRF was                                    to MPSRTC for VRS to its employees from
      and/or closure of     activated in September 2000. A total of Rs20 million was                             its own funds in FY2006 and FY2007.




                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 2
      PSUs; replenish       disbursed in FY2001 for VRSs. Some Rs1.5 billion was                                 Similarly, GoMP had settled most of the
      SRF through           allocated in the FY2002 budget and Rs570 million was                                 old liabilities pertaining to the banks and
      required further      disbursed. An addition Rs1 billion will be allocated to the                          financial institutions for the PSUs identified
      allocation in the     SRF in a supplemental budget to enable disbursement of a                             for closure under this Program.
      FY2001 budget.        VRS for MPSRTC (estimated at Rs1.9 billion). The SRF
                            committee was reconstituted as the cabinet subcommittee,
                            and schemes and/or guidelines were extended for the next
                            3 years.

(A.7) Establish a           Fully complied with. The committee was established in         Condition satisfied.   No further action after program completion
      committee to          January 2000. The draft SSN was submitted to ADB in                                  as SRF discontinued. GoMP decided in
      design and            January 2001. The Mission provided comments, and a                                   FY2002 not to undertake SSN on the
      prepare the SSN       redraft of the SSN has been prepared. The draft report                               grounds that the scheme could create a
      and submit the        proposed retraining of displaced employees using existing                            precedent for all public and private bodies
      draft SSN design      industrial training institutes, training centers, and other                          desiring to undertake downsizing, leading
      to ADB.               institutions. The SSN also identified a counseling service                           to cascading cost implications
                            to help former PSU employees use the cash compensation
                            received from the VRS payment for investment and
                            entrepreneurship. Monitoring of displaced employees, and
                            placement services are also envisioned in the plan.
                            Implementation of the SSN will occur through the technical
                            secretariat being established under the Program.


B. Public Enterprise Reform and Corporate Governance
(B.1) DPE must assume       Fully complied with. A government order designating the       Condition satisfied.   DPE maintains nodal responsibility but
      nodal                 DPE as the responsible department for PSU reform was                                 has a small staff with limited capacity to
      responsibility for    issued on 1 March 2000. DPE has led the current effort to                            meet envisaged mandate.
      reform of all state   close and restructure nonviable PSUs covered by the
      PSUs.                 Program, and has been responsible for introducing
                            governance and performance-based enhancements to the
                            management of PSUs remaining under state ownership. In
                            particular, DPE is charged with formulating and monitoring,
                            on a quarterly basis, MOUs with 34 large PSUs and
                            16 smaller PSUs and cooperatives. DPE is also a member
                            of the committee to vet and select functional directors for
                            PSUs, establishing financially based criteria for dividends
                            and instructing PSU to link pay scales with profitability.
Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                                 PCR Status                             PPER Status
(B.2) Implement           Substantially complied with. GoMP decided on 18 April            Currently, the ratio of buses     GoMP will liquidate MPSRTC, when the
      restructuring of    2001 to restructure MPSRTC by dissolving the corporation         to employees in MPSRTC is         bifurcation of assets and liabilities of
      MPSRTC,             and forming four geographically based corporate units            1:12; most of the fleet is in     MPSRTC between Madhya Pradesh and
      including through   under the Companies Act, 1956. By transforming the               need of repair or                 Chhattisgarh is complete. Out of the
      formation of four   company from a state transport corporation to four               replacement.                      10,600 employees of the corporation,
      corporate units     companies, the units will each be more manageable, will                                            8,900 have been offered VRS, with
      with operational    achieve greater autonomy to make further efficiency              By cabinet order, 4,453           disbursement to 8,300 employees having
      autonomy, and       enhancements, and will be easier to divest. GoMP issued          workers have opted for VRS.       been completed and the VRS
      introduce           the order to form the four companies on 26 August 2001.          An additional 4,500 can be        compensation for 600 employees
      efficiency          Assets and liabilities are being divided among the new           given VRS as well, at a total     scheduled to be disbursed shortly. Of the
      enhancing           units pending the bifurcation of the company, necessary to       cost of Rs2.1 billion.            balance 1,700 employees, 500 who opted
      measures.           split the balance sheet between Madhya Pradesh and the           However, MPSRTC does not          for VRS have been retained because of
                          new state of Chhattisgarh according to Section 58 (3) of         have the resources to fund        certain legal cases and the need for
                          the MPSRA 2000.                                                  the scheme and the labor          adequate human resources to carry out
                                                                                           unions oppose VRS to              the winding-up process. Another VRS for
                          In the meantime, GoMP has taken actions in advance of            maintain their political power.   the balance 1,200 employees has been
                          bifurcation to introduce efficiency measures by (i) allowing                                       announced. The last date for submission
                          the company to adjust tariffs up to 7.5% per year;               Since 1999, while the price       of applications is 28 October 2006, with
                          (ii) introducing commercial principles, including the            of petrol has doubled, the        50­60% of these employees expected to
                          elimination of new guarantees, government appointments,          fares have not been adjusted      signify their acceptance.
                          and bus tickets for special groups; and (iii) offering a VRS     accordingly. On average,
                          to 5,800 workers. Disbursement of the VRS for the 5,800          MPSRTC is not able to pay         Around 510 routes have been leased to
                          workers is awaiting the following: (i) Rs1 billion additional    more than 70% of basic            private companies, with lease rentals of
                          allocation to the SRF was requested for a supplemental           wages of its employees.           approximately Rs27.5 million per month
                          budget; (ii) a council of ministers decision on restructuring    High overhead costs and           being received and applied toward
                          the transport sector; and (iii) bifurcation of the company, to   inefficient management of         meeting administrative expenses,
                          ensure that the VRS is not disbursed for workers who will        the organization persist.         financing court cases and payment of old
                          ultimately work in Chhattisgarh. Based on the TA                                                   arrears.
                          consultant's technical review of the company, which
                          engendered doubt regarding its future viability, GoMP is                                           GoMP has attached assets of the
                          considering a more significant restructuring of the state                                          company against the amount of around
                          transport sector that could involve a much more significant                                        Rs8 billion outstanding from MPSRTC
                          downsizing of the company.                                                                         toward road tax. While creditors
                                                                                                                             guaranteed by GoMP have been repaid,
                                                                                                                             NBFCs that extended lease finance have
                                                                                                                             been approached with a one-time
                                                                                                                             settlement scheme. The process of




                                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 2
                                                                                                                             auctioning the bus fleet has already
                                                                                                                             commenced, while assets such as
                                                                                                                             machinery are being disposed of through
                                                                                                                             open auction. The entire liquidation
                                                                                                                             process is expected to be completed by
                                                                                                                             2008, with approvals from various
                                                                                                                             government agencies having been




                                                                                                                                                                         49
                                                                                                                             obtained.
Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                                 PCR Status                              PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                              50
(B.3) Undertake           Substantially complied with. The classification of assets         Currently, the NPAs of           Post-bifurcation of assets and liabilities of
      financial and       has been completed according to Reserve Bank of India             MPSFC are 45%. It has            MPSFC and the division of employees
      organizational      norms, provisions have been applied accordingly, and the          been trying to clean its         between Madhya Pradesh and
      restructuring of    accounts are subject to annual audit. The company has             portfolio by restructuring its   Chhattisgarh, a VRS scheme was offered




                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 2
      MPSFC including     paid its major overdue obligations as of 31 March 1999,           own debt and providing one-      and accepted by 15 employees, with the
      classifying         but has negative equity of Rs1 billion on the                     time settlement schemes to       disbursement having been effected out of
      nonperforming       reclassification.                                                 its customers that defaulted     MPSFC's own funds. Two loss-making
      assets and fully                                                                      on their loans earlier.          branches have been closed down as part
      provision as per    Given that the classification has revealed that more than                                          of organizational restructuring measures.
      applicable norms    30% of its assets are nonperforming and its core clientele        The retirement age has been
      on basis of March   represents a risky sector of the borrowing community,             reduced from 60 to 58, and       An MOU was executed with SIDBI in 2003
      1999 accounts,      MPSFC finds its viability in question. Under these                financially unviable branch      facilitating reduction of interest on loans by
      discharging         conditions, GoMP has prudently ruled out recapitalization         offices (4 of 13) have been      2% and the provision of refinancing at
      overdue             through injection of new budgetary funds. Due to the high         closed, which reduced            concessional rates. Financial restructuring
      obligations, and    level of contingent liabilities in the balance sheet of           MPSFC's administrative           involving settlement of high cost bonds
      re-capitalizing     MPSFC, immediate liquidation has also been ruled out.             expenses by 23%. They are        worth Rs680 million placed with SBI and
      MPSFC to ensure                                                                       ready to offer VRS to a          Bank of Baroda was completed. Moreover,
      compliance with     Instead, GoMP has instructed the corporation to downsize          number of their employees,       while SLR Bonds amounting to around
      capital adequacy    and cut costs to reduce losses and limit GoMP's exposure.         but have no resources to         Rs770 million have been prepaid/
      requirements.       The company prepared a performance-based action plan              finance the scheme.              redeemed, negotiations for restructuring/
                          in August 2001 for operational restructuring. The                 Their organizational             reduction of SLR bond liability of around
                          restructuring plan strategy has at its core (i) performance       restructuring efforts are        Rs700 million, owing to various public
                          indicators that will be monitored and verified by a third         ongoing.                         sector banks, are in progress.
                          party, (ii) branch closure and early retirement to reduce
                          noninterest operational costs, (iii) refinancing of its funding                                    GoMP has also provided share capital
                          sources to reduce interest costs, and (iv) a cap of                                                support of Rs40 million besides a short-
                          guaranteed funding at current levels to prevent additional                                         term loan of Rs600 million in FY2006 to
                          GoMP exposure to the company. Bifurcation of the                                                   finance the cash deficit.
                          company is necessary prior to implementation of the
                          downsizing plan, as the result of the MPSRA 2000. The                                              While disbursements increased to
                          bifurcation scheme was prepared by the board of MPSFC,                                             Rs1.15 billion in FY2006 (Rs420 million in
                          was approved by its general body, and is awaiting orders                                           FY2004), recovery has marginally
                          to be issued by the Government, according to the MPSRA.                                            improved to Rs920 million from Rs830
                                                                                                                             million in FY2004. The capital adequacy
                                                                                                                             ratio continues to be negative owing to
                                                                                                                             accumulated losses of the SOE, which
                                                                                                                             aggregated to Rs2.27 billion on
                                                                                                                             31 March 2006 (Rs2.16 billion on
                                                                                                                             31 March 2004). NPAs declined to 25% of
                                                                                                                             MPSFC's total loan portfolio on 31 March
                                                                                                                             2006 from 47% on 31 March 2004.
Condition                               Status at Tranche Release                               PCR Status                    PPER Status
(B.4) Close the four     Fully complied with. Operational closure is based on (i) the   Condition satisfied.   MPLeaDC. Official liquidator is yet to be
      corporations and   order for closure; (ii) operations having been ceased; and                            appointed in respect of MPLeaDC, with
      the wholly owned   (iii) a VRS offered to all but core employees needed for                              legal advice and secretarial assistance on
      units of MPSIC;    windup. All companies have been closed by order, and a                                last mill closure required by the SOE. A
      report on          VRS has been offered to all employees of the five                                     total of 97 former employees have filed a
      settlement of      companies and one additional company (slated for third                                joint appeal challenging their
      workers' and       tranche release). Disbursement of the VRS took place for                              retrenchment, with the matter pending
      creditors' dues.   82% of the scheduled 3,200 employees from the five                                    before the M.P. High Court. Four tanneries
                         companies. In addition, as a proactive measure, GoMP                                  of MPLeaDC have been closed and efforts
                         advanced closure for MPSTC (scheduled for third                                       to dispose of their properties are in
                         tranche), disbursed VRS for 68% of the staff (the balance                             progress. While GoMP's decision on
                         is delayed by individual court disputes over VRS amount),                             assets of Damoh tannery is awaited,
                         closed the managed and owned mills, and retrenched                                    efforts to dispose off the assets of
                         almost 5,000 workers under the Industrial Disputes Act .                              Narsingarh tannery are ongoing, while the
                         MPSFishDC. The closure order was issued on 17 March                                   matter relating to two tanneries in
                         1998, and the corporation was subsequently merged with                                Mandsaur and Barhwani has been
                         the Fisheries Federation (an apex body of the Fisheries                               referred to the respective district collectors
                         Cooperative Union) on 31 August 1999. As the operations                               for a decision on alternative use of the
                         of the PSU are no longer under the jurisdiction of GoMP,                              facilities. Auction in respect of other
                         wages for 500 employees are no longer a state obligation.                             usable assets is in progress, while the
                                                                                                               lease for the Emporium Building in Bhopal
                         MPSLandDC. The closure order was issued on 7 June                                     has been terminated and possession
                         2001, and operations ceased on 30 June 2001. The issue                                handed back to the owner. A claim of
                         of "interim relief" for workers, which prevented earlier                              Rs6.1 million has been preferred with
                         disbursement of VRS payments, was resolved. The VRS                                   GoMP for settlement of claims of certain
                         scheme for 567 people was offered, and 552 workers                                    creditors and for meeting legal expenses.
                         accepted it. The SRF approved the VRS payment, and
                         disbursement of Rs174 million took place on 10                                        MPSExC. The operations were
                         September 2001.                                                                       discontinued with effect from March 2002
                         MPSLDC. The closure order was issued on 4 June 1998                                   with 12 permanent employees retained
                         and operations ceased in August 2000. The VRS and                                     and 48 employees taking VRS funded
                         statutory dues amounting to Rs113 million were disbursed                              through SRF. The entire business of
                         to all 132 employees, apart from a core staff of 13, on                               MPSExC was vested in Madhya Pradesh
                         31 October 2000.                                                                      Trade & Investment Facilitation
                                                                                                               Corporation in June 2004. In the
                         MPSExC. The final order to close was issued on 25 July
                                                                                                               intervening period between March 2002
                         2001. Operations, apart from winding up on the order,
                                                                                                               (when the closure of MPSExC took effect)
                         ceased in May 2001. Following receipt of the chief




                                                                                                                                                                Appendix 2
                                                                                                               and June 2004, the business had been
                         minister's closure order, the VRS was offered to all
                                                                                                               transferred to MPSIndDC.
                         remaining 63 employees. The SRF will approve for
                         payment of the VRS is set by the end of November 2001                                 MPSFishDC. No further action required,
                         with disbursement to take place by the end of 2001.                                   as the condition was complied with at the
                         MPSIC. The company has closed 19 units in four phases.                                time of tranche release.
                         In phase one, four units were ordered closed on 3 July
                                                                                                               MPSLandDC. Not able to confirm the
                         1999, and disbursement of the VRS for 212 employees




                                                                                                                                                                51
                                                                                                               status of remaining employees or the sale
                         (Rs48 million) was made on 2 February 2001. In phase
                                                                                                               of assets and settlement of outstanding
                         two, two sugar mills were ordered to close on 28 August
                                                                                                               liabilities.
Condition                                    Status at Tranche Release                                PCR Status     PPER Status




                                                                                                                                   52
                             2000 and disbursement for 1,261 employees
                             (Rs163 million) was made on 10 September 2001. In
                             phase three, 11 units were ordered closed on
                             12 September 2001, and the VRS was offered to the




                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
                             remaining 315 workers on 27 September 2001.
                             Disbursement is scheduled to take place by 31 March
                             2002. In phase four, two units currently under
                             management contracts with private parties will be closed
                             after the contracts expire in March 2002.
                             MPSTC. The corporation was scheduled for closure before
                             the third tranche but has been closed earlier than planned.
                             The company closed two managed mills and one owned
                             mill and 4,780 workers were retrenched under the
                             Industrial Disputes Act. The MPSTC headquarters was
                             ordered closed on 3 July 1998. VRS was disbursed to 369
                             (Rs140 million) of the 539 headquarters workers on
                             23 March 2001.


C. Enabling Environment for Private Sector Involvement
(C.1) Make MPERC             Fully complied with. MPERC was established in June 2000          Condition satisfied.
      fully operational      and made fully operational in accordance with Chapter IV
      by                     of the ERC act. Since then, GoMP has implemented power
      (i) establishment      reform far beyond the stage envisioned by the Program.
      and incorporation      The Madhya Pradesh Vidyut Sudhar Adhiniyim (Electricity
      of the MPERC in        Act), 2000, approved by the Madhya Pradesh legislative
      accordance with        assembly in November 2000 and made effective in July
      Chapter IV of the      2001, is the most progressive power sector reform act in
      ERC Act; and           India to date. In addition to subsuming and expanding the
      (ii) finalization of   powers of MPERC through the creation of the MPERC, it
      the rules of the       includes provision for (i) restructuring of the MPSEB, (ii)
      MPERC in               metering of all consumers, (iii) rationalization of tariffs so
      accordance with        that all classes of consumers will pay at least 75% of cost
      Sections 57 and        of supply over 5 years, (iv) budget provision for MPERC
      59 of the ERC Act.     for the next 5 years, and (v) arbitration with the Central
                             Electricity Regulatory Commission. Rules of the MPERC
                             were developed and notarized under the ERC act. Under
                             the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Act, the MPERC powers
                             have been expanded. Therefore, additional rules for
                             MPERC are needed to reflect the expanded powers.
                             These rules are current being drafted by MPERC with the
                             assistance of TA provided in preparation for the Madhya
                             Pradesh power sector development program.
Condition                                   Status at Tranche Release                                 PCR Status                            PPER Status
(C.2) Announce the          Fully complied with. PWD has framed various road                  Condition satisfied.           The policy on road development in
      State Roads           development programs under national highways, central                                            Madhya Pradesh 2001­2010 provided
      Policy.               road funds, bond roads, normal plan roads, and non-plan                                          input to the Madhya Pradesh State Roads
                            works. These programs were included in the roads sector                                          Act promulgated on 2 July 2005. The act
                            CIP and integrated in to the overall state CIP.                                                  provided statutory authority for the
                                                                                                                             MPRDC as the state's highway authority.

(C.3) Announce the          Fully complied with. The environmental policy was                 Condition satisfied.           Environment policy approved
      State Environment     declared and adopted on 16 March 1999. An
      Policy and a time-    environmental status report was prepared by the
      bound action plan     Environmental Planning and Coordination Organization.
      for implementation    An implementation action plan was prepared and
      of appropriate        submitted in June 2001. Implementation of the action plan,
      policies, including   including market-based instruments, will take place with
      MBIs for              the assistance of ADB TA, scheduled to begin in the fourth
      environmental         quarter of 2001.
      management.

(C.4) Preparation of a      Fully complied with. The draft policy was submitted to ADB        Condition satisfied.           Rehabilitation policy approved
      draft policy on       on 15 October 2000. The cabinet discussed the draft
      rehabilitation to     policy in July 2001 and requested it to be strengthened to
      address social        provide more compensation to resettled persons. A review
      impacts of            of the reformulated policy took place on 21 August 2001.
      economic              Following further revision, the policy will be resubmitted to
      development.          the cabinet for approval. GoMP is well advanced toward
                            finalization of the policy, which is a third tranche condition.


II. Third Tranche

A. Social Development, Institutional Strengthening, and Public Finance Reform

(A.1) Make progress in      Overall: Substantially complied with.                             Overall, the fiscal balances   Final figures actually show a progressive
      fiscal                                                                                  of Madhya Pradesh              rise in primary deficit as a ratio of SDP in 2
      consolidation, with   (a) Fully complied with for primary deficit target. The policy    improved during the program    years after 2000­2001, without any
      primary deficit to    matrix makes provision for adjusting the fiscal                   implementation period.         adjustment. The costs of bifurcation and
      be below 0.7% of      consolidation targets for the primary deficit, expressed as       Capital expenditure,           the droughts may explain it, as mentioned




                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 2
      SDP in the            a percentage of NSDP, by any shortfall in the devolution of       especially for health and      in the PCR, but the overall improvement in
      FY2002 budget;        central taxes to the state relative to the amount assumed         education, was also            fiscal balance is really visible only in
      and capital           in the medium-term fiscal framework. For FY2002, this             protected.                     2004­2005, and not before.
      expenditure to be     shortfall has been estimated to be equivalent to
      at least 2.3% of      approximately 0.6% of NSDP.
      SDP.                  Accordingly, the adjusted program target for primary deficit
                            in FY2002 becomes 1.3% of NSDP. The actual outturn




                                                                                                                                                                              53
                            was 0.97% of NSDP, placing it well below this limit.
                            (b) Substantially complied with for capital expenditure
                            floor. The measured result for capital expenditure was
Condition                              Status at Tranche Release                                 PCR Status                             PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                      54
                        1.83% of NSDP in FY2002 compared with the program
                        target of 2.3% of NSDP, thus reflecting a shortfall of 0.47%
                        of NSDP. However, the state's bifurcation has caused
                        significant costs of fiscal adjustment that are additional to




                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
                        the shortfall in central tax devolutions from the
                        Government not included in the original fiscal framework.
                        GoMP and ADB estimate that the fiscal costs of bifurcation
                        amounted to 0.82% of FY2001 NSDP and that the fiscal
                        costs remained in excess of 0.6% of NSDP in FY2002.
                        FY2002 has also been a year of drought in Madhya
                        Pradesh, leading to an unforeseen need for substantial
                        drought relief expenditures on the current account.
                        Because capital expenditures are treated as a residual
                        item of discretionary expenditure for Indian states, the
                        unforeseen fiscal cost arising from bifurcation has
                        absorbed financial resources in excess of the shortfall on
                        capital expenditure.

(A.2) Introduction of   Fully complied with. Madhya Pradesh assembly passed             Condition satisfied.              After several years of withholding actual
      VAT.              the VAT legislation on 7 August 2002, making it one of the                                        implementation of VAT on various
                        first states to prepare legally for VAT. GoMP has               Considerable effort and           pretexts, it was finally introduced in
                        undertaken a detailed training program for revenue              resources have been               April 2006.
                        department officers for VAT. Ongoing TA on VAT, funded          dedicated to ensuring
                        by ADB, is providing additional assistance to GoMP (as          Madhya Pradesh would be
                        well as other states) on auditing procedures and VAT            ready in technical and
                        administration. Based on the decision of the Interstate         capacity terms to introduce
                        Empowered Committee for VAT and the Government, VAT             the VAT by 2001. They have
                        will commence in Madhya Pradesh and other major Indian          undertaken the necessary
                        states on 1 April 2003.                                         measures, but the
                                                                                        Government deferred the
                                                                                        introduction of VAT across
                                                                                        India indefinitely, citing lack
                                                                                        of capacity in most states.

                                                                                        There has been no training
                                                                                        for the last year and a half
                                                                                        since VAT and all related
                                                                                        procedures are put on hold
                                                                                        by the Government.
Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                                PCR Status                               PPER Status
(A.3) Adjust water         Fully complied with. As of the beginning of FY2002,            Condition satisfied.                Irrigation water charges reported to have
      charges to cover     approximately 70% of O&M expenditure was covered by                                                fallen below the prescribed level. No
                                                                                          Recovery of 100% O&M is
      at least 75% of      water charges. A cabinet order, passed on 31 July 2002,                                            recent figures are available for charges
                                                                                          targeted by order of GoMP.
      O&M expenditure.     has raised O&M charges by a further 5% for FY2002 and                                              levied for water supply by urban local
                                                                                          In addition, a water sector
                           stipulated additional increases of 5% annually for the                                             bodies, but are reported to be well below
                                                                                          restructuring loan from the
                           subsequent 5 years.                                                                                the prescribed level.
                                                                                          World Bank is being
                                                                                          developed for $400 million--
                                                                                          expected to go to the World
                                                                                          Bank Board in July 2004.
                                                                                          This loan (i) has similar
                                                                                          conditionality for cost
                                                                                          recovery; (ii) targets
                                                                                          reclaiming capacity created
                                                                                          but not used, i.e., 50% of
                                                                                          capacity; and (iii) institutional
                                                                                          restructuring.
(A.4) Adopt flexible       Fully complied with. Salaries of local governments were        Condition satisfied.                No change in status quo after the loan
      wage policy          de-linked from general government by Government Order                                              program ended.
      enabling local       4-886/98/10-1 dated 11 September 1998. This decision           Government orders were
      governments to       has been implemented, making local government wage             issued for government
      have separate        structures flexible and reflective of prevailing local labor   employees that there would
      service conditions   market conditions. Local recruitment of teachers under the     be no new hiring and natural
      and salary scales    DPEP program and of paramedical workers has permitted          attrition would continue.
      for their            substantial expansion of social services at a greatly          Flexible wage policy has not
      employees from       reduced unit cost relative to staffing under state level pay   delivered drastic change.
      state government.    scales and through centralized administrative procedures.
(A.5) Include              Fully complied with. A new centrally-sponsored scheme          Condition satisfied.                With the introduction of the centrally
      appropriate          supported by the Government and GoMP, known as the                                                 sponsored SSA scheme, which expands
      additional           national primary education scheme (SSA) will cover all the     World Bank continued after          the coverage to the entire state, the
      budgetary            districts including the original districts covered under       the European Commission             condition is rather irrelevant, since the
      allocation           DPEP I and II. Programs for increased coverage of              sponsored the DPEP, as well         total expenditure on education (central
      equivalent to the    primary education facilities to disadvantaged districts will   as GoMP. Program rolled out         plus states' share) is substantially higher
      Central              continue after the DPEP's termination on 30 June 2003          to even more districts.             than before its introduction. However, only
      Government share     under this centrally sponsored scheme. Funding for this                                            the state's own expenditure and its (25%)
      to ensure            scheme is shared in the proportion 75% central and 25%         A program exists for hiring         share in SSA spending is shown in the
      sustainability of    state funding. For the 5-year duration of the new 10th         teachers on a 2-year                budget figures.




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 2
      the District         Plan, GoMP has identified funding consisting of a central      contractual basis--trying to
      Primary Education    share of Rs21 billion and an GoMP share of Rs7 billion.        alleviate the burden on the
      Program after        The costs of funding 11,000 teachers, now covered under        budget vis-à-vis their
      termination of       the DPEP, has been integrated into state budget planning.      salaries, benefit packages,
      exogenously                                                                         and ultimate pension
      funded Central                                                                      payments.
      Government




                                                                                                                                                                            55
      assistance.
(A.6) Review the SSN       Substantially complied with. GoMP has reviewed the main        GoMP has taken a decision           No change.
Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                             PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                    56
      including            features of the SSN for workers affected by retrenchment,     in 2002 not to undertake
      socioeconomic        the impact of the program, problems encountered under         SSN. They were and/or are
      survey of affected   the implementation of the SSN, and recommendations for        of the opinion that this would
      groups, make         improvement. A small survey conducted under TA has            set an example for all public




                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 2
      recommendations      identified workers' concerns and perceived needs with         and private bodies wishing to
      for changes to       respect to the SSN. In the next phase of PSU reform,          downsize and would have
      SSN as required,     GoMP, with TA funded by DFID, will study in detail the        cascading cost implications.
      and submit such      affected groups and the socioeconomic impacts of PSU
      SSN review to        reform.
      ADB.


B. Public Enterprise Reform and Corporate Governance
(B.1) The technical        Substantially complied with. In the absence of a technical    A technical secretariat was      The proposal to establish a technical
      secretariat will     secretariat, yet to be established, GoMP's Department of      not established. A £1 million    secretariat has been revived in recent
      submit a report on   Finance, in consultation with DPE, has prepared a note on     TA proposal was submitted        discussions with DFID.
      the experience       progress in improving corporate governance. The Madhya        to the Government of India in
      gained from          Pradesh DPE has set up performance management                 May 2003. However, TA was
      reform of PSUs       systems for public enterprises, and the backlog of            still not approved. In its
      and the progress     unaudited accounts has been reduced. GoMP has placed          absence, a cabinet
      in improvement in    a cap on MPSFC guarantees, has limited its financial          subcommittee on VRS was
      corporate            guarantees on borrowings of PSUs, and has frozen              established and oversaw
      governance,          recruitments of PSUs. GoMP intends to establish the           PSU reform so far, and
      together with        technical secretariat and has entered into an agreement       approved about
      recommendations      with DFID for a grant to be used to staff the secretariat     Rs1.60 billion for VRS to
      for changes, if      with contract staff.                                          date.
      any, to the policy                                                                 Principal secretaries for
      and institutional                                                                  finance and industry
      framework for                                                                      indicated that scope still
      PSU reform.                                                                        exists for a technical
                                                                                         secretariat. Discussions with
                                                                                         DFID are ongoing to
                                                                                         establish a technical
                                                                                         secretariat, supported by a
                                                                                         DFID grant.

(B.2) Establish            Fully complied with. PSU performance is being monitored       An MOU mechanism exists,         No substantive implementation of the
      procedures for       on the basis of MOU signed annually between PSUs and          such that each PSU signs an      MOU for accountability of PSU managers,
      enhanced             GoMP. A performance review committee, chaired by the          MOU with the relevant line       which continues to be an issue in the
      accountability of    Department of Finance, undertakes regular quarterly           ministry. The process is         effectiveness of PSUs.
      managing             reviews. Activity-specific targets are laid down along with   facilitated by DPE. In the
      directors for PSU    percentile rankings of each activity and serve as a           MOU, qualitative and
      performance and      scorecard of the performance of PSUs and their managing       quantitative targets are
      introduce            directors. The performance review committee can also          supposed to be identified
      appropriate          recommend action against managing directors in case of        each year, and the chief
      monitoring           noncompliance with targets.                                   secretary is supposed to
Condition                                    Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                              PPER Status
      mechanisms.                                                                           review whether these targets
                                                                                            have been met at the end of
                                                                                            each fiscal year. "Action" is
                                                                                            supposed to be taken
                                                                                            against managing directors
                                                                                            that do not meet their
                                                                                            targets. However, a
                                                                                            principal-agent problem
                                                                                            exists--last year's MOU was
                                                                                            just signed when the Mission
                                                                                            was in the field.
(B.3) Incorporate             In view of changed circumstances due to bifurcation, the      MPPHC was given VRS,             Changes to corporate structure of MPHB
      MPHB.                   policy condition is proposed to be amended to: "Take a        since MPHB could not             still awaiting decisions on restructuring
                              cabinet decision to incorporate MPHB." The Madhya             absorb the massive human         subject to finalizing asset division with
                              Pradesh cabinet decided to incorporate MPHB on 27             resources of MPPHC.              Chhattisgarh.
                              August 2002. However, implementation of this decision is
                              awaiting the division of assets and/or liabilities between
                              Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. If the policy condition
                              is amended as proposed, the condition is fully complied
                              with.
C. Enabling Environment for Private Sector Involvement
(C.1) Establish a utilities   Partially complied with. GoMP has designated the Madhya       Only MPERC was                   A utilities commission has not been
      pricing                 Pradesh State Bridge Development Corporation, a               established--no other utility    established. The electricity regulatory
      commission for          subsidiary of PWD, as the nodal agency for design and         pricing or commissions exist.    authority is functioning, and tolls for BOT
      road and transport      implementation of BOT and other public-private                However, several GoMP            roads are set through policy and then
      tariff setting and      partnerships for construction and operation of toll roads.    officials noted that after       included in the contract between the
      making                  GoMP amended the India Tolls (Madhya Pradesh) Act in          ensuring "one utility" can be    Government and contractor.
      operational the         1999 to facilitate private sector participation in road       priced effectively and without
      commission.             projects. GoMP has not established a utilities pricing        too much political resistance,   There was a waiver of full compliance with
                              commission to date. The concession agreements for BOT         other utilities could be         one tranche release condition based on
                              with toll rates defined for the full contract period have     considered "in the future."      the achievement of partial compliance.
                              already been announced for the first batch of BOT
                              contracts. Consequently, the state authorities were
                              concerned that potential BOT bidders would be confused
                              by the alternative governance of a utility pricing
                              commission, if such a commission were implemented in




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 2
                              2002. Under the Madhya Pradesh State Road Sector
                              Development Program, TA for institutional strengthening
                              and capacity building for the road sector will be provided,
                              and BOT operations will be evaluated. GoMP has not yet
                              established a utilities pricing commission pending the
                              outcome of the TA for the reorganization of PWD, although
                              it has requested ADB for advice on legal and financial




                                                                                                                                                                           57
                              aspects of model concession agreements.
Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                            PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                      58
(C.2) Implement the       Fully complied with. An environmental policy was adopted      Condition satisfied.
      time-bound action   and promulgated by GoMP in 1999. Assistance for
      plan for improved   implementation of environmental policy, including
      environmental       improved environmental monitoring and management, has




                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
      monitoring and      been provided under ADB TA for environment
      management.         management. In addition, under a centrally sponsored
                          program, environmental data collection and pollution
                          monitoring capabilities are being upgraded through an
                          exogenously funded multistate government program.

(C.3) Finalization of     Fully complied with. The Madhya Pradesh cabinet               Condition satisfied.            Rehabilitation policy in place
      policy on           approved the rehabilitation policy on 17 August 2002.
      rehabilitation.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, BOT = build-operate-transfer, CIP = core investment program, DFID = Department for International Development,
DPE = Department of Public Enterprises, DPEP = District Primary Education Program, ERC = electricity regulatory commission, FY = fiscal year,
GoMP = government of Madhya Pradesh, MBI = market-based instrument, MOU = memorandum of understanding, MPERC = Madhya Pradesh Electricity
Regulatory Commission, MPHB = Madhya Pradesh Housing Board, MPSLandDC = Madhya Pradesh State Land Development Corporation, MPSLDC = Madhya
Pradesh State Leather Development Corporation Limited, MPPHC = Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation, MPSEB = Madhya Pradesh State Electricity
Board, MPSExC = Madhya Pradesh State Export Corporation, MPSFC = Madhya Pradesh State Financial Corporation, MPSFishDC = Madhya Pradesh State
Fisheries Development Corporation, MPSIC = Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation, MPSRA = Madhya Pradesh State Reorganization Act,
MPSRTC = Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, MPSTC = Madya Pradesh State Textile Corporation, NBFC = nonbanking finance company,
NPA = nonperforming asset, NSDP = net state domestic product, O&M = operations and maintenance, PCR = program/project completion report,
PPER = program/project performance evaluation report, PSU = public sector undertaking, PWD = Public Works Department, RRP = report and recommendation of
the President, SBI = State Bank of India, SDP = state domestic product, SFRF = states' fiscal reforms facility, SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India,
SLR = statutory liquidity ratio, SOE = state-owned enterprise, SRF = state renewal fund, SSA = Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (national primary education scheme),
SSN = social safety net, TA = technical assistance, VAT = value-added tax, VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
a
  The target is adjusted for any shortfall in the devolution of central taxes to the state, calculated as the difference between the amount of central tax transfer
  assumed in the medium-term fiscal framework (Appendix 4, Table A4.2) and the actual amount of tax devolution from the central Government. The target is also
  adjusted for outlays in natural calamities in excess of the programmed outlays of 0.1% of SDP, if applicable.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                      Table A2.2: Post-Loan Approval Non-Tranche Release Covenants

Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                            PCR Status                          PPER Status

A. Covenants to be Achieved by the Release of the Second Tranche
(A.1) Set up by March       Fully complied with. The unit was established on 7 June     SBFAU currently has only   The Economic Policy Analysis Unit is
     2000 a state           1999 in the Finance Department under the economic           one staff member. The      functioning, but is nowhere near the
     budgeting and fiscal   adviser. The duties of SBFAU are to prepare various         Economic Policy Analysis   envisaged SBFAU. It is understaffed, has no
     analysis unit in the   reports on state finances for the Government, prepare       Unit, under the            experts at the moment, and is essentially
     Finance                the background paper for MOU with Government, and           Institutional Finance      working as a finance commission cell within
     Department to          undertake analytical and technical work to assist in        Department, currently      the Finance Department.
     strengthen the         budget preparation.                                         handles most of SBFAU's
     analytical and                                                                     tasks.
     technical capacity
     for development
     and analysis of
     economic policy
     options and
     strengthen the debt
     management
     capability.
(A.2) Computerize sales     Fully complied with. The Commercial Tax Department          Covenant fulfilled.        Some amount of computerization has taken
     tax administration,    has initiated a three-pronged approach to computerizing                                place, but several facets of sales tax/VAT
     including monitoring   the sales tax and/or VAT administration, auditing, and                                 administration yet to be computerized. It is
     and accounting         trader registration: (i) systems study and software                                    probably necessary to have a fresh look at
     systems, and a         development contract for software application was                                      the entire administrative structure and a new
     system for             awarded to Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd.; the                                  computerized system for VAT.
     registration of        software is being modified to incorporate the VAT design
     traders and cross-     adopted in August 2001; (ii) the networking architecture
     checking taxpayer      was approved and procurement of hardware and
     information on the     networking equipment for 73 circle offices of the sales
     basis of the           tax administration is at an advanced stage. Following
     systems plan being     hardware procurement, acceptance testing will begin in
     prepared with ADB      January 2002; and (iii) training of staff is ongoing with
     technical              Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd. support.
     assistance.
(A.3) Complete training     Fully complied with.                                        Covenant fulfilled.        No new developments after program
     for all tax                                                                                                   completion.




                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
     commissioners and
     tax officers on
     commercial taxes
     and taxation policy
     to strengthen tax
     assessment and
     enforcement




                                                                                                                                                                   59
     capacity.
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                     PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                 60
(A.4) Review and assess      Fully complied with. GoMP was one of the first states to      Covenant fulfilled.   Since VAT has been introduced recently, the
     the fiscal impact of    develop an action plan to transform its antiquated tax                              time for an assessment is not yet ripe.
     the first stage of      system into a VAT, and preparation for the VAT is well
     VAT introduction        advanced, but implementation must await preparation by




                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
     and make                other states and Government of India harmonization.
     recommendation, if      The following actions have been taken: (i) reduced rates;
     any, for further        (ii) not offering new incentives and withdrew new
     strengthening of tax    incentives effective 1 January 2000 while grandfathering
     administration.         old incentives; (iii) reduced the list of tax-free goods;
                             (iv) created a state level VAT cell and five working
                             groups; (v) prepared draft VAT legislation which is
                             publicly available; (vi) drafted rules and procedures;
                             (vii) publicized the VAT through workshops; (viii) training
                             of VAT officers; and (ix) begun computerization work.
                             GoMP has carried out some calculations under
                             alternative scenarios assuming the VAT would be in
                             place by 1 April 2002. Estimates of the fiscal impact were
                             made, revealing the first phase of VAT--reducing rates
                             from 4% to 2%, the revenue loss would have been
                             around Rs1.65 billion per annum.
(A.5) Establish central      Fully complied with. Order to set up the valuation cells      Covenant fulfilled.   The condition has been complied with
     and regional            was issued in April 2001. The state set formal guidelines                           regarding the reorganization of the valuation
     valuation cells and     intended to bring recorded values into greater conformity                           system for stamp duty. However, the
     introduce               with market values. As of 1 April 2000, three tiers of a                            valuation systems for property tax and for
     methodology to          valuation cell were operating, and associated oversight                             stamp duty continue to be different.
     assess properties       functions were operational at the three levels of
     for levy of property    administration responsible for overseeing the recording
     tax and stamp duty,     of property titles and transfer transactions. The function
     taking into             of the valuation cells is to prepare procedural guidelines
     consideration           for valuation and statistical information, collecting
     technical               information on market valuation by use and geographic
     assistance              zone, notification of rates after public hearings to deal
     recommendations.        with objections, and periodic revisions of benchmarked
                             property rates.
(A.6) Prepare time-          Fully complied with. User charges have been raised for        Covenant fulfilled.   As the utilities commission was not
     bound action plan       most services. Irrigation charges were raised threefold                             established, rate revisions are not
     and implement           (on a weighted average basis) in 1999­2000. Urban                                   coordinated--except in the power sector
     system of user          local bodies have been given full freedom to fix water                              where a regulatory authority is functioning.
     charges on utilities    charges and are raising water fees to cover a rising
     for enhanced            proportion of operation and maintenance. Road used
     sustainability taking   charges have been raised. Tolls have been introduced
     into consideration      on numerous highways and toll roads are being
     technical               expanded through a recently introduced BOT scheme. A
     assistance              power tariff award of 47% increase was proposed by
     recommendations.        MPSEB. The regulator is expected to make an award
                             later in 2001.
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                            PCR Status                          PPER Status


(A.7) Rationalize and        Fully complied with. The Government has introduced and      Covenant fulfilled.         Internal reviews and monitoring have
     prioritize              is updating a "top-down" MTFF while simultaneously                                      become routine, and the treasury
     expenditure and         introducing the corresponding "bottom-up" CIP. The                                      computation has helped greatly in monitoring
     strengthen              MTTF plays an important role in steering expenditure                                    financial flows. The priorities are, however,
     expenditure             patterns toward the medium-term goals, particularly in                                  more informally integrated in the budgetary
     management              the social sector, while integrating current and capital                                process with the signals emanating from the
     including:              expenditure decisions. The CIP is encouraging line                                      cabinet committee. Formal CIPs are no
     (i) preparation of      departments and the Planning Department to identify                                     longer in use.
     CIP, and (ii) system    wasteful projects while protecting priority investments
     for monitoring          from ad hoc budgetary cuts. The state CIP, which
     implementation of       identifies 30­35% of total capital outlays as "core," has
     CIP and for periodic    been approved by the line departments and the Finance
     review of project       Department and will be incorporated in GoMP's
     performance.            budgetary process. The system for monitoring
                             implementation of the CIP and periodic review of project
                             performance has been introduced, including quarterly
                             review by an interdepartmental committee. The
                             committee will review performance targets and funds
                             flows, year-end assessments, and coordinate revisions
                             on a 3-year rolling basis.
(A.8) Strengthen and         Fully complied with. The activities of MCDD were            Covenant fulfilled.         No change.
     extend the activities   extended beyond the 40,000 target to 51,000 villages. As
     of the MCDD from        20,000 villages now reside in Chhattisgarh, the third
     11,000 to 40,000        tranche condition has also been met. The mission has
     villages through        since been wound up.
     local bodies.
(A.9) Make operational       Substantially complied with. The decision to set up the     Discussions with DFID are   Technical secretariat was never established
     the technical           technical secretariat was taken in October 2000. Based      continuing.                 during the life of the Program. Although DFID
     secretariat for         on the heavy program of divestment anticipated for the                                  was interested in supporting the secretariat,
     assisting in            next 3 years, GoMP accepted ADB consultant                                              it was a very small part of a larger
     implementing PSU        recommendations to recruit international staff for the                                  investment package which did not eventuate.
     reform.                 technical secretariat using DFID proposed funding for                                   The proposal to establish a technical
                             3 years. Government order to establish the technical                                    secretariat has been revived in recent
                             secretariat will be issued when funding from the United                                 discussions between GoMP and DFID
                             Kingdom DFID for 3 years. The Government order to                                       although no firm decision had been made at
                             establish the technical secretariat will be issued when                                 the time of the OEM.




                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 2
                             funding becomes available, now estimated for
                             November 2001. The technical secretariat will become
                             fully operational following recruitment of consultants,
                             estimated for January 2002. As an interim measure,
                             DFID has agreed to extend the contract of the ADB
                             consultants on a temporary basis to play the role of the
                             technical secretariat.




                                                                                                                                                                     61
Condition                                   Status at Tranche Release                           PCR Status                     PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                  62
(A.10) Assign to the         Fully complied with. The committee for reviewing            Covenant fulfilled.   This is no longer being applied.
     DPE the                 candidates was set up under the chair of retired Chief
     responsibility for      Secretary Shri RN. Chopra. Other members of the
     reviewing               committee include the principal secretary, DPE; principle




                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 2
     candidates, on the      secretary, commerce and industry; principle secretary of
     basis of appropriate    finance; and the principal secretary of the concerned
     screening               department. The committee screens candidates and
     procedures, for the     recommends appointments for higher level positions.
     appointment of all
     functional directors
     to ensure that these
     appointments are
     made on a
     professional basis
     with due regard to
     the PSUs' service
     rules.

(A.11) Introduce the         Fully complied with. The financial criteria introduced by   Covenant fulfilled.   No change.
     financial criteria on   order on 7 July 1998, which requires PSU dividends to
     return on               be linked to 12% of net profits.
     investment for
     dividend payment;
     and establish and
     introduce
     investment limit for
     which PSUs do not
     need approval from
     the government to
     increase PSUs'
     operational
     freedom.

(A.12) Review the            Fully complied with. PSUs no longer have the uniform        Covenant fulfilled.   No change.
     existing practice of    pay scale. The order introduced on 3 October 1998
     uniform pay scale       requires PSUs to link pay to company profits.
     for PSUs, and
     authorize the
     setting of
     enterprise-specific
     salary scales,
     including
     differentiation in
     remuneration linked
     to productivity and
     the financial
Condition                                   Status at Tranche Release                             PCR Status                      PPER Status
     performance of
     individual state
     public enterprises.

(A.13) Initiate              Partially complied with. The restructuring plan developed     No new developments   MPSIDC currently has NPAs worth around
     organizational and      to introduce a strategic partner was accepted by              since last review.    Rs7.15 billion (including outstanding interest
     financial               Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services, Ltd.,                                of about Rs3.15 billion). Negotiations for
     restructuring of        which agreed to restructure the company with 15%                                    financial restructuring, both with borrowers
     MPSIDC.                 ownership, but the board of MPSIDC rejected the offer.                              and lenders, are in progress. One-time
                             The company downsized by 40% in 1998. The company                                   settlement schemes, one for term loans and
                             is contemplating its options to reduce GoMP's                                       another for inter corporate deposits extended
                             shareholding through a strategic partner and a private                              by the SOE, have been approved by the
                             dominated board of directors.                                                       Board and await GoMP clearance, before
                                                                                                                 being taken up with borrowers.

                                                                                                                 Some 80 employees have been offered VRS
                                                                                                                 in FY2004 as part of the personnel
                                                                                                                 restructuring exercise.

                                                                                                                 Report of consultants appointed to suggest
                                                                                                                 restructuring measures, has been placed
                                                                                                                 before the state cabinet for approval.
                                                                                                                 Currently, there is no proposal for inviting
                                                                                                                 bids from the private sector for the SOE's
                                                                                                                 shares, with the proposed restructuring
                                                                                                                 measures under GoMP's consideration.


(A.14) Advertise by          Fully complied with. The advertisement for a buyer of the     Covenant fulfilled.   NABCONS, a subsidiary of NABARD, has
     March 2000 for a        agricultural farm was issued twice. The first did not bring                         recently valued the Babai farm at
     joint sector partner    enough bidders. The second led to two offers received                               Rs520 million, with the final decision being
     in a large              on 28 May 2001. The offers have been presented to the                               left to the cabinet subcommittee and the
     agricultural farm       chief minister with a cabinet note. Upon approval by the                            option of offering different parts of the farm
     owned by                chief minister, the cabinet will decide on which of the                             on lease to several parties for 3.5 years
     MPSAIDC.                offers to accept. The company, originally operating with                            proposed.
                             1,400 staff, is now utilizing only 800 positions, of which
                             17% will be allocated to Chhattisgarh and 50% will




                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
                             receive VRS compensation. The company is therefore
                             operating with 50% of the original workforce.

(A.15) GoMP approval         Fully complied with. The restructuring plan is being          Covenant fulfilled.   All operations of MPSCB have been
     for the restructuring   incorporated through an amendment to the Housing                                    discontinued with surveying, execution, and
     plan; close MPPHC       Board Act, enabling the Housing Board to enter into                                 monitoring of slum projects handed over to
     and MPSCB; and          public-private partnerships. The Housing Board is                                   local bodies, to be carried out in coordination




                                                                                                                                                                   63
     transfer MPSCB's        introducing (i) employee incentive schemes,                                         with the respective district administrations.
     core activities to      (ii) management information system automation for
Condition                                Status at Tranche Release                            PCR Status                     PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                              64
    MPHB as per the        accounts and accepted the VRS, with 115 choosing not                              MPPHC. In response to a program to
    plan.                  to exercise the option. Of those choosing not to exercise                         modernize the state police force and
                           their option, 22 remain as core staff to wind up the                              construct police accommodation (funded by
                           company, and the rest will be retrenched under the                                the Government), GoMP decided to revive




                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 2
                           Industrial Development Act. Funds for VRS payments of                             MPPHC in 2004 to manage the housing
                           Rs315 million covering 110 workers were disbursed on                              construction aspect. The employees of
                           10 September 2001. The order for closure of MPSCB                                 MPPHC post-VRS, who reverted back to the
                           was issued by the Urban Development Department, and                               police force on closure, have been
                           the company dissolved on 31 March 2001; all                                       reemployed by MPPHC on its revival.
                           112 officers have been shifted to vacancies in urban
                           local bodies.

(A.16) Prepare plans for   Fully complied with. Tenders were invited and 70 offers     Covenant fulfilled.   MPSTDC recorded an improvement in
     organizational        were received, of which 22 were found to be eligible. As                          operating performance, indicated by an
     restructuring of      the company did not receive offers from hotels, it                                operating profit of Rs22.5 million during
     MPSTDC, focusing      decided to reject the offers. The company sought advice                           FY2005 (Provisional) compared to a loss of
     on promotional        from the Confederation of Indian Industry, which                                  Rs1.6 million recorded in FY2004. This was
     activities, and       arranged detailed discussions with a big hotel chain. The                         primarily on account of the increasing tourist
     advertise the sale    hotel chain indicated interest, but only when                                     arrivals caused by an improvement in road
     and/or lease of its   infrastructure facilities are provided. MPSTDC decided to                         infrastructure and better upkeep of properties
     properties.           wait until a roads improvement project is completed and                           at select heritage sites. Given the above,
                           will then invite tenders for its hotel properties.                                attempts to sell/lease out properties of the
                           Concurrently, MPSTDC has undergone organizational                                 company have been shelved.
                           restructuring to focus activities on ecotourism with the
                           advice of the Confederation of Indian Industry.

(A.17) Prepare report on   Fully complied with. The report was prepared with the       Covenant fulfilled.   No further action taken on cooperatives
     the financial         assistance of TA consultants in July 2001.                                        sector although it is well known that this
     performance of                                                                                          sector requires reform. However, it is a
     cooperatives sector                                                                                     politically difficult area to reform.
     with assistance
     from ADB technical
     assistance.

(A.18) Ensure that the     Fully complied with. The budget for the newly created       Covenant fulfilled.   No change.
     MPERC budget          MPSERC is charged in the consolidated funds of GoMP.
     provided to GoMP      Under the new legislation, Madhya Pradesh Electricity
     in accordance with    Act 2000, Section 8 (3) provides that MPSERC will be
     Section 33 of the     charged in the consolidated fund of the state.
     ERC Act is charged
     upon the Madhya
     Pradesh state
     budget.
Condition                                    Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                             PPER Status
(A.19) Prepare roads          Fully complied with. PWD has framed various road               Covenant fulfilled.           PWD no longer prepares CIP.
     sector CIP on the        development programs under national highways, central
     basis of PWD's           road funds, bond roads, normal plan roads, and nonplan
     strategic options        works. These programs were included in the roads
     study for inclusion      sector CIP and integrated into the overall state CIP.
     in the overall state
     CIP.

(A.20) Establish by           Fully complied with. The private sector cell was               Covenant fulfilled.           The work of the private sector cell has been
     March 2000 a             established as orders were issued and postings made.                                         transferred to MPRDC, which is responsible
     private sector cell in   The private sector cell now operates with five officers.                                     for managing road development including
     PWD and make it                                                                                                       public-private partnerships.
     fully operational.

(A.21) Analyze options        Fully complied with. Distance-based tolls have been            Covenant fulfilled.           Distance-based toll rates are defined in a
     for distance-based       introduced and are being expanded throughout the state                                       policy.
     toll rates and           under the Program for 14 BOT roads being developed
     prepare a plan for       with private participation. A utility pricing commission is
     establishing a           not considered feasible at this time because, in the
     utilities pricing        concession agreement with entrepreneurs and/or firms,
     commission.              final toll rates have to be specified for the whole
                              agreement period.

(A.22) Enact the              Substantially complied with. The amendment to liberalize       The Rent Control Act was      No change.
     amendment to the         revisions of rents and the standard rent formula was           drafted, including a rent
     State Rent Control       reviewed by the legislature's select committee. Following      tribunal, and it was
     Act upon approval        the select committee's recommendations, the                    submitted to the
     by the Government.       amendment was revised and sent to the Law                      legislature in 2000, where
                              Department on 6 August 2001. Final discussion on the           it was referred to a select
                              draft amendment took place on 13 August 2001 in a              committee in 2001. There
                              meeting between the Law Department and the Housing             have been no new
                              and Environment Department. The amendment was                  developments since then.
                              submitted for passage during the 20 August­
                              15 September 2001 legislative session.
(A.23) Implement the          Fully complied with. Environmental Capacity Building           Covenant fulfilled.           PCB continues to monitor and website is
     measures to              Project for the state PCB is being implemented by the                                        regularly updated.
     strengthen the           Ministry of Environment and Forest and the Central




                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 2
     monitoring               Pollution Control Board. In addition, monitoring has been
     capacities of the        implemented through a program of e-governance and
     PCB and its              computerization. The e-governance program operate
     regional offices.        through a website for PCB which was developed and
                              regularly updated. Polluting units are put on a list and are
                              continuously monitored. The public can make complaints
                              to PCB regarding polluting units through e-mail. Some




                                                                                                                                                                          65
                              units have already been prosecuted, and a distillery has
                              been shut down under the new system.
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                               PCR Status                             PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                            66
B. Covenants to be Achieved before Release of the Third Tranche
(B.1) Computerize and       Substantially complied with. Networking of treasury             Empowered Committee           After full computerization, further
      network FD's          operations and computerization of payment and audit             on Public Finance Reform      improvements are regularly being made to




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 2
      treasury              systems is being undertaken. Software requirement               has not met since             the system. It now accepts sales tax
      operations for        specification for this purpose has been completed.              covenant was met; activity    payments online. The treasury database is
      effective payment     Expenditure control systems have been upgraded.                 ceased after MTFF was         accessible through the internet and the
      and audit systems;                                                                    signed.                       system is to include the departments so far
      complete                                                                              SBFAU is not delivering       outside the treasury system (irrigation, public
      management                                                                            according to its mandate.     works, and forest) in a limited way.
      information system                                                                    All treasuries networked
      for improved                                                                          and gone online, as of
      expenditure                                                                           1 April 2004.
      control.                                                                              Using treasuries as
                                                                                            monitoring mechanism for
                                                                                            all expenditures and/or
                                                                                            receipts; expenditures and
                                                                                            receipts are rationalized
                                                                                            on a monthly basis.
(B.2) Make progress in      Overall: Substantially complied with. (a) Fully complied        Covenant fulfilled, after     Final figures actually show a progressive rise
      fiscal                with for primary deficit target. The policy matrix makes        adjustments for bifurcation   in primary deficit as a ratio of SDP in 2 years
      consolidation, with   provision for adjusting the fiscal consolidation targets for    are made.                     after 2000­2001, without any adjustment.
      primary deficit to    the primary deficit, expressed as a percentage of NSDP,                                       The costs of bifurcation and the droughts
      be below 0.7% of      by any shortfall in the devolution of central taxes to the                                    may explain it, as mentioned in the PCR.
      SDP in the            state relative to the amount assumed in the MTFF. For                                         However, the overall improvement in fiscal
      FY2002 budget;        FY2002, this shortfall has been estimated to be                                               balance is really visible only in 2004­2005,
      and capital           equivalent to approximately 0.6% of NSDP. Accordingly,                                        and not before.
      expenditure to be     the adjusted program target for primary deficit in FY2002
      at least 2.3% of      becomes 1.3% of NSDP. The actual outturn was 0.97%
      SDP.                  of NSDP placing it well below this limit. (b) Substantially
                            complied with for capital expenditure floor. The
                            measured result for capital expenditure was 1.83% of
                            NSDP in FY2002 compared to the program target of
                            2.3% of NSDP, thus reflecting a shortfall of 0.47% of
                            NSDP. However, the state's bifurcation has caused
                            significant costs of fiscal adjustment that are additional to
                            the shortfall in central tax devolutions from the
                            Government not included in the original fiscal framework.
                            GoMP and ADB estimate that the fiscal costs of
                            bifurcation amounted to 0.82% of FY2001 NSDP and
                            that the fiscal costs remained in excess of 0.6% of NSDP
                            in FY2002. FY2002 has also been a year of drought in
                            Madhya Pradesh, leading to an unforeseen need for
                            substantial drought relief expenditures on the current
                            account. Because capital expenditures are treated as
                            residual items of discretionary expenditure for Indian
Condition                                   Status at Tranche Release                             PCR Status                              PPER Status
                             states, the unforeseen fiscal cost arising from bifurcation
                             has absorbed financial resources in excess of the
                             shortfall on capital expenditure.
(B.3) Implement by           Fully complied with. Ready reckoners were prepared            Covenants have been fully      The reforms have been made, but there
      December 2000,         with assistance from the TA, and implemented in               met, capacity building at      does not appear to be a significant impact on
      in consultation        municipal corporations and large municipalities. Local        the local government level     local bodies' finances, despite substantial
      with the local         governments have also taken additional steps to               is ongoing (about 50% of       independence granted to them. The own
      bodies, property       strengthen their public finances, including through           them, and mostly larger        resources of even urban local bodies
      tax reform             computerization.                                              local government bodies        continue to be totally inadequate to meet
      including                                                                            have done it); not all local   their expenditure responsibilities, resulting in
      preparation of                                                                       government units have          poor O&M of assets.
      ready reckons for                                                                    computerized their
      tax assessment;                                                                      operations, neither are
      strengthen the                                                                       they networked to each
      public finances of                                                                   other and to Bhopal.
      local bodies taking
      into consideration
      findings of ADB
      technical
      assistance.
(B.4) Sufficient provision   Fully complied with. Non-personnel expenditure in rural       Covenant fulfilled.            Primary health services substantially
      in the FY2002          health was Rs460 million in FY2001 and Rs350 million in                                      expanded in terms of infrastructure and
      state budget to        FY2002, and has been increased substantially to                                              remaining backlog is likely to be wiped out
      further reduce the     Rs890 million in FY2003 through allocations under a                                          soon. However, the major bottleneck
      backlog of capital     supplementary budget. GoMP is also expanding health                                          appears to be in the area of medical
      expenditure and        services in rural areas under the Rajiv Gandhi Health                                        personnel. The state is even trying to enlist
      shortfall of non-      Mission that has a separate budget category.                                                 the services of the private doctors by giving
      personnel                                                                                                           cash subsidies to, for example, expectant
      expenditure in                                                                                                      mothers who get private medical attention for
      existing rural                                                                                                      delivery.
      health facilities.

(B.5) Review and             Fully complied with. No fiscal incentives have been           No new incentives and/or       No change.
      implement the          provided for new industrial units following a decision by     exemptions granted since
      recommendations        all Indian states to discontinue the granting of sales tax    the third quarter of 2003;
      of the study on        concessions as industrial incentives on 1 January 2000.       tax breaks that have been
      industrial             GoMP is also phasing out power sector subsidies under         granted previously are




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 2
      incentives             the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development                   grandfathered. The
      scheme; and            Program. GoMP has developed an MTFF to guide future           number of items granted
      complete system        budget formulation in anticipation of completing an           exemptions were
      of expenditure         agreement with the Government of India under the              decreased to 39 in 1999
      management and         States' Fiscal Reforms Facility. This MTFF advances           and to 34 in 2003.
      control.               GoMP's system of public expenditure management.




                                                                                                                                                                             67
Condition                                   Status at Tranche Release                            PCR Status                           PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                    68
(B.6) Extend the              Fully complied with. The activities of the MCDD,            Covenant fulfilled.            No change.
      activities of the       dedicated to reducing the incidence of diarrhea disease
      MCDD to all             in children, were extended to all villages in the post-
      71,000 villages in      bifurcation state and recommendations for follow-up




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 2
      the state; monitor      policy interventions were prepared.
      and evaluate the
      impact of the
      program and
      prepare
      recommendation
      for follow-up policy
      interventions.

(B.7) Abolish the posts,      Fully complied with. The decision of GoMP not to fill the   Natural attrition is adhered   No change.
      other than              posts in nonessential services vacated through natural      to. However, two
      technical positions     attrition has been implemented.                             conflicting measures are
      in essential social                                                                 being undertaken in
      services and                                                                        Madhya Pradesh at the
      police, vacated                                                                     moment.
      through natural                                                                     As a cost-saving measure,
      attrition during that                                                               each department was
      tranche period,                                                                     tasked to identify 30% of
      and reassign the                                                                    the posts in their unit that
      resources to                                                                        could be abolished. Some
      poverty-reducing                                                                    60,000 posts have been
      social services.                                                                    identified, 23,000 of which
                                                                                          have already been
                                                                                          abolished in the last 4
                                                                                          years.
                                                                                          In 1998, GoMP had taken
                                                                                          a decision to retrench
                                                                                          22,000 of the 28,000 daily
                                                                                          wage earners--exception
                                                                                          being those workers in
                                                                                          public works, irrigation,
                                                                                          and public health. The
                                                                                          majority of these workers
                                                                                          were retrenched.
                                                                                          However, with the advent
                                                                                          of the BJP government in
                                                                                          December 2003, this
                                                                                          decision was revisited.
                                                                                          The high court of Jabalpur
                                                                                          overturned the decision to
                                                                                          retrench in 2003.
                                                                                          A government order was
                                                                                          issued on 21 January
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                             PCR Status                            PPER Status
                                                                                          2004, titled "Procedure for
                                                                                          Employment of Daily
                                                                                          Wage Employees
                                                                                          Discontinued after 31.12.
                                                                                          1988." Rehiring has
                                                                                          begun; a total of 11,000
                                                                                          people are expected to be
                                                                                          hired and a budget
                                                                                          provision of Rs360 million
                                                                                          has been made in FY2005
                                                                                          for their remunerations.
(B.8) Implementation of     Substantially complied with. In the absence of a technical    SRF has been dwindling,       Technical secretariat not established and
      SRF to be             secretariat, the TA consultants appointed to assist in the    despite ample scope for       GoMP decided to discontinue the SRF.
      reviewed by           work of public enterprise reform reviewed the                 its use, e.g., for VRS in
      Technical             implementation of the SRF and provided their findings in      MPSFC. Its allocation
      Secretariat and       reports submitted to the PRMC and ADB.                        dropped from
      report to be                                                                        Rs230 million in FY2004
      submitted to                                                                        to Rs50 million in FY2005.
      PRMC and ADB.                                                                       GoMP looks to
                                                                                          international aid agencies
                                                                                          or the Government for
                                                                                          replenishment of SRF.

(B.9) The DPE will issue    Fully complied with. DPE has issued annual reports            This is not done in a         Annual reports are not published because of
      and publish annual    starting in FY2000. This report provides details on PSU       timely manner. PSU            lack of updated information from PSUs. A
      report on the         performance, contains information on most recently            targets are published after   report on PSU performance for FY2003 was
      performance of        completed audited accounts, and summarizes general            actualization, often with     published in September 2005.
      PSUs.                 issues of governance, including procedures for                1-year lag.
                            appointment of managing directors.

(B.10) The PSUs will set    Fully complied with. Strategic targets are specified in the   MOU system does not           No change. The MOU system not
      strategic targets     MOU, signed annually between PSUs and GoMP.                   work as originally            operational so no accountability mechanisms
      on the basis of       Activity-specific targets are laid down along with            foreseen (see note for        are being practiced.
      guidelines given      percentile rankings of each activity, which serve as a        B.9).
      by GoMP. The          scorecard of the performance of PSUs and their
      PSU boards will       managing directors. A committee may also suggest
      set qualitative and   actions in cases of noncompliance with targets.




                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
      quantitative
      targets as basis
      for performance-
      related incentives
      for PSU
      management.




                                                                                                                                                                      69
Condition                                 Status at Tranche Release                               PCR Status                                PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                             70
(B.11) The managing         Fully complied with. A formal appointment committee,          PSUs are still losing             No change. The MOU system is not
      directors of PSUs     comprising three members, appoints all new managing           money; there is still no          operational so no accountability mechanisms
      will be appointed     directors through transparent procedures. Average             accountability or quality         are being practiced.
      on professional       tenure of all managing directors now exceeds 2 years          control mechanism by and




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 2
      basis (with           and a general managerial policy exists to lengthen their      of managing directors.
      particular            tenure positions to a minimum of 3 years. On 6 June
      emphasis on           2002, the cabinet decided that approval of the chief
      experience and        minister would be required in the case of transfer of an
      performance) and      official who has not completed 2 years in a post. Hiring of
      for a minimum         professionals as managing director has begun. The
      3-year term; and      practice of combining managing director posts with other
      the practice of       government posts has been discontinued.
      combining the post
      of managing
      director with other
      posts in the
      government will be
      discontinued.

(B.12) Reduce GoMP's        In view of changed circumstances with respect to              MPSIDC manages land               MPSIDC currently has NPAs worth around
      100%                  bifurcation, the policy condition is proposed to be           for big industries, but           Rs7.15 billion (including outstanding interest
      shareholdings in      amended to: "Take a cabinet decision to sell 51% of the       started lending to SMEs           of about Rs3.15 billion). Negotiations for
      MPSIDC to 51%         assets of MPSIDC, if possible, and to restructure the         under the name of "inter          financial restructuring, both with borrowers
      by inducting a        enterprise through downsizing." A consultancy firm has        corporate deposits" and           and lenders, are in progress. One-time
      strategic partner,    been appointed to prepare a business plan for                 accumulated considerable          settlement schemes, one for term loans and
      and appoint the       restructuring MPSIDC and its report has been sent to          NPAs.                             another for inter corporate deposits
      chair as well as a    GoMP. In addition, MPSIDC has developed several                                                 extended by the SOE, have been approved
      majority of           initiatives for restructuring, including downsizing, with     MPSIDC has negative net           by the Board and await GoMP clearance,
      directors on the      approximately 80 employees accepting voluntary                worth now (in debt for            before these are taken up with borrowers.
      Board from private    retirement scheme and the accounting policy of the            about Rs7.5 billion).             Some 80 employees were offered VRS in
      and/or                Reserve Bank of India has been adopted. If the policy         Its mandate was realigned         2004 as part of the labor restructuring
      nongovernment         condition is amended as proposed, the condition is fully      to include only                   exercise.
      sector.               met.                                                          promotional activities and        The report of consultants appointed to
                                                                                          stopped lending in 1995,          suggest restructuring measures has been
                                                                                          but MPSIDC is still not           placed before the state cabinet for approval.
                                                                                          privatized. The compancy          Currently, there is no proposal for inviting
                                                                                          Reliance made a strong            bids for MPSIDC's shares from the market
                                                                                          bid for it initially, but since   with the proposed restructuring measures
                                                                                          it wanted to take over            under government consideration.
                                                                                          MPSIDC fully in 3 years,
                                                                                          GoMP refused Reliance's
                                                                                          offer.
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                             PPER Status
(B.13) Hive off to joint    Overall: Substantially complied with. (i) Partially complied   Babai farm, the biggest       Bids from the private sector for the Babai
      sector holding        with. Tenders were invited for Babai Agricultural Farm on      entity under MPSAIDC, is      farm were rejected by GoMP as prices
      large agricultural    three occasions--December 1997, July 1998, and April           still not hived off. "No      quoted were found to be unattractive.
      farm; reduce          2001. Tenders were received and negotiations held with         takers" is the feedback       NABSCONS, a subsidiary company of
      GoMP's                the bidders in 1998, but because of the withdrawal of the      given to the Mission.         NABARD, has recently valued the farm at
      shareholding in       first-ranked bidder, the deal could not be completed. On                                     Rs520 million, with the final decision being
      MPSAIDC to not        a subsequent tendering, the cabinet rejected the bids as       GoMP has not sanctioned       left to a cabinet subcommittee and the option
      more than 26% in      too low. On 1 August 2002, the cabinet directed the            a buyback of shares           of offering different parts of the farm on lease
      a transparent         Agricultural Department to develop new proposals for the       either.                       to several parties for 3.5 years having been
      manner,               future of Babai Farm. (ii) Fully complied with. In view of                                   suggested.
      contingent upon a     changed circumstances with respect to bifurcation, the                                       While about 100 employees of MPSAIDC
      buy back of shares    policy condition is proposed to be amended to: "The                                          have submitted their acceptance of VRS, the
      from Government       Board of Directors of MPSAIDC will approve a resolution                                      scheme has not been executed because of
      of India.             to reduce the share of GoMP ownership to 26%." The                                           insufficient funds.
                            board of directors of MPSAIDC has approved a reduction                                       The Agriculture Production Commissioner
                            in the share of GoMP's shareholding to 26%.                                                  has raised objections to the repurchase of
                            Government approval for buyback of shares is being                                           the Government's shares in MPSAIDC by
                            negotiated by GoMP. The Cabinet Sub-Committee on                                             GoMP at a price of Rs75 per share,
                            Economic Affairs has directed that a core group be                                           considering its current negative net worth,
                            formed to suggest additional organizational reforms. If                                      holding up the share buyback and
                            the policy condition is amended as proposed, the                                             consequent divestiture.
                            condition is fully met.                                                                      While no organizational restructuring
                                                                                                                         measures have been implemented, an MOU
                                                                                                                         with MP Agro Food Industries Ltd., a private
                                                                                                                         company, for the sale of a nutritional mix to
                                                                                                                         Women & Child Development Dept. of
                                                                                                                         GoMP, has been executed, with commission
                                                                                                                         of Rs125 per ton slated to be received by
                                                                                                                         MPSAIDC as sales commission.
(B.14) Divest 49% of        In view of changed circumstances with respect to               MPSRTC is in dire             GoMP has decided to liquidate MPSRTC
      MPSRTC's              bifurcation, the policy condition is proposed to be            financial condition. Adam     when the bifurcation of assets and liabilities
      shareholding in       amended to: "Take a cabinet decision to reorganize             Smith Institute, TA           between Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh
      the four              MPSRTC into four incorporated units." GoMP decided             consultants, proposed that    is completed.
      incorporated units;   through a cabinet decision on 18 April 2001 to                 it should be closed.          Out of the 10,600 employees of the
      further rationalize   restructure MPSRTC by dissolving the corporation and           Cabinet did not accept this   corporation, 8,900 have been offered VRS,
      routes.               forming four corporate units under the Companies Act of        proposal.                     with disbursement to 8,300 employees
                            1956 and in a manner consistent with the Program. The                                        having been completed and the VRS




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 2
                            order to form the new companies was issued on                  The state government has      compensation for 600 employees scheduled
                            26 August 2001. GoMP has also introduced efficiency            decided to denationalize      to be disbursed shortly. Of the balance 1,700
                            measures for MPSRTC by (i) allowing the company to             147 routes.                   employees, 500 who opted for VRS have
                            adjust tariffs up to 7.5% per year as of 13 February 2000;                                   been retained because of certain legal cases
                            (ii) introducing commercial principles, including not                                        and the need for adequate human resources
                            offering new guarantees, and elimination of free services                                    to carry out the winding-up process. Another
                            for special groups; (iii) substantially raising fees for bus                                 VRS for the balance 1,200 employees has




                                                                                                                                                                            71
                            passes; and (iv) offering VRS to a large number of                                           been announced, and the last date for
                            workers. If the policy condition is amended as proposed,                                     submission of applications is 28 October
                            the condition is fully met.                                                                  2006; 50­60% of these employees are
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                              PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                           72
                                                                                                                          expected to signify their acceptance.
                                                                                                                          Around 510 routes have been leased to
                                                                                                                          private companies, with lease rentals of
                                                                                                                          approximately Rs27.5 million per month




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 2
                                                                                                                          being received and applied toward meeting
                                                                                                                          administrative expenses, financing court
                                                                                                                          cases, and payment of old arrears.
                                                                                                                          GoMP has attached assets of the company
                                                                                                                          against the amount of around Rs800 crores
                                                                                                                          outstanding from MPSRTC toward road tax.
                                                                                                                          While creditors guaranteed by GoMP have
                                                                                                                          been repaid, NBFCs that extended lease
                                                                                                                          finance have been approached with a one-
                                                                                                                          time settlement scheme. The process of
                                                                                                                          auctioning the bus fleet has already
                                                                                                                          commenced, while assets like machinery are
                                                                                                                          being disposed of through open auction.
                                                                                                                          The entire liquidation process is expected to
                                                                                                                          be completed in a year, with approvals from
                                                                                                                          various government agencies having been
                                                                                                                          obtained.
(B.15) Reduce GoMP's        In view of changed circumstances with respect to               MPSFC suffers from             Post-bifurcation of assets and liabilities of
      shareholding in       bifurcation, the policy condition is proposed to be            NPAs of 45% of its total       MPSFC and the division of employees
      MPSFC by 25%          amended to: "Take a cabinet decision to restructure            loan portfolio, considering    between Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh,
      through public        MPSFC through reduction in staffing levels and actions         the principal component        a VRS scheme was offered and accepted by
      issue as              to minimize the future contingent liabilities of GoMP."        alone. Efforts to reduce       15 employees, with the disbursement having
      permissible under     The bifurcation scheme was prepared by the board of            losses and to downsize         been effected out of MPSFC's own funds.
      the State Financial   MPSFC general body, endorsed by GoMP and approved              are ongoing. Negotiations      Two loss-making branches have been closed
      Corporations Act      on 17 July 2001. The scheme is now under consideration         are also in progress with      down as part of organizational restructuring
      of 1951,              by the government of Chhattisgarh and GoMP. The                lenders like SIDBI, to write   measures.
      contingent upon       classification of the assets of MPSFC revealed that more       off a portion of the           An MOU was executed with SIDBI in 2003,
      amendment to the      than 30% of assets were nonperforming and the                  principal besides waiving      facilitating reduction of interest on loans by
      Act, reduce           company had negative equity of Rs1 billion. Because of         interest payments. The         2% and the provision of refinance at
      GoMP's                the high level of liabilities, immediate liquidation was not   lending portfolio to SMEs      concessional rates. Financial restructuring
      shareholding          possible. Therefore, GoMP has decided on downsizing            is being restructured by       involving settlement of high-cost bonds worth
      further to not more   and loss reduction rather than recapitalization. The           offering a scheme, in          Rs680 million placed with LIC, SBI & Bank of
      than 26%.             company prepared an action plan in 2001 to close               respect of loans disbursed     Baroda was completed. Moreover, while SLR
                            branches and reduce GoMP exposure. If the policy               prior to 1990, of not          Bonds amounting to around Rs770 million
                            condition is amended as proposed, the condition is fully       charging interest for more     have been prepaid/redeemed, negotiations
                            met.                                                           than 2 years. The results      for restructuring/reduction of SLR bond
                                                                                           of these measures have         liability of around Rs700 million, due to
                                                                                           not yet fructified.            various public sector banks, are in progress.
                                                                                                                          GoMP has also provided share capital
                                                                                                                          support of Rs40 million besides a short-term
                                                                                                                          loan of Rs600 million in FY2006 to finance
                                                                                                                          the cash deficit.
Condition                                Status at Tranche Release                             PCR Status                            PPER Status
                                                                                                                     While disbursements have increased to
                                                                                                                     Rs1.15 billion in FY2006 (Rs420 million in
                                                                                                                     FY2004), recovery has marginally improved
                                                                                                                     to Rs920 million from Rs830 million in
                                                                                                                     FY2004. The capital adequacy ratio
                                                                                                                     continues to be negative owing to
                                                                                                                     accumulated losses of the SOE, which
                                                                                                                     aggregated to Rs2.27 billion as on 31 March
                                                                                                                     2006 (Rs2.16 billion as on 31 March 2004).
                                                                                                                     NPAs have declined to 25% of MPSFC's
                                                                                                                     total loan portfolio as on 31 March 2006 from
                                                                                                                     47% as on 31 March 2004.
(B.16) Divest 49% of       In view of changed circumstances with respect to             MPPHC was given VRS,         The recommendations of a task force,
      GoMP's share in      bifurcation, the policy condition is proposed to be          since MPHB could not         headed by then principal secretary, Housing,
      MPHB following its   amended to: "Take a cabinet decision to change all Acts,     absorb the massive           on restructuring MPHB's operations, are
      incorporation.       rules, and existing orders to permit private sector          human resources of           expected to be approved once the scheme of
                           participation in MPHB." MPHB has a low rate of recovery      MPPHC.                       bifurcation of assets and liabilities of MPHB
                           on loans, particularly for low-income housing. By a                                       between Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh
                           cabinet decision dated 27 August 2002, the Housing and       MPHB still has negative      is cleared by the Government. The proposals
                           Environment Department has been directed to make             net worth and could not be   for restructuring include: (i) VRS or
                           changes to acts, rules, and existing orders as needed to     sold off.                    redeployment of a substantial portion of the
                           permit private sector participation in MPHB. If the policy                                surplus employees, with Class 3 and Class 4
                           condition is amended as proposed, the condition is fully     Mission was told "0%         staff constituting around two thirds of the
                           met.                                                         divestment to date."         current employee strength of 2,700; and
                                                                                                                     (ii) allocation of urban planning activities,
                                                                                                                     e.g., roads and sewerage line development,
                                                                                                                     rehabilitation of slum dwellers, etc. to MPHB,
                                                                                                                     to improve the Board's margins and offset
                                                                                                                     the impact of problems associated with
                                                                                                                     construction of houses like non-recovery of
                                                                                                                     sale proceeds, unsold flats, necessity to
                                                                                                                     make payments for land long before its
                                                                                                                     allotment, etc. Apart from the above, other
                                                                                                                     measures for restructuring that have been
                                                                                                                     implemented include: (i) public-private
                                                                                                                     partnerships in re-densification schemes
                                                                                                                     being executed (Re-densification of Indore




                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
                                                                                                                     Central Jail); (ii) undertaking commercial
                                                                                                                     projects, e.g., Platinum Plaza, Centre Point
                                                                                                                     etc., to offset the losses from construction of
                                                                                                                     houses for economically weaker sections;
                                                                                                                     and (iii) integrated project accounting system
                                                                                                                     to monitor profitability of each project.
                                                                                                                     Corporatization of MPHB and subsequent




                                                                                                                                                                       73
                                                                                                                     divestiture of 49% GoMP stake would be
                                                                                                                     considered only after the restructuring
                                                                                                                     measures are implemented.
Condition                                Status at Tranche Release                          PCR Status                              PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                                       74
(B.17) Sell or close the   Fully complied with. All 19 units of MPSIC have been      The cited entities have        All units of MPSIC, including the head office,
      remaining units of   closed. Two units have been sold to the private sector.   taken full VRS, and they       have been closed down and all MPSIC
      MPSIC, and                                                                     have not been active           employees, post-bifurcation, have been
      closure of the                                                                 since 2002. Under the          given VRS, with one employee's case




                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
      corporation.                                                                   Companies Act, for the         pending in court. VRS compensation of
                                                                                     company to be closed, all      Rs324 million, funded by the SRF, has been
                                                                                     its assets and liabilities     disbursed.
                                                                                     would have to be cleared.      Of the 19 manufacturing units under the
                                                                                     However, with the              SOE's control prior to the state's bifurcation,
                                                                                     exception of MPSLandDC,        two units were transferred to Chhattisgarh,
                                                                                     which sold Rs2million­         two sugar mills transferred to local
                                                                                     Rs3 million worth of its       cooperative societies, and two units are
                                                                                     assets, assets have not        being operated through management
                                                                                     been sold yet (since           contracts with private companies. Out of the
                                                                                     assets are outdated, out       balance 13 manufacturing units whose
                                                                                     of order, etc.). The           operations were discontinued, the assets of
                                                                                     GoMP guarantees their          one have been transferred to a private
                                                                                     debt to lenders. If they are   company while the buildings of another unit,
                                                                                     sold, banks will ask for       Brush and Sport Industry, have been
                                                                                     payment, hence GoMP is         surrendered to the Industry Department.
                                                                                     not too keen on expediting     Valuation reports in respect of the remaining
                                                                                     the closing of these           11 units have been forwarded to GoMP for
                                                                                     companies.                     perusal.
                                                                                                                    No operations, other than recovery of old
                                                                                                                    dues, are currently being carried out by
                                                                                                                    MPSIC.
                                                                                                                    A GoMP guarantee, to the effect that any
                                                                                                                    shortfall in sale proceeds of assets to meet
                                                                                                                    the outstanding liabilities would be made
                                                                                                                    good by it, has been sought, to enable the
                                                                                                                    directors to issue a solvency declaration, the
                                                                                                                    first step toward legal closure. The liquidation
                                                                                                                    process is expected to last 3 years from the
                                                                                                                    date of its commencement.
                                                                                                                    Creditors for supply of material amounting to
                                                                                                                    around Rs30 million besides contingent
                                                                                                                    liabilities from court cases estimated at Rs14
                                                                                                                    million have to be settled out of the proceeds
                                                                                                                    of sale of assets of the SOE, with the
                                                                                                                    balance proceeds reverting to GoMP.
Condition                                Status at Tranche Release                              PCR Status                            PPER Status
(B.18) Complete            Substantially complied with. MPSTC has been closed.           The Government                MPSTDC targeted turnover of during
      restructuring of     MPSTDC offered properties for long-term lease in 2002         (Archeological Sites of       FY2006 is Rs300 million vis-à-vis sales of
      MPSTDC,              but did not receive any suitable bids. As lack of             India) has been injecting     Rs170 million achieved in FY2005
      including lease      infrastructure and/or road access has been a main factor      money to the Tourism          (Provisional).
      and/or sale of its   behind lack of positive response to bid process, six          Corporation for last          With an improvement in operating
      properties; and      unprofitable units have been closed and 44 staff              4 years (about Rs500          performance, indicated by an operating profit
      close the MPSTC.     redeployed.                                                   million) as well as the       of Rs22.5 million during FY2005
                                                                                            th
                                                                                         11 Finance Commission,        (Provisional) compared with a loss of Rs1.6
                                                                                         so most of the properties     million recorded in FY2004, accumulated
                                                                                         are in good condition.        losses have decreased to Rs89 million in
                                                                                         MPSTDC has not been           FY2005 (Provisional) from Rs128 million in
                                                                                         too successful in lease       FY2004, according to data available from the
                                                                                         and/or sale of its            Department of PSU, GoMP.
                                                                                         properties. Although three    The sale/lease of properties of MPSTDC has
                                                                                         World Heritage Sites are      not been carried out.
                                                                                         located in Madhya
                                                                                         Pradesh, lack of              MPSTC Status of court cases relating to
                                                                                         infrastructure makes it       VRS disbursement and the current position
                                                                                         undesirable for the private   with regard to remaining employees are to
                                                                                         sector to invest in these     be ascertained; confirmation regarding sale
                                                                                         areas. The Oberoi Group       of assets and settlement of outstanding
                                                                                         was interested in a           liabilities is to be obtained
                                                                                         number of palaces,
                                                                                         including Rajgar Palace,
                                                                                         but an agreement has not
                                                                                         been reached yet.

(B.19) Review existing     Fully complied with. GoMP has enacted enabling                Condition was complied        No further action taken on cooperatives
      arrangements in      provisions for cooperative societies based on the model       with.                         sector reform.
      cooperative          multipurpose Cooperative Act of the Government and
      societies and        relevant acts in other states. Under this act, all previous
      develop options      GoMP control and restrictions have been removed.
      and                  Cooperatives have been given full operational freedom in
      recommendations      their business. New cooperatives, not receiving loan or
      to enhance the       share capital from GoMP or government guarantees, can
      operational          register under this act and existing cooperatives can
      freedom of           apply for conversion to this act.




                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
      cooperatives,
      while taking into
      consideration
      relevant proposals
      in other states.




                                                                                                                                                                       75
Condition                               Status at Tranche Release                          PCR Status                             PPER Status




                                                                                                                                                76
(B.20) Prepare power      Fully complied with. A power sector investment plan has   MPSERC was formed and          CIP no longer prepared.
      sector CIP on the   been prepared and is being implemented as part of the     granted two tariff awards
      basis of a power    Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program           twice so far, in
      sector master       Loan.                                                     October 2001 and in




                                                                                                                                                Appendix 2
      plan.                                                                         November 2002. The total
                                                                                    debt of MPSEB is
                                                                                    Rs129 billion--all public
                                                                                    debt, which is about 85%
                                                                                    of total revenue receipts of
                                                                                    Madhya Pradesh. Industry
                                                                                    still cross-subsidizes
                                                                                    agriculture. However, this
                                                                                    is only anecdotal
                                                                                    information from various
                                                                                    government officials;
                                                                                    actual figures have been
                                                                                    requested by the Mission.
                                                                                    The financial restructuring
                                                                                    plan of MPSEB was
                                                                                    accepted by the Finance
                                                                                    Department, the chief
                                                                                    secretary, and the chief
                                                                                    minister. GoMP prepared
                                                                                    a financial restructuring
                                                                                    plan for restructuring of
                                                                                    MPSEB, to be formally
                                                                                    approved by the state
                                                                                    cabinet. GoMP has taken
                                                                                    over the liabilities of
                                                                                    MPSEB relating to central
                                                                                    PSUs of Rs28.1 billion,
                                                                                    and toward the Rural
                                                                                    Electrification Corporation
                                                                                    of Rs17,000 million in
                                                                                    October 2004, thus
                                                                                    opening a line of credit for
                                                                                    improvement of the
                                                                                    infrastructure in rural
                                                                                    areas. During the course
                                                                                    of 2004­2005, the new
                                                                                    Government settled the
                                                                                    defaults of MPSEB of
                                                                                    Rs5 billion to Banks and
                                                                                    Financial Institutions in
                                                                                    SLR Bonds.
Condition                                  Status at Tranche Release                            PCR Status                            PPER Status
(B.21) Prepare report on     Fully complied with. In the context of the preparation of   Covenant was fulfilled.        No change.
      PWD experience         the Madhya Pradesh State Road Sector Development
      with roads and/or      Program, TA for institutional strengthening and capacity
      bridge construction    building for the road sector of Madhya Pradesh is being
      and maintenance        provided. This TA will strengthen the capacity of the
      under BOT or           PWD in transport planning, project finance, and
      similar                investment management and assist PWD with
      arrangement,           implementation. The Program aims to support the
      including              formation of a restructured PWD with an organizational
      recommendations        structure and clearly defined responsibilities. The
      for changes, if any,   responsibility for implementation of road projects
      to the policy and      involving private sector participation, such as BOT, has
      regulatory             been assigned to the Madhya Pradesh State Bridge
      framework for          Development Corporation, a statutory corporation under
      private sector road    the PWD. The role of the corporation as a BOT
      development,           coordinator will be evaluated under the TA.
      tender procedure,
      and PWD's
      organizational
      structure.

(B.22) Establish a rent      Partially complied with. The proposed amendment to          No new developments to         No change.
      tribunal to exercise   establish the rent tribunal was submitted for passage       date. The mission was
      the powers of          during the 20 August­15 September 2001 legislative          informed that political
      appeals authority;     session. The assembly returned the legislative proposal     resistance to the Rent
      review the initial     to the select committee and the select committee            Control Act exists, with the
      impact of the          referred it back to GoMP for reconsideration of the         perception that this
      Amendment to the       structure of the rent tribunal and associated financial     resistance would hinder
      Rent Control Act       implications. The matter remains under consideration        private sector involvement
      on the level of        with GoMP. Establishment of the rent tribunal and other     in the residential
      rents and on           subsequent actions are contingent on passing of the         construction sector.
      investment in the      legislation.
      housing sector.

(B.23) Implement             Fully complied with. Environmental monitoring training      Covenant fulfilled.            No change. PCB continues to conduct
      integrated training    for technical staff of PCB is occurring under the                                          environmental monitoring.
      program for PCB        Government's program for enhanced environmental




                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 2
      staff and industrial   monitoring.
      associations on
      environmental
      monitoring and
      environmental
      management.




                                                                                                                                                              77
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BJP = Bharatiya Janata Party, BOT = build-operate-transfer, CIP = core investment program, DFID = Department for
International Development, DPE = Department of Public Enterprises, ERC = electricity regulatory commission, FD = Finance Department, FY = fiscal year, GoMP




                                                                                                                                                               78
= government of Madhya Pradesh, MCDD = mission on control of diarrheal diseases, MOU = memorandum of understanding, MP = Madhya Pradesh,
MPERC = Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission, MPHB = Madhya Pradesh Housing Board, MPPHC = Madhya Pradesh Police Housing
Corporation, MPRDC = Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation, MPSAIDC = Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation, MPSCB




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 2
= Madhya Pradesh Slum Clearance Board, MPSEB = Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, MPSERC = Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Regulatory
Commission, MPSFC = Madhya Pradesh Sate Financial Corporation, MPSIC = Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation, MPSIDC = Madhya Pradesh State
Industrial Development Corporation, MPSLandDC = Madhya Pradesh State Land Development Corporation, MPSRTC = Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport
Corporation, MPSTC = Madhya Pradesh State Textile Corporation, MPSTDC = Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation, MTFF = medium-term
fiscal framework, NABARD = National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development, NABSCONS = National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Consultancy Services, NBFC = nonbanking finance company, NPA = nonperforming asset, NSDP = net state domestic product, O&M = operation and
maintenance, OEM = Operations Evaluation Mission, PCB = Pollution Control Board, PCR = project completion report, PPER = program/project performance
evaluation report, PRMC = public resource management committee, PSU = public sector undertaking, PWD = Public Works Department, SBFAU = State
Budgeting and Fiscal Analysis Unit, SBI = State Bank of India, SDP = state domestic product, SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India,
SLR = statutory liquidity ratio, SME = small and medium-sized enterprise, SOE = state-owned enterprise, SRF = State Renewal Fund, TA = technical assistance,
VAT = value-added tax, VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                           Appendix 3        79



                                        IMPACT OF BIFURCATION

1.      Madhya Pradesh was bifurcated in November 2000 into the new states of Madhya
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. Although not directly referred to in the program design, the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) was 1aware that proposals to bifurcate Madhya Pradesh had been
around for some 20 years, and the decision to act relatively quickly in 2000 was heavily
influenced by political considerations. An assumption identified in the Madhya Pradesh
Public Resource Management Program (MPPRMP) program framework generically alludes
to such a possibility in stating that the "program success is contingent on stable political and
exogenous environment; exogenous shocks, including policy decisions by the Central
Government could adversely affect economic development, environment for private sector,
and implementation of State Renewal Fund."

2.       The new state of Chhattisgarh was carved out of 16 southeastern districts of Madhya
Pradesh with a population of almost 18 million people, almost 27% of the population of the
pre-bifurcated state. Because of geography, Chhattisgarh gained significant natural
resources. Conversely, most of the comparatively underdeveloped districts of Madhya
Pradesh, generally with a higher than average scheduled tribe population, went to
Chhattisgarh. These areas were also prone to public safety problems primarily because of
activities of the Naxalite movement. Because of the inclusion of these districts, the new
Madhya Pradesh did not have to spend large amounts of additional funds on the
development of these areas or expenditure on specific public safety measures.

3.      The most significant political effect was to reduce the size of the Madhya Pradesh
state assembly, as representatives of the 16 former districts moved to the new Chhattisgarh
assembly. Neither the chief minister nor the governor was changed. The Madhya Pradesh
State Reorganization Act, 2000,2 identified the new Madhya Pradesh as the sole successor
state of pre-bifurcated Madhya Pradesh for purposes of obligations under the Program.
However, section 44(1), which governs public debt liabilities, makes this ruling less definitive,
requiring consultation among the Government of India (the Government), government of
Madhya Pradesh (GoMP), and government of Chhattisgarh. In a letter dated 16 February
2001, the additional chief secretary of the government of Chhattisgarh informed the
Government of the decision of the government of Chhattisgarh not to participate in the
second and third tranches of MPPRMP, thus removing any legal constraints to new Madhya
Pradesh having sole claim as the successor state for purposes of obligations and tranches
of the Program.

4.      The bifurcation posed challenges to the reform momentum and the truncated state's
economy in several ways, the most notable being the impact on receipts, power availability,
and expenditure. GoMP and ADB estimated the fiscal impact of bifurcation on the new
Madhya Pradesh budget for FY2001 at 0.82% of net state domestic product (NSDP). The
impact on receipts was mainly because much of the high value mineral bearing areas of the
state went to Chhattisgarh, thus negatively affecting the tax and non-tax (royalties) receipts
of the smaller Madhya Pradesh. Similarly, a larger share of the power plants went to
Chhattisgarh on the basis of location, leaving the new Madhya Pradesh with a serious power
shortage. In terms of expenditure responsibilities, there were mixed effects. The new
Madhya Pradesh had a larger share of the population in comparison to the share in area,
which implied larger public expenditure. Moreover, a large majority of government
employees, given the choice of Chhattisgarh or Madhya Pradesh, chose the latter, resulting
in a disproportionately higher salary burden on it. This resulted in a 2% increase in the share
1
    The Naxalite movement is formed of radical, often violent, revolutionary communist groups following Maoist
    ideology born in 1967 out of the Sino-Soviet split in the Indian communist movement. Initially the movement
    had its epicenter in West Bengal but has spread into less developed areas of rural central and eastern India,
    including Chhattisgarh.
2
    Section 50 (1)(a).
80        Appendix 3



of employees, in proportion to the population, and in additional expenditure of Rs1,50 billion
per annum. GoMP also had to keep a high number of class III and class IV workers on its
payroll, since the move to Chhattisgarh for these lower level workers was not feasible.
GoMP was responsible for establishing the new Chhattisgarh capital in Raipur and was
required to continue to transfer un-bifurcated organizations and corporations.

5.     Perhaps the most contentious aspect of bifurcation was with the split of public sector
undertakings (PSUs), which posed complex legal issues for GoMP's reforms. The Madhya
Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2000, required assets and liabilities to be split according to
mutual agreement between the two states. Most of the PSUs under the reform program were
affected. For example, it was proposed the assets and liabilities of Madhya Pradesh Tourism
Corporation would be partitioned at the ratio of 6:94 (Chhattisgarh:Madhya Pradesh),
Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation at the rate of 10.29:89.71, and Madhya
Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation at the ratio of 17:83. All of these
required approval from the Government for full implementation. The Madhya Pradesh State
Financial Corporation (MPSFC) was apportioned 17.51:82.49 and the scheme was finally
approved by the Government on 12 March 2003.

6.       The delays in enterprise restructuring put additional strain on Madhya Pradesh's
already precarious financial condition. Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation
(MPSRTC) had been losing money for some time. A dispute initially occurred regarding the
partition of MPSRTC between Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. Chhattisgarh proposed to
take on only 18% of the assets and liabilities of MPSRTC, while Madhya Pradesh state
proposed a 23.51% share for Chhattisgarh. On 27 December 2002, the Government ordered
a provisional bifurcation formula of 76:24 to Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, respectively,
until a final decision may be reached. At the time of the Operations Evaluation Mission, the
issue was still not resolved although the GoMP had resolved to close MPSRTC and liquidate
all assets once the split was resolved.

7.      The split of Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board (MPSEB) assets and liabilities
was difficult, leading ultimately to the Government's arbitration in 23 May 2003. However,
this led to charges by GoMP that the split left Madhya Pradesh with a disproportionate share
of the liabilities, with 78% of liabilities allocated to Madhya Pradesh and the revenues
allocated are only 64%, making it even more difficult for MPSEB to service these liabilities.
Although the share of energy consumption of the new Madhya Pradesh state was about
78% of the combined states, the generation capacity allotted to the new Madhya Pradesh
was just 68%. The new Madhya Pradesh had 94% of the agricultural consumers who need
to be subsidized, and was incurring increased financial losses because of the low
agricultural tariff and even lower recovery from farmers. With only 61% of industrial
consumers remaining in Madhya Pradesh, the economics of electricity generation and cross-
subsidizing agricultural and domestic consumers was adversely affected. As the high-cost
electricity plants were located in Madhya Pradesh, the cost of generation in the state rose to
Rs1.27 per kilowatt-hour against Rs0.77 per kilowatt-hour in Chhattisgarh. Finally, a majority
of the employees (about 78%) were allocated to MPSEB, against only 22% to Chhattisgarh
State Electricity Board.

8.     The shadow cast by these ongoing disputes delayed the implementation of reforms
and the MPPRMP took far longer to implement than envisioned. To resolve a continuing
impasse, on 30 March 2003, an order from the Government was issued to form the R. P.
Kapur Committee3 to arbitrate on the division of PSUs.



3
    The committee was formed on 31 July 2003, chaired by the former chief secretary of the composite Madhya
    Pradesh state with the chief secretaries of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh as members.
                                                                            Appendix 3     81



9.       According to GoMP and ADB estimates, the adjustment costs associated with the
reforms would fall from about $600 million to around $530 million. The revenue loss from tax
reform associated with the introduction of the value-added tax was estimated to decline from
$185 million to $150 million as a result of bifurcation, based on a reduction of the revenue
loss from lowering input taxes and stamp duties by the same proportion as manufacturing
output loss (assuming inputs are used principally in manufacturing) resulting from bifurcation.
The revenue loss was assumed to cover March 1999 through June 2001, with the reduction
in revenue loss occurring during November 2000­June 2001. Regarding costs associated
with PSU restructuring, the effects on only MPSRTC and MPSFC were singled out. Madhya
Pradesh was responsible for restructuring three of MPSRTC four units (the fourth was under
the responsibility of Chhattisgarh). It offered a voluntary retirement scheme (VRS) to workers
of the part of the company ultimately residing in Chhattisgarh. It was therefore estimated that
bifurcation would reduce the MPSRTC restructuring costs by around $25 million. Shifting
some MPSFC liabilities to Chhattisgarh would reduce adjustment costs by $12 million.
However, the downsizing and use of the VRS was estimated to increase the adjustment cost
by $2 million. Thus, the overall PSU adjustment costs were estimated to decline by
$35 million as a result of bifurcation and may be higher, depending on the ultimate
restructuring plan implemented for MPSRTC. As the loan size of $250 million was still less
than 50% of the revised adjustment cost of $531 million, it was agreed that the loan size was
justifiable on the basis of revised adjustment costs.
82        Appendix 4



             FISCAL CONSEQUENCES OF MULTILATERAL ADJUSTMENT LENDING
                               TO STATES IN INDIA1

A.        Introduction

1.       Large and increasing fiscal imbalances at the state level, had adverse consequences for
macroeconomic stability, and raised major concerns about growth and equity by impacting on
efficiency in resource allocation, technological progress, and the intergenerational distribution of
tax burden. Wide differences in the fiscal health of the states, failure of the fiscal transfer system
to offset states' genuine fiscal disadvantages, and significant interstate differences in standards
of governance and delivery systems have led to increasing inequalities in the provision of social
services and physical infrastructure. Moreover, the transition from a planned to a market
economy has created unequal opportunities for different states, as states with greater market
development, access, and good infrastructure facilities are better able to take advantage of the
opportunities. At the same time, coalition governments supported by parties with varied
ideological persuasions and the emergence of regional parties in states aligned to the
Government of India have put tremendous strain on the institutions of federal governance. The
problem was exacerbated by the short electoral cycle governing the political parties and
politicians.

2.      Uncontrolled subnational deficits and contingent liabilities have made the task of
macroeconomic stabilization 2 much more difficult and complex. The pro-cyclical pattern of
spending when the subnational deficits are uncontrolled is even more concerning. When an
attempt is made to control the borrowing through the budget, states resort to borrowing through
special purpose vehicles and accumulate liabilities in public sector enterprises, particularly
power utilities. Some states control their deficits by compressing outlays on essential public
services. Finally, the involvement of many actors in subnational fiscal consolidation, particularly
bilateral and multilateral agencies besides the central Government, makes the incentive
structure unclear and complex.

3.      The consequences of states' fiscal stress are not confined to the deficit measures alone;
there are significant repercussions on revenues and expenditures as well. When states are
unable to soften the budget constraints, the fiscal stress shows itself in compressed expenditure
allocation to basic public services. In fact, the sociology of fiscal politics is such that the fiscal
stress in a state invariably results in compressing productive spending on maintenance and
creation of physical infrastructure, with significant adverse impacts on economic growth in the
state.

4.       For the same reason, fiscal adjustment focusing on any measure of deficit reduction is
inadequate, as it ignores the possibility of keeping deficits low by cutting down spending on
essential public services. Many quantitative and qualitative aspects of a fiscal imbalance need
to be taken into account in calibrating fiscal adjustment to prevent inappropriate policy
responses. Second, the ability of states to achieve fiscal correction depends on economic and
political constraints. Third, it is important to understand whether the stringent conditions of
structural adjustment lending by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB) have
succeeded in hastening the process of subnational fiscal consolidation, or resulted in softening
1
    Prepared by G. M. Rao, Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) consultant, and P. Chakraborty, Senior Economist,
    National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, New Delhi.
2
    Macroeconomic stabilization is a central government function as macro policy instruments have countrywide
    spillover Oates, W. E. 1999. An Essay on Fiscal Federalism. Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. XXXVII (3), pp.
    1120­1149.
                                                                                                  Appendix 4        83


the recipient states' budget constraints. This study undertakes econometric analysis to unravel
the effects of adjustment lending on states' finances in the medium term. The results of the
paper are preliminary and tentative, as adjustment lending is a relatively recent phenomenon.

5.      Evaluating fiscal adjustment by states is difficult because fiscal policy consists of a long
vector of components including public investment, consumption, transfers to households, and
the structure of the tax system.3 It becomes even more complex as fiscal adjustment measures
have both quantitative and qualitative dimensions. 4 The problem is compounded as states
conceal their actual fiscal positions through various off-budget borrowings.

B.        Fiscal Imbalances in States: Quantitative and Qualitative Dimensions

          1.       State level Fiscal Imbalance: Recent Developments

6.      Table A4.1 presents the trends in revenue and fiscal deficits of the states taken together.
The analysis shows that, despite severe pressures on their finances, the states tried to contain
their revenue and fiscal deficits until FY1997. However, the pressure of salary and pension
revision increased both revenue and fiscal deficits sharply from FY1997. The problem was not
helped by the steadily declining tax devolution from the center, of over 1% to gross domestic
product (GDP) over the period from FY1990 to FY2001. Similarly, a sharp increase in
indebtedness and the rising cost of borrowing led to a significant increase in interest payments.
The period since the late 1990s has also seen a sharp increase in contingent liabilities incurred
through public enterprises and special purpose vehicles. These are well recorded and
analyzed.5

                                     Table A4.1: Fiscal Trends in States
                                              FY2001­FY2006

          Description                           FY2001       FY2002      FY2003      FY2004      FY2005      FY2006
     1.   Revenue Deficit                           2.59        2.25        2.22         1.17        0.49        0.05
     2.   Gross Fiscal Deficit                      4.21        4.17        4.46         3.50        3.20        2.71
     3.   Primary Deficit                           1.47        1.31        1.50         0.68        0.70        0.16
     4.   Revenue Receipts                         11.21       11.44       11.47        11.92       12.74       13.12
     5.   Current Transfers                         4.18        4.18        4.29         4.34        5.13        5.31
     6.   Revenue Expenditure                      13.80       13.69       13.68        13.09       13.22       13.16
     7.   Interest Payments                         2.74        2.86        2.96         2.82        2.50        2.54
     8.   Capital Outlay                            1.41        1.49        1.90         1.97        2.39        2.43
     9.   Development Expenditurea                  9.50        9.32       10.15         9.40       10.16        9.81
    10.   Non-Development Expenditure a             6.05        6.20        6.12         6.03        5.70        5.83
    11.   Social Sector Expenditure a               5.78        5.60        5.42         5.39        5.95        5.82
    12.   Social Servicesa                          5.13        5.00        4.82         4.71        5.19        5.13
          of which:

3
    de Castro. A. S., I. Goldin and L. A. P. da Silva. 2002. Relative Returns to Policy Reform: Evidence from Controlled
    Cross-Country Regression. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2898. The World Bank. Washington.
4
    See, Alam, A. and M. Sundberg 2002. A Decade of Fiscal Transition. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
    No. 2835. The World Bank. Washington D.C.; and Rao, G. M. and M. W. Sundberg. 2003. The Quality of Fiscal
    Adjustment and Subnational Fiscal Reform. Mimeo.
5
    See Rao, G. M. 2002. State Finances in India. Economic and Political Weekly Vol. XXXVII (31) August 3­9, and
    World Bank. 2005. State Fiscal Reforms in India: Progress and Prospects, A World Bank Report. Macmillan India
    Ltd. New Delhi.
84            Appendix 4



         Description                                                FY2001         FY2002      FY2003         FY2004         FY2005   FY2006
         a. Education, Sports, Art, and
            Culture                                                       2.66          2.57        2.40         2.31          2.33     2.91
         b. Medical, Public Health, and
            Family Welfare                                                0.73          0.70        0.66         0.63          0.72     0.73
Note:   Figures are percentage of gross domestic product (GDP).
a
  GDP for FY2006 has been estimated from Government of India. 2006. Budget at a Glance 2006­07, New Dehli.
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

7.      Even if deficits are taken to measure the fiscal health of the states, considering the
deficits in the consolidated accounts alone could be misleading. This is because, while some
states provide for the losses in power utilities through subsidies, others do not. The fiscal deficit
in the states, reworked to include the losses in power utilities, is shown alongside the fiscal
deficits in the consolidated accounts in Figure A4.1. It shows that the deficits on account of
power utilities are high and increasing; in FY2001, while the combined fiscal deficits of the
states as a ratio of GDP was about 5.1%, the fiscal deficits (including the power sector deficit)
was 6.45%. It also illustrates that the power sector deficits have shown a steady increase over
the years. In the mid-1990s, deficits on account of the power sector--not included in the state
budgets--was virtually zero. However, by FY2001, it was about 1.4% of GDP. This implies that
any attempt to infer the severity of fiscal stress in the states, only on the basis of budgetary
measures of deficits, may not be appropriate.


                                  Figure A4.1: Fiscal Deficit with       r e without
                                                                  F ig uand  1       Power Sector Deficit
                                     F is c a l D e fic it w ith(AaComparison)
                                                                    n d w ith o u t P o w e r S e c to r
                                                             D e fic it: A C o m p a r is o n
                        GSDP)
                     to SDP




                                7.00
                                   7
                                6.00
                                   6
                                5.00
                                   5
             percent to




                                4.00
                                   4
          As percent




                                3.00
                                   3
                                2.00
                                   2
                                1.00
                                   1
                                0.00
                                   0
         (As



                                          3


                                                  4


                                                              5


                                                                      6


                                                                               7


                                                                                           8


                                                                                                   9




                                                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                           00
                                       -9


                                               -9


                                                           -9


                                                                   -9


                                                                            -9


                                                                                        -9


                                                                                                -9




                                                                                                                      -0


                                                                                                                               -0
                                  92


                                              93


                                                       94


                                                                  95


                                                                          96


                                                                                    97


                                                                                               98




                                                                                                                  00


                                                                                                                              01
                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                     99
                                19


                                          19


                                                      19


                                                              19


                                                                       19


                                                                                   19


                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                    19




                                        F D Including P sector D eficit                  F D E xclud ing P sector D eficit
       FD = fiscal deficit, SDP = state domestic product.
       Source: Reserve Bank of India.

8.      Concerned with the steadily deteriorating fiscal health of the states, the Eleventh
Finance Commission (EFC) was required to "...draw a monitorable fiscal reforms programme
aimed at reduction in revenue deficits of the states...."6 However, the monitorable program of
linking grants to fiscal performance indicators, recommended by the EFC, had serious
shortcomings in the way it was designed and did not help to improve the situation much.
Therefore, the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) was required to "...review the state of the

6
    Public Finance. 2000. Report of the Eleventh Finance Commission. June. Available:
    http://www.tn.gov.in/tsfc/11threport.pdf.
                                                                                           Appendix 4   85


finances of the Union and the States and suggest a plan by which the governments, collectively
and severally, may bring about a restructuring of the public finances restoring budgetary
balance, achieving macro-economic stability and debt reduction along with equitable growth."7

9.      The fiscal restructuring plan recommended by the TFC requires that combined revenue
deficits of the center and states should be eliminated by FY2008, and aggregate fiscal deficit
should be contained at 6% of GDP. The state governments on their part would have to
restructure their finances to eliminate the revenue deficit and contain the fiscal deficit at 3% of
GDP by FY2008. While the revenue deficits would have to be phased out--not only in the
aggregate but in each of the states--fiscal deficit targets for individual states would have to be
set on the basis of the sustainability conditions of each state (based on the ratio of interest
payments to revenue receipts).

10.     The TFC made detailed recommendations on the measures to accelerate the growth of
revenues and decelerate the growth of expenditures in states to achieve fiscal consolidation. It
also recommended that the states should enact state fiscal responsibility acts (FRA), and work
out medium-term fiscal plans to achieve revenue and fiscal deficit targets. This would entitle
them to avail of the benefits of debt restructuring, involving consolidation of debt for a fresh term
of 20 years at a reduced interest rate of 7.5%. The states have acted swiftly to join the fiscal
restructuring program and 23 states have passed FRAs. Another incentive component--writing
off the repayments of central loans due from FY2005 to FY2009--was linked to progress in the
reduction in revenue deficits.

          2.       Recent Trends in State Finances

11.     The aggregate fiscal trend in state finances shows significant improvement, particularly
since FY2003 (Figure A4.2). The aggregate revenue and fiscal deficits of the states have shown
a sharp decline. The revenue deficit in FY2005 is estimated at just about 0.5% of GDP, about
2% lower than in FY2001 (Table A4.1). Similarly, the fiscal deficit for FY2005, estimated at 3.2%
of GDP, is marginally higher than the target set for FY2008. The states' capital expenditure
relative to GDP has also increased from 1.5% in FY2002 to 2.4% in FY2005. Even if the final
accounts of revenue and fiscal deficits for FY2006 are marginally higher, it is clear that the fiscal
health of the states has shown a significant improvement and they are well on their way to
achieving the targets set by the TFC.




7
    Public Finance. 2002. Report of the Twelfth Finance Commission. November. Available:
    http://indiabudget.nic.in/es2004-05/chapt2005/chap25.pdf.
86         Appendix 4




                                                               Fiscal2:
                                                             Figure
                                         Figure A4.2: Trend in        Imbalances in States
                                                Trends in Fiscal Imbalances in States
                        5                                                             Fiscal Deficit
      Per Cent of GDP
              of GDP


                        4
                        3                                                             Revenue Deficit

                        2
      Percent




                        1                                                               Primary Deficit
                        0
                                6         7         8         9         0         1         2         3         4         5         6         7
                            5-9       6-9       7-9       8-9       9-0       0-0       1-0       2-0       3-0       4-0       5-0       6-0
                           9         9         9         9         9         0         0         0         0         0         0         0
                        19        19        19        19        19        20        20        20        20        20        20        20
                                                                                    Years

     GDP = gross domestic product.
     Source: Reserve Bank of India.

12.     Is the improvement in state finances caused by states' own efforts or is it due to
exogenous factors? The states' own efforts include measures to improve revenue productivity
from tax and non-tax sources assigned to them, and those initiated to compress expenditures.
The exogenous factors with favorable impact on state finances include the introduction of debt
swap scheme, larger tax devolution from increased buoyancy of central taxes, larger transfers
for various central schemes, and those arising from the TFC's recommendations.

13.    The disaggregated analysis of the sources of improvements in state finances presented
in Table A4.2 shows that of the 2.1% improvement, increase in revenues contributed to 1.5%
and the remaining 0.6% was due to compression of expenditures. About 1% of the improvement
was due to increased devolution recommended by the TFC, higher buoyancy of central taxes
since FY2002, and increased grants for various central schemes. On the expenditure side,
reduction in interest payments following the debt swap scheme and later caused by adoption of
the TFC's scheme of debt restructuring and write-off, contributed to a 0.24% improvement in
revenue deficit. The interest payment as a ratio of GDP declined from 2.96% in FY2003 to
2.82% in FY2004 and is estimated at 2.5% in FY2005.

                            Table A4.2: Fiscal Consolidation: Contribution of Different Factors

                                                                                                                  Cumulative Contribution
                                                                                                                 Improvement     to the
                                                           Percentage point changes in                             in FY2005 improvement
                                                          the fiscal variables as a ratio of                          over    in revenue
Description                                                SDP over the previous year in                             FY2001    deficit (%)
Fiscal Variables                                     FY2002          FY2003          FY2004          FY2005
Revenue Deficit                                       (0.34)          (0.03)          (1.05)         (0.68)             (2.1)
Fiscal Deficit                                        (0.04)           0.29           (0.96)          (0.3)            (1.01)
Primary Deficit                                       (0.16)           0.19           (0.82)          0.02             (0.77)
Revenue Receipts                                       0.23            0.03            0.45           0.82              1.53                  (72.9)
Own revenues                                           0.23           (0.08)           0.4            0.03              0.58                  (27.6)
Current Transfers                                        0             0.11            0.05           0.79              0.95                  (45.2)
                                                                                          Appendix 4     87


                                                                               Cumulative Contribution
                                                                              Improvement     to the
                                       Percentage point changes in              in FY2005 improvement
                                      the fiscal variables as a ratio of           over    in revenue
 Description                           SDP over the previous year in              FY2001    deficit (%)
 Revenue Expenditure               (0.11)      (0.01)     (0.59)      0.13       (0.58)           27.6
 Interest Payments                  0.12         0.1      (0.14)     (0.32)      (0.24)           11.4
 Capital Outlay                     0.08        0.41       0.07       0.42        0.98
 Developmental Expenditure         (0.18)       0.83      (0.75)      0.76        0.66
SDP = gross state domestic product.
Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

14.      In contrast, cumulative improvement in revenue deficit in FY2005 over FY2001, resulting
from increase in states' own revenues was about 0.6% and compression of noninterest
expenditures was 0.34%. Thus, states' own effort contributed 43% to the reduction in revenue
deficit and 57% of the reduction is attributable to exogenous factors. While this is lower than the
reduction caused by central transfers and savings because of debt swap, it is still important.
Higher transfers are likely to continue and, more importantly, higher buoyancy of central taxes is
also likely to show buoyancy in tax devolution. The benefits of debt restructuring implemented
on the basis of the TFC's recommendations will continue in the future. Thus, in the medium
term, the improvement in the fiscal situation is likely to continue.

15.     The reduction in the revenue deficit has had a favorable effect--not only in reducing
fiscal and primary deficits but also in increasing capital outlay in the states. Of the 2% reduction
in revenue deficit-gross state domestic product (SDP) ratio, 1% was used to reduce fiscal
deficits and the remainder was used to increase capital outlay in the states. Despite this, the
increase in development expenditure, which includes social services with a large revenue
expenditure component, has been lower than the capital outlay (0.66%). In other words, there
was no increase in states' developmental expenditure as a ratio of SDP in FY2005 over that of
FY2002. In some social sectors such as education, the expenditure-SDP ratio was actually
lower in 2005­2006 than in 2002­2003. This may be partly because some central transfers,
such as that for the national primary education scheme (SSA), do not pass through state
budgets and are given directly to districts or spending agencies. Nevertheless, it is important
that the focus on reducing deficits should not cause compression of social sector expenditures.

16.      While the improvement in the fiscal health of the states is noteworthy, some recent
developments threaten to reverse the trend. The first is the risk of pay revision. Some state
governments have already appointed pay commissions (Karnataka and Punjab), and the
Government's decision to appoint a pay commission would cause ripple effects. Revision in pay
and pensions contributed to an increase of over 2% in revenue expenditures in states from
FY1997 to FY2000. A similar increase could destabilize the finances of the states again.
Second, the era of low interest rates seems to be over. Although the average rate of interest
has fallen significantly because of the TFC debt restructuring plan, new loans by states will have
higher interest rates. Third, some states have not shown any inclination to adopt the path of
fiscal discipline recommended by the TFC. The recent assembly election in Tamil Nadu showed
political parties' inclination to resort to competitive populism to come to power, which is a sure
route to fiscal profligacy. Finally, the pressure to generate larger resources for the 11th Five Year
Plan has led to the idea that the deficits do not matter. Combined with the recent experience of
a fast-growing economy, despite persisting deficits, this has led to the belief that it is not
necessary to adhere to the fiscal adjustment path recommended by the TFC.
88     Appendix 4




17.     The introduction of value-added tax (VAT) in place of a cascading type sales tax is an
important positive development at the state level and it is expected to improve the buoyancy of
the state tax system significantly. In general, the VAT revenue registered over 15% growth in
FY2005 over the previous year. It was feared that the introduction of VAT could result in
substantial loss of revenue in the initial years, and a provision of Rs60.5 billion was made to
compensate states in the budget for FY2005. However, the actual compensation was
significantly lower. Despite having revenue reducing the VAT rate structure, the revenue
increase in VAT states in the first year was similar to those in states that did not switch to VAT.

18.     The increase in revenue productivity from the introduction of VAT is shown more clearly
when the revenue collections from VAT are observed during April­August 2006. By April 2006,
all the states except Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu had switched to the VAT regime and the
collections during the first 5 months show a revenue increase of 28% over the same period the
previous year. All states, except Arunachal Pradesh, have registered significant increases in
revenues. In Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, and Jharkhand, growth or revenues from
VAT during the first 5 months of FY2006 were more than 30% compared with the same period
in FY2005. Although the increase in FY2005 was lower than the trend growth in states such as
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Kerala, the growth rate accelerated significantly in FY2006,
and the first 5 months of FY2006 have seen growth of over 30% in Andhra Pradesh, 18% in
Karnataka, and 24% in Kerala. Thus, VAT reform is likely to increase the revenue productivity of
the tax system significantly in the medium term.

19.     There is no room for complacency, however. The available evidence shows that traders
are slowly adjusting to the new tax system and discovering ways to evade the tax, as the
information system required for effective administration and enforcement has not proceeded
alongside structural reform. Evasion is done by keeping the entire chain of transactions outside
the tax net. The chain is also circumvented by showing resales to registered dealers as sales to
final consumers. The success in the implementation of VAT will depend on taking immediate
measures to strengthen the information system. The success of the tax information network in
garnering significant additional revenues from income taxes at the central level should be the
eye-opener for the states.

20.     Overall improvement in state finances should not obscure serious fiscal problems in
individual states. Table A4.3 shows that fiscal problems in West Bengal, Kerala, Jharkhand, and
even Punjab are worrisome. In Kerala, there was hardly any improvement in revenue deficits
since FY2003, and revenue deficit continues to be as high as 4% of SDP. The fiscal deficit
relative to SDP declined from 6.2% in FY2003 to 4.4% in FY2004, but increased the next year
to 5.2%. In West Bengal, despite improvement by 1.2%, the revenue deficit was 3.7% of SDP.
The fiscal deficit declined from 6.8% to 4.6% during the period. Yet, with almost 3.5% going to
bridge revenue deficit, the capital outlay was just about 1.1% of SDP. In Jharkhand, a state with
very high revenue and fiscal deficits, the revenue deficit is budgeted to decline to 1.4% in
FY2006 from 3.3% in the previous year.

21.      Implementation of the TFC's debt restructuring scheme has substantially reduced states'
outstanding liabilities. Besides, reduction in the effective interest rates on states' borrowings,
combined with high growth rate of SDP in most states, has ensured a reduction, albeit marginal,
in debt-SDP ratio in recent years. Some 23 states have passed FRAs, as recommended by the
TFC, and are eligible for benefits under the debt restructuring plan; others are likely to pass the
legislation within the next few months. West Bengal is a notable exception--despite its severe
imbalance, it has not passed the FRA. Kerala passed the act but, with the change in the party in
                                                                                          Appendix 4        89


power, the new government has not shown any inclination to adhere to the set targets of fiscal
and revenue deficit reduction.

                            Table A4.3: Fiscal Health of Individual States

                         Percentage of Fiscal Deficit to SDP       Percentage of Revenue Deficit to SDP
                       2003­       2004­     2005­      2006­      2003­      2004­     2005­     2006­
                        2004        2005      2006       2007       2004       2005      2006      2007
 Item                  Actual      Actual      RE         BE       Actual     Actual      RE        BE
 General Category States
 Andhra Pradesh          (4.04)     (4.04)     (3.61)     (3.21)    (1.61)     (1.26)    (0.49)    (0.39)
 Bihar                   (8.34)     (2.17)     (8.05)     (5.19)    (0.49)     (1.88)     0.24     (0.86)
 Chhattisgarh            (5.72)     (2.92)     (2.84)     (2.84)    (1.66)      0.35      1.69      2.37
 Goa                     (4.61)     (4.86)     (5.32)     (5.04)    (1.45)      (1.1)    (0.54)    (0.23)
 Gujarat                 (5.53)     (0.35)        (3)     (3.12)    (2.24)      2.25      0.17         0
 Haryana                 (3.97)     (1.45)     (2.01)     (1.76)    (0.37)     (0.31)    (0.65)     (0.3)
 Jharkhand               (4.17)      0.57     (10.33)     (9.37)      0.36      1.33     (3.26)    (1.37)
 Karnataka               (3.46)     (2.42)     (2.86)     (2.79)      (0.4)      1.1      0.71      0.82
 Kerala                  (6.19)     (4.43)      (5.2)     (5.38)    (4.11)     (3.65)    (3.98)    (3.73)
 Madhya Pradesh          (7.46)      (6.3)     (4.23)     (3.95)    (4.56)      1.67     (0.02)     0.79
 Maharashtra             (5.47)     (5.01)     (4.01)     (1.85)    (2.53)      (2.7)    (0.35)     0.07
 Orissa                  (6.57)     (8.54)     (5.33)     (5.32)    (2.61)     (0.88)    (0.88)    (0.66)
 Punjab                  (6.01)     (4.66)     (3.75)     (3.32)    (4.39)     (3.84)    (1.75)    (1.29)
 Rajasthan               (7.02)     (5.56)     (4.96)     (3.79)    (3.26)     (1.25)     0.18      0.51
 Tamil Nadu              (3.32)     (2.95)     (2.59)     (2.39)    (0.93)     (0.37)    (0.17)    (0.09)
 Uttar Pradesh           (7.74)     (5.51)     (5.09)     (4.47)    (8.64)     (2.97)    (1.21)       0.4
 West Bengal               (6.9)    (5.15)     (4.79)     (4.47)    (4.91)     (3.98)    (3.67)    (3.08)
 Special Category States
 Arunachal Pradesh      (10.31)    (15.23)      0.33      (3.93)      7.59     (0.31)    20.62      6.19
 Assam                   (3.46)     (0.43)    (0.580      (0.51)      (1.7)     0.39      0.41      0.47
 Himachal Pradesh        (13.2)     (9.01)     (4.09)     (3.82)      (8.9)    (5.77)    (0.41)    (0.97)
 Jammu & Kashmir           0.09     (4.83)     (5.41)          0      9.96      7.55      9.04         0
 Manipur                   (7.8)   (11.14)    (7.090      (2.15)    (1.19)      2.27      10.7     15.88
 Meghalaya               (4.19)     (5.95)    (3.640      (1.28)      1.77     (0.95)      2.2      5.09
 Mizoram                (12.15)     (7.91)    (10.23)     (3.91)      3.34      3.76      5.57      3.71
 Nagaland                   2.9      8.51      16.98         15      10.07       2.5       6.5      6.49
 Sikkim                  (3.61)    (12.12)    (16.09)   (13.74)      11.54     11.03     11.47     12.61
 Tripura                 (4.76)     (2.89)      (5.7)   (5.58)0       1.48      4.74      4.92      3.75
 Uttaranchal               (8.1)   (10.75)    (10.87)   (11.43)     (4.38)      (4.7)    (1.89)    (0.63)
BE = budget estimate, SDP = state domestic product, RE = revised estimate.
Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
Source: Budget documents of state governments.
90      Appendix 4




22.     Interestingly, fiscal stress as measured by revenue and fiscal deficits is not related to the
level of development of the states as measured by their per capita SDP. The analysis shows
that, in FY2003, the correlation between revenue deficit and per capita SDP was ­0.07 and
between fiscal deficit and per capita SDP, it was 0.236. However, this does not mean that fiscal
stress in poorer states is any less or that their fiscal discipline is any better. The simple fact is
that their spending on social and economic services is extremely low. For example, Bihar shows
a revenue surplus of 0.24% in FY2005, Rajasthan shows a revenue surplus, and the revenue
deficits in Orissa and Madhya Pradesh are small. However, per capita expenditure on social
and economic services in all these states was well below average. In Bihar, it was Rs1,075,
which was only 48% of the non-special category average (Rs 2,035). In Uttar Pradesh, revenue
deficit was reduced from 2.98% of SDP in FY2000 to 1.21% in FY2005, but per capita
expenditure on social and economic services (Rs1,187) was 42% lower than the all-state
average.

23.     Table A4.4 summarizes the fiscal situation in Madhya Pradesh during the mid-1990s and
subsequent years. It shows that, barring the last 2 years of the series, the highest deficit figures
are for FY1998. Afterward, there was a fiscal correction until FY2002, coinciding with the ADB
program. Subsequent years show some deterioration, but the deficit figures may be the results
of one-time entries. In FY2003, almost the entire increase in the deficit can be traced to a jump
in the non-plan revenue (roughly the same as current) expenditures on economic services. In
FY2004, the sharp drop in revenue deficit, changing it to a surplus, is mainly attributable to a
large (probably one-time) receipt in the power sector. Similarly, the fiscal deficit of 6.01% of
SDP, despite a revenue surplus, is the result of a large increase in capital expenditure on
economic services.

         Table A4.4: Madhya Pradesh Summary Fiscal Variables as Percentages of
                      Gross State Domestic Product, FY1995­FY2004

Budget Head/Description         1995    1996    1997     1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004
Gross Fiscal Deficit             3.41    3.50    3.03    5.96    5.02     4.80    4.32    4.92    7.25    6.01
Revenue Deficit                  1.00    2.63    0.78    4.15    3.76     2.91    3.75    1.42    4.43   (1.59)
Primary Deficit                  0.99    1.00    0.27    3.31    2.28     1.53    1.65    1.89    4.07    2.62

Own Tax Revenue                  7.35    7.45    7.60    7.38    7.44     7.65    5.56    7.47    6.72    7.20
Own Non-Tax Revenue              3.72    3.59    3.36    2.57    3.17     2.34    1.90    1.98    1.46    4.13
Total Revenue Expenditure       19.09   20.82   19.52   20.54   20.71   20.33    17.07   17.64   18.57   16.70
Total Capital Outlay             1.80    1.85    2.79    1.46    1.22     1.51    1.75    2.97    2.65    4.59

Public Expenditure Ratio        20.88   22.68   22.32   22.00   21.93   21.83    18.81   20.62   21.23   21.29
Social Allocation Ratio         32.90   30.98   30.25   34.28   34.24   33.70    26.86   28.94   23.71   23.71
Social Priority Ratio           55.26   55.14   57.25   57.20   53.80   57.73    59.50   55.77   57.03   57.99
Human Expenditure Ratio          3.80    3.87    3.87    4.31    4.04     4.25    3.01    3.33    2.87    2.93
FY = financial year.
Note:    Figure in parenthesis is negative.
Source: Government of Madhya Pradesh Finance Accounts for the relevant years.
                                                                                              Appendix 4       91


C.        Explaining Fiscal Stress: Economic and Political Factors

24.     The finances of every single state deteriorated during the latter half of the 1990s,
although they have improved in the last couple of years because of higher transfers from the
center. The reasons for the deterioration were (i) sharp increases in wages, salaries, and
pensions following the implementation of the Fifth Pay Commission's recommendations at the
central level; (ii) an increase in the debt servicing burden, with the increase in their cost of
borrowing; (iii) an increase in explicit and implicit subsidies and transfers because of inadequate
cost recoveries in the provision of quasi-public services; (iv) declining buoyancy in state taxes in
the 1990s over the previous decade; (v) a decline in the transfers from the center following
deceleration in tax devolution; and (vi) a sharp deterioration in power sector finances.

25.     The fiscal stress was partly because the states did not undertake systematic tax reforms
after the economy was liberalized in 1991 (footnote 6). The changes in their tax policy and
administration have been largely ad hoc. Of course, the major reform--the introduction of state
level VAT--was implemented only from April 2005.8

26.     The revenue from states' own taxes grew substantially more slowly, and there was a
sharp decline in the tax buoyancy in every state except Bihar in the 1990s compared with the
previous decade (Table A4.5). The buoyancy of tax revenue, which was more than one in every
state during the 1980s, declined in the 1990s to less than one in all the states except Assam,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh. This is not surprising since over 70% of the growth
in GDP during the latter half of the 1990s was attributable to growth in the services sector,9 a
large proportion of the production and consumption of which is not taxed by states. The case of
West Bengal is striking as it had the lowest buoyancy in the 1990s (0.76).

                 Table A4.5: Growth and Buoyancy of States' Own Tax Revenues

                                        Compound Growth Rate                Buoyancy Coefficients
         State                         1980­1990   1991­2002               1980­1990   1991­2002
         Andhra Pradesh                   16.16             14.36              1.13              0.93
         Assam                            19.41             13.16              1.32              1.14
         Bihar                            14.75             12.90              1.01              1.12
         Gujarat                          14.45             14.68              1.07              0.91
         Haryana                          14.70             13.63              1.06              0.89
         Karnataka                        15.62             14.54              1.13              0.90
         Kerala                           15.10             15.30              1.20              0.89
         Madhya Pradesh                   15.45             13.71              1.12              1.24
         Maharashtra                      14.84             13.89              1.06              0.90
         Orissa                           15.71             12.56              1.22              0.84
         Punjab                           13.52             12.47              0.98              0.94
         Rajasthan                        16.06             14.66              1.12              0.89
         Tamil Nadu                       14.19             14.36              0.99              0.86
         Uttar Pradesh                    15.72             13.57              1.19              1.04
         West Bengal                      15.20             11.64              1.16              0.76
        Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

8
    Rao, G. M. and R. K. Rao. 2005. Trends and Issues in Tax Policy and Reform in India. Paper presented at the
    Conference on India Policy Forum 2005, July 25­26, 2005.
9
    Acharya, S. 2001. India's Macroeconomic Management in the Nineties. Indian Council of Research in International
    Economic Relations. New Dehli.
92         Appendix 4




27.     Reforms on the expenditure side were difficult in the latter part of the 1990s, an era of
coalition politics and competitive populism. While the effect of pay revision was felt in all the
states, some states (such as Karnataka) tried to contain the damage by not entirely adhering to
central pay scales and not filling vacancies created by natural attrition. On the other hand, pay
revision in Punjab was even more liberal than the revision of the Government's pay scales. The
effect of savings on debt servicing as a result of the debt swap scheme is yet to unfold fully.
This will benefit more states with a large stock of small saving loans at high interest rates.

28.      Variations in the intensity of the stress among the states depend on the structure of
expenditures. The burden of salary revision varied depended on the share of salaries in total
government expenditures and the extent of pay revision granted by the state government.
Similarly, the interest burden depended on the stock of debt, its composition, time profile, and
average interest rate payable. There were also exogenous shocks such as earthquakes in
states like Maharashtra and Gujarat. Most of the states responded to the fiscal stress by
compressing expenditures, and compressed most maintenance expenditure and creation of
infrastructure, as support in the states on these is relatively weak. The ability to compress
expenditures depends on the political strength and complexion of the state government. Recent
developments, such as the emergence of coalition governments at the center and in some of
the states, which increases the dependence of the main ruling party at the center on other
political parties, and the short electoral cycle of political parties affects the prospects for fiscal
consolidation. The emergence of regional parties and their "pivotal" role in the central coalition
results in the adoption of asymmetric and discretionary fiscal arrangements. A pro-labor
government as in West Bengal or coalition governments in the states could not implement
policies to compress wages, salaries, and pensions. In contrast, some states such as Haryana,
Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu did well to both increase revenues from own sources and manage
expenditures to contain the size of revenue and fiscal deficits.

29.      The important fiscal implications of these political developments may be summarized. In
general, lowering of the time horizon has resulted in (i) greater competitive populism with
reluctance to raise revenue from taxes and user charges, and (ii) an increase in expenditures
with short-term political gains rather than long-term benefits for development. Second, coalition
governments at the center with several parties including left wing parties has made it extremely
difficult to undertake any rationalization of employment and wages, salaries, and pensions. At
the same time, the common minimum wage program adopted by the United Progressive
Alliance government has the potential to increase expenditures substantially. As many of the
programs are within states' control, this has serious consequences for states' fiscal health.
Third, bipolarization of the polity at the center has divided the ruling parties in the states as
friendly and unfriendly to the center. States with strong central support could allow their fiscal
situation to drift and have high deficits, and use the levers of their bargaining power to get larger
transfers and bailouts. Even a rule-based system of intergovernmental finance has considerable
scope for asymmetry and discretion.10

D.         Structural Adjustment Loans and Fiscal Consolidation

30.     This section analyses the impact of structural adjustment lending on states' finances.
The experience with subnational adjustment lending from multilateral institutions is relatively
recent. According to Article 293 of the Constitution, states cannot contract exogenous loans and
even in the case of domestic loans, they have to seek permission from the central Government

10
     Rao, G. M. and N. Singh. 2005. Political Economy of Indian Federalism, Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
                                                                                                 Appendix 4        93


as long as they are indebted to it. Thus, even though detailed loan negotiations are conducted
by multilateral institutions with state governments, the final contract is with the central
Government, which onlends to the states. This creates an incentive problem, as the ultimate
borrower has no repayment liability to the lender, and the enforcement of the contract will be the
responsibility of the central Government despite the level of detail of the conditions imposed by
the lending institutions.

31.      Wide-ranging international experiences of structural adjustment loans (SAL) have
produced mixed outcomes. A World Bank review11 conducted in 1992 observed that adjustment
lending was associated with fiscal deficit reduction and increase in revenue, but the general
spending cuts were often at the expense of critically important operation and maintenance
(O&M) and overspending on salary relative to non-salary inputs. While analyzing the effect of
development assistance on public sector behavior, Mavrotas and Quattara 12 observed that
official development assistance reduced revenues in the short run but raised them in the long
run. The study by Gupta, Clements, Pivovarsky, and Tiongson13 of foreign aid in 107 countries
during 1970­2000 found that, while concessional loans were associated with higher domestic
revenue mobilization, grants had the opposite effect.

32.    The states in India that have availed of the SAL facility and the year of introduction of the
SAL-induced fiscal reform program in those states are in Table A4.6. To date, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, and Kerala have availed of SAL assistance from ADB; 14 and the World Bank has
assisted Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, and Orissa. The relative fiscal
performance of these states vis-à-vis states that did not avail of an SAL is now examined.15
                         Table A4.6: Year of Fiscal Intervention through SAL

                                                        Year of Fiscal        SAL Facility
                        State                            Intervention         Provided by
                        Andhra Pradesh                        2002             World Bank
                        Gujarat                               1996               ADB
                        Karnataka                             2001             World Bank
                        Kerala                                2002               ADB
                        Madhya Pradesh                        1999               ADB
                        Uttar Pradesh                         2000             World Bank
                        ADB = Asian Development Bank, SAL = structural adjustment loan.
                        Sources: ADB and World Bank documents.

33.     The combined fiscal deficits to SDP ratio became marginally lower in SAL states than
the rest of the states from FY2000 onward (Figure A4.3), and tended to decline. However, as far
as revenue deficits are concerned, there was not much difference between SAL and non-SAL
states.16 The ratio of fiscal deficit to SDP ratio remained stagnant during FY2000 to FY2002 for
the non-SAL states. By 2001, all five states had introduced fiscal reform except Andhra
11
   Cited in World Bank. 2005. State Fiscal Reforms in India: Progress and Prospects, A World Bank Report. New
   Delhi: Macmillan India Ltd.
12
   Mavrotas G. and B. Quattara. 2004. Public Sector Revenue Response to Development Assistance, Time Series
   Evidence from Costarica, Cote D Ivorie, The Philippines. Available: http://hkkk.fi/~haaparan/NNDE/Ouattara.pdf.
13
   Gupta, S., B. Clements, A. Pivovarsky, and E.R. Tiongson. 2003. Foreign Aid and Revenue Response: Does the
   Composition of Aid Matter? International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 3176. New York.
14
   ADB also approved an SAL in Assam in 2004.
15
   The analysis is confined to the 15 major states in India, leaving aside the special category states excluding Assam.
   These 15 major states comprise all of the non-special category states, excluding Goa, and one special category
   state, i. e., Assam.
16
   There was a decline in the SAL states in FY2002, the last year for which date is available.
94     Appendix 4


Pradesh, which followed in 2002. A similar trend is observed concerning revenue and primary
deficits to SDP ratio of both categories of states (Figures A4.4 and A4.5). However, unlike fiscal
and revenue deficits, the primary deficit to SDP ratio declined for both categories of states from
the late 1990s--the fall is sharper in the case of states with SAL. The World Bank study
(footnote 5) also noted that there has been a sustained reduction in the revenue deficits of
states that availed of SAL-induced fiscal reform.

                                                  Fiscal Deficit
                                     Figure A4.4. Figure          GSDP Deficit
                                                          A4.3:toFiscal          Comparison
                                                                        Ratio: Ato SDP Ratioof States with
                                                              SAL and without SAL
                                                A Comparison of States with and without SAL
                              7
                              6
       FD to SDP Ratio




                              5
                              4
                              3
                              2
                              1
                              0
                                   1987-      1989-       1991-       1993-       1995-      1997-        1999-      2001-
                                    88         90          92          94          96         98          2000        02
                                                            FD of SAL States       FD of Non-SAL States

      FD = fiscal deficit, non-SAL = non-structural adjustment loan, SAL = structural adjustment loan,
      SDP = gross state domestic product.
      Source: Reserve Bank of India.


                                                 Revenue
                                    Figure A4.5.Figure   Deficit
                                                       A4.4:              Ratio: Ato
                                                                 to GSDPDeficit
                                                             Revenue               Comparison
                                                                                     SDP Ratioof States with
                                                             SAL   and without SAL
                                              A Comparison of States with and without SAL

                              5
            RD to SDP Ratio




                              4
                              3
                              2
                              1
                              0
                                  1987- 1988- 1989- 1990- 1991- 1992- 1993- 1994- 1995- 1996- 1997- 1998- 1999- 2000- 2001- 2002-
                                   88    89    90    91    92    93    94    95    96    97    98    99 2000 01        02    03

                                                              RD of SAL States       RD of Non-SAL States

      non-SAL = non-structural adjustment loan, RD = revenue deficit, SAL = structural adjustment loan,
      SDP = gross state domestic product.
      Source: Reserve Bank of India.
                                                                                                 Appendix 4        95




                                    Figure A4.6.     A4.5:Deficit
                                                 Primary
                                             Figure        Primaryto Deficit
                                                                     GSDP Ratio:     Comparison of
                                                                             to SDPARatio
            PD to SDP Ratio                       States with
                                            A Comparison       SAL and
                                                           of States  withwithout SAL SAL
                                                                           and without

                              3.5
                              3.0
                              2.5
                              2.0
                              1.5
                              1.0
                              0.5
                              0.0




                                 20 0
                                 19 8

                                 19 9

                                 19 0

                                 19 1

                                 19 2

                                 19 3

                                 19 4

                                 19 5

                                 19 6

                                 19 7

                                 19 8

                                99 9



                                 20 1

                                 20 2

                                        3
                                      -8

                                      -8

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9

                                      -9



                                      -0

                                      -0

                                      -0
                                     00
                                   90

                                   91

                                   92

                                   93

                                   94

                                   95




                                   00

                                   01

                                   02
                                   87

                                   88

                                   89




                                   96

                                   97

                                   98

                                   -2
                                 19




                              19
                                                      PD of SAL States   PD of Non-SAL States

          non-SAL = non-structural adjustment loan, PD = primary deficit, SAL = structural adjustment loan,
          SDP = gross state domestic product.
          Source: Reserve Bank of India

34.     Overall, the upward movement of revenue, fiscal, and primary deficits have been on hold
or there has been a marginal improvement in these deficits in SAL states subsequent to
structural adjustment lending. However, it would be misleading to conclude that there are clear
trends as the analysis period is not long enough and the reduction in the deficits is not clear and
decisive.

35.    It is important to find out whether and to what extent fiscal intervention through SAL
resulted in the expected improvement of revenues and rationalization of expenditures.17 Before
model specification and estimation, an exploratory analysis of state level fiscal variables was
undertaken in the pre- and post-reform period in these six SAL states. The period chosen was
from FY1987 to FY2002.

36.    There are a spectrum of indicators to judge fiscal reform. To start with, the pre- and post-
reform tax buoyancy is compared. In all states, except Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, own
tax buoyancy was higher in the post-fiscal intervention year than the pre-fiscal intervention year
(Table A4.7). However, there are sharp interstate differences in the pre- and post-reform
buoyancies. The revenue buoyancy was highest in Karnataka, followed by Kerala, Andhra
Pradesh, and Gujarat.




17
     Orissa is excluded from the analysis, as the SAL-induced fiscal reform has just been introduced in the last fiscal
     year.
96         Appendix 4




                     Table A4.7: Buoyancy of Own Tax Revenues: Comparison of
                               Pre- and Post-Fiscal Intervention Years

                                 Pre Fiscal           Post Fiscal       Difference of
                                Intervention         Intervention       post and pre        Buoyancy of
                                    Year                 Year              reform          the combined
          State                  Buoyancy             Buoyancy          buoyancies             period
          Andhra                    0.910                1.617                                 0.938
          Pradesh                                                          0.707
          Gujarat                   0.921                0.976             0.055               0.932
          Karnataka                 0.964                4.397             3.433               0.984
          Kerala                    1.007                1.980             0.973               1.015
          Madhya                    1.027                0.978                                 1.075
          Pradesh                                                          (0.049)
          Uttar Pradesh             0.997                0.792             (0.204)             1.078
          Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
          Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

37.    However, when the buoyancy of non-tax revenues of the state is analyzed, higher
buoyancy is observed in the post-reform period in the states, except in Andhra Pradesh where it
declined and in Uttar Pradesh where it was negative (Table A4.8).

                  Table A4.8: Buoyancy of Own Non-Tax Revenues: Comparison of
                               Pre- and Post-Fiscal Intervention Years

                                                          Post-Fiscal      Difference of
                                  Pre-Fiscal             Intervention     Post- and Pre-       Buoyancy of
                              Intervention Year              Year             Reform          the Combined
       State                      Buoyancy                Buoyancy         Buoyancies             Period
       Andhra Pradesh                0.799                  0.027             (0.772)              0.781
       Gujarat                       1.005                  1.879              0.874               0.934
       Karnataka                     0.733                  0.763               0.03               0.689
       Kerala                        0.736                  2.111              1.375               0.728
       Madhya Pradesh                0.818                  3.405              2.587               0.813
       Uttar Pradesh                 0.679                 (0287)             (0.966)              0.626
      Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
      Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

38.      To assess the performance on the expenditure side, the non-interest expenditure
elasticity was estimated in pre- and post-reform periods.18 Inclusion of interest payment in the
expenditure model may give spurious results, as it is sticky upwards and committed in nature.
Interest payment in the states also increased because of the increase in the average cost of
debt caused by financial liberalization during the 1990s. The expenditure elasticity declined
significantly in Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh (Table A4.9), while it increased in Karnataka,
followed by Kerala and Gujarat. These increases reflect softening of the budget constraint
because of the fresh infusion of resources via SAL.


18
     Interest payment being a committed expenditure, will not vary by whether a debt state undertakes fiscal reform
     unless reform is accompanied by aggressive debt restructuring. Furthermore, the benefits from a softening of
     interest rates would accrue to all the states.
                                                                                       Appendix 4      97



                 Table A4.9: Elasticity of Non-Interest Expenditure: Comparison of
                              Pre- and Post-Fiscal Intervention Years

                                                                    Difference Of
                                Pre-Fiscal          Post-Fiscal     Post- and Pre-    Buoyancy of
                               Intervention        Intervention        Reform        the Combined
         State                Year Elasticity     Year Elasticity     Elasticity         Period
         Andhra Pradesh             0.947                (0.007)        (0.954)         0.932
         Gujarat                    0.701                 1.186          0.485          0.910
         Karnataka                  0.948                 6.523          5.575          0.982
         Kerala                     0.948                  2.46          1.512          0.955
         Madhya Pradesh             0.925                 0.986          0.061          0.972
         Uttar Pradesh              0.934                 0.674          -0.26          0.943
         Note:    Figures in parenthesis are negative.
         Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

          1.      Model Specification and Estimation

39.     The econometric analysis of the impact follows a modeling strategy that controls for
state-specific factors, including unanticipated shocks other than the fiscal intervention through
SAL. In the present context, unanticipated shocks were the Gujarat earthquake and the
bifurcation of the states of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.19 In addition, the specification
includes the effects of pay revision caused by implementation of the Fifth Pay Commission's
award, the earthquake in Gujarat, and the bifurcation of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
The period chosen for the analysis was FY1987 to FY2004.

40.   The following expenditure model has been specified for Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
and Kerala:

                 ln iex =  +  lg sdp +  ln ixt -1 + f du + S du + U t

          For Gujarat, the expenditure model shocks is specified as:

                  ln iex =  +  lg sdp +  ln ixt -1 + f du + S du + E du + U t

          For Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the specification is:
                  ln iex =  +  lg sdp +  ln ixt -1 + f du + S du + µbdu + U t

          Where, lg sdp = log of gross state domestic product
                   f du = fiscal int ervention dummy
                   S du = Salary revision dummy
                   E du = Earthquake dummy
                   bdu = State bifurcation dummy


19
     The states of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh were carved to form two other states--Chhattisgarh and
     Uttaranchal respectively.
98        Appendix 4


41.     According to the expenditure models specified above, the primary government
expenditure is expected to be positively related to the SDP and the lag of its own expenditure.
The sign of fiscal intervention dummy would primarily depend on the nature of fiscal
intervention. If the intervention focused more on expenditure restructuring rather than
expenditure contraction, a positive coefficient may be produced, implying enhancement of
primary expenditure. The sign of the dummy for salary revision is expected to be positive, as
well as the earthquake dummy for Gujarat. It is difficult to predict the sign of the state bifurcation
dummy used for Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, as it would depend primarily on whether
the bifurcation of the state leads to a fiscal loss or gain.

42.     The results of the state-specific expenditure models presented in Table A4.10 reveal that
the coefficient of lagged expenditure variable was positive and significant in Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh. In other words, past expenditure determined the
level of the current fiscal year expenditure. The fiscal intervention dummy shows a negative sign
for Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, and Madhya Pradesh, implying that fiscal intervention induced
contraction of expenditure, although the coefficients are not statistically significant. In Uttar
Pradesh, however, the sign of the fiscal intervention dummy is positive but not significant. In
Gujarat, the earthquake dummy is positive but not statistically significant.

43.     The coefficient of the fiscal intervention dummy is positive and statistically significant in
only in Kerala. This implies that fiscal intervention has helped increase the share of non-interest
or the primary expenditure in Kerala, and the coefficient is 0.097. Exploratory analysis for Kerala
showed that the dummy used to capture the Fifth Pay Commission recommendation induced
salary revision.

                   Table A4.10: Results of the State-Specific Expenditure Models
                                             1987­2005

     States                      C          LSDP     LNIEX(-1)       Fdu         Sdu         Edu         bdu
                                                              a
     Andhra Pradesh          (0.427)           0.167       0.858       (0.043)                 (0.018)
                                               0.619       2.936
     Gujarat                   (0.335)         0.331       0.640a      (0.004)        (0.004)    0.082
                                               1.751       3.449
     Karnataka                 (1.338)a        0.723a      0.281         0.030                 (0.062)
                               (2.426)         3.154       1.222
     Kerala                     (1.262)a       1.076a    (0.167)         0.097b                  0.118a
                               (2.143)         4.097     (0.634)         1.836                   2.613
                                                                 a
     Madhya Pradesh            (0.551)         0.266       0.750         0.022                 (0.030)  (0.189)b
                                               0.985       2.946                                        (2.013)
                                                                 a
     Uttar Pradesh             (0.581)         0.332       0.670         0.056                 (0.035)  (0.080)
                                               1.159       2.509
     bdu = state bifurcation dummy, C = control, Edu = earthquake dummy, Fdu = fiscal intervention dummy,
     LSDP = lagged gross state domestic product, LNIEX = expenditure model, Sdu = salary revision dummy.
     Note:    Figures in parenthesis are negative and figures italicized are the t-statistics.
     a
       Indicates significance of the variable.
     b
       Indicates significance at 10%.
     Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

44.    The state-specific revenue side models were then estimated separately for own tax
revenues and own non-tax revenues. The following model was specified for Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, and Kerala:
                                                                                               Appendix 4   99


        lotr =  + gsdp + f du + u t
        lontr =  + gsdp + f du + u t

45.    In the case of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the state bifurcation dummy was also
incorporated:

        lotr =  + gsdp + f du + bdu + u t
        lontr =  + gsdp + f du + bdu + u t

Where, otr = own tax revenues
         ontr = own non tax revenues

46.     The results of state-specific revenue models are presented in Tables A4.11 (own tax
revenues) and A4.12 (non-tax revenues). Own tax revenues are a positive function of state
income, and statistically significant for all the states, unlike in the expenditure model. The fiscal
intervention dummy has a negative sign for Gujarat, but not significant. This could be partly due
to the natural calamities and communal problems. It is significant with a positive sign for all
other states. This implies that the intervention and associated reforms did not bring about
significant improvement in the revenues in Gujarat.

47.     In the case of non-tax revenues, the fiscal intervention dummy is significant with a
negative sign in Gujarat (Table A4.12), indicating that the non-tax revenues showed a decline
after the structural adjustment reforms were introduced. It is positive and significant in Andhra
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, and is not significant in the remaining states. The state bifurcation
dummy, though negative, remained statistically insignificant in both Madhya Pradesh and Uttar
Pradesh.

                             Table A4.11: States' Own Tax revenues

                   State                       C          LSDP          FD          BD
                                                    a            a             a
                   Andhra Pradesh           (1.544)      0.898         0.274
                                           (2.542)      16.283         3.071
                   Gujarat                  (1.898)a     0.940a      (0.024)
                                           (3.733)      19.298
                   Karnataka                (2.340)a     0.992a       0.157a
                                           (5.829)      26.427        2.592
                   Kerala                   (2.534)a     1.006a       0.044b
                                          (16.253)      66.811        1.707
                   Madhya Pradesh           (3.433)a     1.047a       0.242a        (0.204)b
                                           (5.086)      16.680        3.556        (1.866)
                   Uttar Pradesh            (3.387)a     1.032a       0.271a        (0.026)b
                                           (4.953)      17.096        3.602        (0.247)
                   BD = budget deficit, C = control, FD = fiscal deficit, LSDP = lagged
                   gross state domestic product.
                   Note:    Figures in parenthesis are negative and figures italicized are
                            the t-statistics.
                   a
                     Indicates significance of the variable.
                   b
                     Indicates significance at 10%.
                   Source: (Basic Data) Finance Accounts.
100    Appendix 4



                            Table A4.12: Own Non-Tax Revenue Model

                    State                        C           LSDP         FD         BD
                                                                    a           a
                    Andhra Pradesh             (2.236)          0.814        0.581
                                                                9.815        4.331
                    Gujarat                      (6.234)a       1.211a     (2.451)a
                                                 (5.334)       10.819      (2.451)
                                                         b
                    Karnataka                    (1.536)        0.744a       0.002
                                                 (1.709)        8.847
                    Kerala                       (1.779)a       0.740a     (0.014)
                                                 (3.675)       15.825
                    Madhya Pradesh               (1.752)        0.827a     (0.094)     (0.205)
                                                                5.810
                    Uttar Pradesh                (2.870)a       0.822a       0.479a      0.048
                                                 (2.962)        9.613        4.496
                    BD = budget deficit, C = control, FD = fiscal deficit, LSDP = lagged gross
                    state domestic product.
                    Note:     Figures in parenthesis are negative and figures italicized are
                              the t-statistics.
                    a
                       Indicates significance of the variable.
                    b
                       Indicates significance at 10%.
                    Source: (Basic Data) Finance Accounts.

E.     Concluding Remarks

48.     This study has analyzed the nature and causes of fiscal stress in state governments in
India, and has examined the impact of fiscal reform initiated through structural adjustment
lending to selected state governments. The study shows that there has been a steady
deterioration in the deficit indicators of the states during the 1990s, with a turnaround in recent
years. However, the deficits shown in the budgets do not reveal a complete picture, since off-
budget deficits are not included because of the power sector and other utilities. The study noted
that off-budget deficits caused by power sector loss have increased steadily in recent years to
constitute about 1.4% of GDP, and should be added to the deficits measures derived from the
budget to get a realistic picture of the deficits. Thus, the deterioration in state finances is worse
than what the deficit figures derived from the budgets reveal.

49.     The analysis of revenue and fiscal deficits show significant interstate variations. The
performance of West Bengal, in terms of both the size of deficits and their change over time, is
worrisome. Other badly performing states include Punjab and Gujarat, the latter mainly because
of adverse fiscal fallout from the earthquake in 2001. At the other end of the spectrum, Haryana
and Tamil Nadu have performed well in terms of containing their deficits. Curiously, some of the
low-income states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have also contained their deficits--raising
serious doubts on the appropriateness of taking only these measures to understand fiscal stress
in the states. Given the structure of incentives, many of the poorer states have preferred to
reduce their expenditures, particularly on social and economic services, with adverse growth
implications for the future, as a route to contain the deficit. There is no significant relationship
between the level of development expenditure and the size of revenue or fiscal deficits in states.

50.     The study shows that the response to fiscal stress could differ, depending on the
structure of incentives faced by states and their political environment and alignments. States
that cannot easily soften their budget constraints by increasing the off-budget liabilities or
bargain and secure larger grants from the center, have to increase revenues, cut expenditures,
                                                                                Appendix 4     101


or incur larger deficits. States such as Haryana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh
have tried to contain their deficits, partly by containing expenditures and partly by raising
revenues. In contrast, states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have cut developmental
expenditures, given the weak constituency for these expenditures. States such as West Bengal
and Punjab did not increase revenues but continued to incur expenditures, so they incurred
large deficits.

51.     The emergence of coalition governments at the center, and regional parties in the states
that became "pivotal" partners in the central Government, can have important implications for
the fiscal health of the states but the state response to fiscal stresses. The bipolarization of the
polity and asymmetric treatment of various states by the center also influences the fiscal
response of the states. Above all, lowering of the time horizon of the political parties has
imparted competitive populism to the policy environment. All these factors have adversely
affected fiscal discipline in the states.

52.     The state-specific effect of SAL has been mixed in terms of fiscal consolidation. The
exploratory data analysis of key fiscal variables across states revealed some improvement in
the expenditure structure and revenue effort for a subset of states that have introduced SAL-
induced fiscal reform. The econometric analysis shows that, while fiscal intervention had a
positive and statistically significant impact on own tax revenues in Karnataka and Kerala, the
impact on the expenditure side was insignificant. Although there was evidence of softening of
the budget constraints in some states in terms of non-interest expenditure, overall, there seems
to have been some fiscal gain in terms of reduction in revenue and fiscal deficits of SAL states
vis-à-vis non-SAL states. This remains true even when the consolidated fiscal deficits, including
power sector deficits, of non-SAL and SAL induced states is compared. Many of the gains seem
to have occurred in terms of improved revenue productivity of the tax system and not through
expenditure compression.

53.     These results are tentative. The impact of interventions on revenue productivity and
expenditure economy cannot be immediate, but must take place in the medium term. More
analytical work is necessary before conclusions are drawn. Nevertheless, initial results are not
very encouraging since adjustment lending did not result in expenditure economy in any of the
states. However, in two of the four states analyzed, the revenue productivity of the tax system
improved following adjustment lending.
102    Appendix 5



                      REFORMING PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS

A.     Background

1.     India's states replicated the Government of India's model of using public sector
undertakings (PSU) to spur industrial and socioeconomic development. Currently, state PSUs
contribute around 5% of gross domestic product (GDP) in terms of aggregate revenues, against
10% in the case of central Government PSUs. The total investment in state PSUs is estimated
to have been over Rs3.6 trillion in 2003. Among the states, Andhra Pradesh had the largest
investment in PSUs, accounting for 8% of the state's total investment, followed by Jammu and
Kashmir (7%), and Delhi and Maharashtra (5% each).

2.     Most state governments emulated the Government in setting up manufacturing
enterprises to increase industrialization in their states. State PSUs have also been used to
achieve a number of objectives, ranging from employment creation to supply of subsidized
services such as power and transport. Out of 1,068 state PSUs, over 50% was engaged in
manufacturing activities. Other categories in which state level PSUs operate include promotional
and development activities (16% of total number of state PSUs), utilities primarily comprising
power utilities and road transport corporations (12%), welfare enterprises providing economic
support to the poor (8%), financial enterprises (7%), and trade and services.

3.     Kerala has the largest number of state PSUs at 109, with 77 enterprises engaged in
manufacturing. Uttar Pradesh, with 104 PSUs, has the second largest concentration, but
accounts for the largest number of enterprises engaged in promotional and welfare activities
amongst the states. In 2003, the total revenues earned by all state PSUs was Rs862.84 billion
with net losses of Rs69.97 billion. Most state PSUs continue to depend on annual budgetary
support from their state governments. Given the budgetary constraints faced by most states,
many initiated PSU reforms to reduce the recurring budgetary support required to sustain the
PSUs and allocate additional resources to infrastructure, health, and education.

4.      Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka have been pioneers in PSU reforms in India.
Madhya Pradesh's total investments in 31 PSUs were estimated at Rs33 billion in FY1997,
accounting for 5.4% of the state domestic product (SDP). These enterprises employed 134,000
persons, about 10% of the state's total public sector workforce. Like other states, Madhya
Pradesh provides recurring budgetary support to sustain its underperforming PSUs. For
example, in FY1995, budgetary support to PSUs was over Rs4 billion in the form of loans,
grants, write-off of debt service payment, and equity infusion and funds for investment plans.

5.      The Madhya Pradesh Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) was established through
a government order issued in March 2000, with the mandate to be the nodal agency for PSU
reforms in the state. The key responsibilities of DPE included: (i) leading efforts to close or
restructure unviable PSUs identified under a program initiated with ADB funding; (ii) introducing
better corporate governance and performance-based enhancements to the management of
PSUs covered under the above program; (iii) formulating memoranda of understanding (MOU)
with identified PSUs and monitoring performance, on a quarterly basis, vis-à-vis targets
delineated in the MOUs; and (iv) publishing annual reports on the performance of PSUs.

6.      Prior to 1997, in the absence of a PSU policy on restructuring and divestment, the
government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) adopted a case-by-case approach to PSU reform.
Selected enterprises that were not perceived to be serving social objectives were closed and
certain units of enterprises were transferred to the private sector on a management contract. A
                                                                              Appendix 5     103


processing mill of Madhya Pradesh Textile Corporation was also privatized as part of public
enterprise reform. However, the absence of an institutional mechanism for developing and
implementing a PSU restructuring program and a lack of focus on corporate governance,
besides the limited availability of funds for implementing the restructuring, hampered PSU
reforms.

7.      In January 1998, GoMP approved a policy on public sector reforms and restructuring in
preparation for the ADB-financed Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program
(MPPRMP) loan supporting fiscal reforms. The salient features of this policy were
(i) establishment of a state renewal fund (SRF) to finance the voluntary resettlement scheme
(VRS) in respect of employees displaced by the PSU reforms, to mitigate the adverse social
impact of PSU restructuring; (ii) formation of a public resource management committee (PRMC)
chaired by the chief minister, supported by an Empowered Committee on PSU Reform (ECPR)
chaired by the chief secretary with high-level representation from key sector departments, to
systematically review and implement PSU reform in the state; and (iii) formulation of a VRS
policy in respect of employees likely to be discharged from service on account of the closure or
restructuring of identified PSUs.

B.     Program Design

       1.      Rationale for PSU component of the Program

8.      In the 1990s, GoMP was facing difficulties meeting mounting expenditure pressures
because of stagnating revenues from its own sources and from central government transfers, in
form of grants and share in national taxes. Government expenditure was increasing, mainly
because of the rising wage bill, high interest burden, and rising losses of PSUs--including
conversion of loan to equity through capital grants. This resulted in a change in expenditure
composition, as public investment was compressed and outlays for operation and maintenance
were squeezed. This affected both the expansion and maintenance of infrastructure and other
capital assets. In addition, resources available for allocation to social services were limited,
which otherwise could have facilitated progress in the state's social development. With more
than one third of its population under the poverty line--the highest proportion among all Indian
states--GoMP was increasingly focusing on achieving public financial stability in the medium
term by redirecting its expenditure to ensure basic human needs as well as social and
infrastructure development.

9.      MPPRMP was launched with the primary objective of fostering social development and
sustainable economic growth by addressing prevailing resource and implementation constraints
in Madhya Pradesh. Consequently, the Program adopted a three-pronged approach:
(i) enhancing resource allocation to social sectors through focused social sector interventions to
support human development; (ii) implementing public sector reforms, including capacity building
and institutional strengthening for improved fiscal capabilities and management, and policy and
operational frameworks for restructuring of public enterprises; and (iii) promoting an enabling
environment for private sector participation in key sectors. By the late 1990s, GoMP had
invested Rs3.3 trillion in PSUs. However, their operational and financial performance had been
extremely weak in FY1998, with the public enterprise sector (excluding the state electricity
board [MPEB]) as a whole incurring after-tax losses of Rs570 million or 0.1% of SDP, and an
accumulated loss of more than Rs5 billion (about 0.9% of SDP). Dividend payments amounted
to Rs47 million in FY1998, equivalent to only about 0.5% of GoMP's share in total paid-up
capital. Consequently, the state budget bore a heavy burden as it underwrote losses of PSUs
104    Appendix 5


through budgetary support for loans, grants, or write-off of debt service payment. In addition,
equity injection in PSUs and funding of PSU investment plans had reached Rs.68 billion.

10.     Undertaking PSU reforms was critical to reduce the adverse impact of PSUs on
government finances, thereby freeing up resources for investment in health, education,
infrastructure, and other social sectors, in line with the developmental priorities of GoMP; and
allowing the private sector to take the lead in commercial activities through divestment. The 14
PSUs targeted for reform under the MPPRMP had a workforce of 37,000 (27% of total PSU
employment in the state), accounted for 80% of total paid-up capital, and represented 85% of
GoMP's shareholding in PSUs (excluding MPEB).

       2.      Policy measures for PSU reforms under the MPPRMP

11.    Framework to Categorize PSUs. Three categories of PSUs were identified to be
reformed under the MPPRMP.

       (i)     Partial divestment. Enterprises that can achieve greater efficiencies in their
               operations through induction of private partners or benefit from adopting
               corporate governance measures through wider dispersion of ownership to be
               divested after implementing appropriate restructuring measures. Enterprises
               requiring induction of a strategic partner from the private sector to ensure their
               sustainable viability will be divested through a process of joint venture
               transformation, with other enterprises being partially divested with part of GoMP
               shares being offered to the public.
       (ii)    Closure. Enterprises identified as financially unviable and not fulfilling any social
               objective were to be subject to closure after implementing a VRS for its
               employees.
       (iii)   Restructuring enterprises through sale/lease of properties together with
               the transfer of employees to private sector lessees/owners, to the extent
               possible. This strategy was envisaged only in respect of the Madhya Pradesh
               State Tourism Development Corporation (MPSTDC), in accordance with the
               state's tourism policy.

12.   Institutional Framework to Support PSU Reform. Three institutions were central to
implementing, and monitoring the PSU reforms process.
       (i)     The ECPR headed by the chief secretary with high-level representation from key
               GoMP departments was established with a mandate to review and approve
               (a) the extent of shareholding to be divested in those enterprises identified for
               privatization or divestment, and (b) enterprises to be closed.
       (ii)    Two cabinet subcommittees were established--one on VRS and another on
               SRF--to ensure smooth operation of these two components. The VRS
               subcommittee, established in 2001, was mandated to design the VRS scheme as
               part of the MPPRMP. The SRF subcommittee, established as part of the
               Program and chaired by the finance minister, approved allocations to the SRF
               from the state budget.
       (iii)   DPE was to be the nodal government agency for implementing PSU reforms in
               the state. With the objective of facilitating coordination and reducing possible
               conflicts of interest in implementing reform measures, the nodal responsibility for
               implementing reforms measures for PSUs covered under the program was to be
               transferred to DPE from their respective line departments. DPE was to be
                                                                                       Appendix 5       105


                    strengthened by appointing qualified professionals with the appropriate
                    experience to take on the responsibility as the nodal agency for implementing
                    PSU reforms.

                    A technical secretariat was to act as an advisory body to the empowered
                    committee responsible to (a) undertake preparatory and technical analysis of
                    PSUs, (b) conduct valuation of PSUs, and (c) provide technical assistance (TA)
                    on reform options including restructuring and divestment. However, the
                    secretariat was not established.

13.     State Renewal Fund for Voluntary Retirement Scheme and Social Safety Net for
Displaced Workers. GoMP instituted a VRS under the MPPRMP to be applicable to all workers
being displaced as a result of implementation of PSU reforms. An SRF was set up to fund the
VRS payments, cost of redeployment of surplus personnel, and financial restructuring plans of
PSUs. The SRF was to be financed through contributions from GoMP, the proceeds from the
sale of GoMP shareholding in PSUs, and sale of assets of closed PSUs. The applications from
individual PSUs for VRS disbursement were vetted by the secretary of the institutional finance
department, before being forwarded to the finance department for approval. The finance
department forwarded sanctioned applications to the SRF subcommittee for ratification of the
required fund allocation from the state budget to the SRF.1 The VRS entitlement in respect of
individual employees was calculated based on years of service (Table A5.1), with the
disbursements being effected by the concerned PSUs on the release of funds from the SRF.

                Table A5.1: Formula for Computation of VRS Compensation to Employees

       Tenure of Service of Employees                                VRS Compensation
       Employees with less than 10 years of               Aggregate of 18 months of salary, composed
       service                                            of 75% of the last drawn salary disbursed
                                                          during the first year post-VRS, 50% of the
                                                          last drawn salary disbursed during the
                                                          second year post-VRS, and 25% of the last
                                                          drawn salary disbursed during the third year
                                                          post-VRS.

       Employees with 10 years or more of                 2 months salary for every completed year of
       service                                            service or the equivalent of salary for the
                                                          remaining period of service, whichever is
                                                          lower.
      VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
      Source: Interview with Social Safety Net Program Expert.

14.     A social safety net (SSN) scheme was to offer training to re-skill displaced employees to
enable them to seek alternate employment opportunities, with a committee intended to be
established to prepare and implement the SSN scheme, besides conducting a socioeconomic
survey of the affected groups for benefit monitoring. The MPPRMP design estimated that the
total cost of the VRS and SSN would total $120.4 million, with the estimated 16,500 staff to be
retrenched, based on information provided by GoMP and the individual PSUs. However, GoMP
decided, in FY2002, not to undertake a SSN, on the grounds that the scheme would create a

1
    Interview with social safety net program expert.
106       Appendix 5


precedent for all public and private bodies wishing to undertake downsizing with commensurate
cost implications.

          3.       Assessment of Policy Measures

15.     The proposed PSU policy reform measures were based on three key risks and
constraints identified during the MPPRMP design phase: (i) political and labor union resistance
to the displacement of surplus PSU employees proposed to be undertaken under the Program;
(ii) government support and commitment to the SSN mechanism; and (iii) lack of experience of
GoMP and the respective enterprises in PSU reforms. The first risk would be addressed through
regular consultations with key stakeholders, together with financial and training support provided
through the SRF to displaced employees. Almost 9,000 employees of PSUs identified for reform
under the Program were offered a VRS, 2 with a total of Rs2.575 billion disbursed as VRS
compensation from the SRF. It is understood that there have not been any instances of labor
resistance to the personnel restructuring measures initiated as part of the reforms, suggesting
that the VRS amount was considered reasonable. The second was intended to be mitigated by
setting up the technical secretariat, supported by consultants with specialized skills to manage
the SSN, and the two cabinet subcommittees on VRS and SRF wereestablished to ensure
smooth operation of these two program components. However, as GoMP decided not to
undertake the SSN, apparently because of fund constraints, the counseling and re-skilling of
displaced workers was not accomplished. The third risk was proposed to be addressed through
an ADB-financed TA to build GoMP capacity to undertake PSU reform.

16.     However, there appear to be a few areas where a slight fine-tuning of the program
design may have increased its effectiveness further. While the categorization of PSUs covered
by the Program appears to have been based on an analysis of the respective mandates for
individual PSUs, there is scope for improvement regarding the reform/restructuring strategy for
each category. For example, offering a majority stake (with management control) to prospective
private partners for enterprises with limited socioeconomic obligations, such as MPSRTC, may
have increased the chances of successful divestment.

17.     Limited expert inputs seem to have been utilized for specialized functions such as
marketing the proposed divestment to potential investors, negotiations with prospective bidders
and with industry bodies like the Confederation of Indian Industries in the case of MPSTDC.
Based on our experience in similar engagements, the chances of successful consummation of
the transaction increase significantly when expert inputs are leveraged.

          4.       Effectiveness of PSU Reforms

18.      The relevant loan conditions, covenants, and status of the individual enterprises
identified for reform were presented in Appendix 2 in the program performance evaluation report
(PPER).

19.    PSU Restructuring ­ Partial Divestment. Although five PSUs were identified in this
category, GoMP did not succeed in divesting its stake in any of the enterprises.

20.     Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation. (MPSIDC). GoMP
proposed to reduce its share to 51% after the initiation of organizational and financial
restructuring. MPSIDC prepared a restructuring plan involving the induction of a strategic

2
    Note on VRS by the Project Management Unit, Department of Finance, Government of Madhya Pradesh.
                                                                                 Appendix 5     107


partner, Infrastructure Leasing and Finance Services Ltd., chosen based on its track record of
turning around enterprises with suboptimal performance. Infrastructure Leasing and Finance
Services Ltd. agreed to restructure the corporation with 15% ownership, but the MPSIDC board
rejected the offer. A bid for the company by Reliance group was rejected by GoMP, as the offer
included a proposal for complete privatization of MPSIDC in 3 years. The report of a
consultancy firm, appointed to prepare a business plan for restructuring the corporation, still
awaits GoMP approval. However, in 1998, MPSIDC downsized by 40%, followed by a further 80
employees accepting VRS in 2004. The corporation's exposure to the small and medium-sized
enterprise (SME) sector, in the form of intercorporate deposits, resulted in significant levels of
nonperforming assets (NPAs), consequent to the adoption of Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
norms relating to provisioning for nonperforming accounts. According to MPSIDC management
estimates, the NPAs currently stand at around Rs7.15 billion. One-time settlement schemes
with term lenders and borrowers of intercorporate deposits have been approved by the board as
part of financial restructuring measures but also await GoMP approval.

21.      Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation Ltd. (MPSAIDC).
The corporation was to divest its holding in a large agricultural farm to the joint sector, involving
the participation of both government and private investors. This was to be followed by GoMP's
equity stake in the corporation being reduced to not more than 26%. Two attempts to privatize
Babai farm, a large agricultural farm owned by MPSAIDC, did not succeed--in 1998, the
highest bidder withdrew, and in 2001, the bids were lower than the reserve price. At the request
of GoMP, the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Consultancy Services
recently valued Babai Farm at Rs520 million and recommended leasing the farm gradually to
several parties for 3.5 years. As a result of the bifurcation of Madhya Pradesh in 2000,
130 employees were transferred to the new state of Chhattisgarh. However, in FY2000, another
100 employees who agreed on a VRS package could not be discharged because the SRF had
inadequate funds. While the MPSAIDC board approved a resolution to reduce GoMP's stake to
26%, GoMP commenced negotiations with the Government to buy back the Government's 36%
share in the corporation. However, the agricultural production commissioner raised objections to
the repurchase of the Government's shares at Rs75 per share, citing the corporation's negative
net worth. As part of business restructuring measures, an MOU has been executed by the
corporation with Madhya Pradesh Agro Food Industries Ltd., a private company, for the sale of
a nutritional mix to the women and child development department, with a commission of Rs125
per ton proposed to be paid to MPSAIDC for facilitating the sale.

22.     Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (MPSRTC). The corporation was
to be restructured through the formation of four geographically based corporate units to facilitate
better management and operational autonomy. This was to be followed by a 49% divestment of
the corporation's stake in the units. Assets and liabilities of the corporation were being divided
among the units, pending bifurcation of the state. However, the corporate units were not created
as envisaged. While 510 routes were opened to the private sector as part of the restructuring of
MPSRTC, GoMP proposed to raise tariffs up to 7.5% per annum and introduce market-linked
practices, including elimination of exemptions from bus tickets for special groups, etc. However,
the tariff revision could not be effected and, with increased fuel costs, the corporation was
unable to provide wages to about 30% of employees. Consequently, GoMP decided to liquidate
MPSRTC after the division of assets and liabilities once the bifurcation of Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh was settled. Of the 10,600 employees, 8,900 were offered VRS, and the
disbursements are still in progress. Around 500 employees have been retained to follow up
pending legal cases and close the finances. Another VRS package was announced in FY2006
for the remaining 1,200 employees, and management expects 50­60% of them to accept. As
part of the settlement of financial obligations, the creditors guaranteed by GoMP have been
108    Appendix 5


repaid and one-time settlement schemes are being negotiated with nonbanking finance
companies (NBFCs) that had extended lease finance. GoMP has also attached assets of the
corporation against Rs8 billion outstanding to it by MPSRTC. Pending liquidation, the rental
earned through the lease of selected routes to private companies is being applied toward
meeting the administrative expenses and costs of legal cases, besides the settlement of arrears.

23.     Madhya Pradesh State Financial Corporation (MPSFC). GoMP's stake in the
corporation was to be reduced initially by 25% through a public issue, and subsequently to be
brought down to not more than 26% after an amendment to the State Financial Corporation Act.
However, as a result of the bifurcation of Madhya Pradesh, the policy covenant was amended to
provide for a cabinet decision to restructure the corporation through a reduction in personnel
and actions to minimize future contingent liabilities of GoMP. Significant exposure to NBFCs
caused MPSFC NPAs to increase from 30% in FY1999 to 45% in FY2004, resulting in
recapitalization through injection of fresh equity or immediate liquidation being rendered difficult.
MPSFC prepared a restructuring plan in FY2001, incorporating measures including
performance indicators being monitored by third parties, branch closures accompanied by early
retirement schemes for employees, and a cap on GoMP guarantees. The retirement age was
reduced from 60 to 58 years and four unviable branch offices were closed, resulting in savings
in administrative overheads. A total of 15 employees, representing around 5% of the total
manpower, accepted a VRS. As part of financial restructuring, an MOU was executed with the
Small Industries Development Bank of India in 2003, reducing the interest on loans and
providing refinancing at concessionary rates. High-cost bonds were settled, while negotiations
for restructuring the statutory liquidity ratio bond liability is in progress. Moreover, a scheme of
not charging interest for more than 2 years in respect of loans disbursed prior to 1990 has been
adopted as part of the exercise to reduce the exposure tof the SME sector.

24.      Madhya Pradesh Housing Board (MPHB). After corporatizing and restructuring the
MPHB, 49% of GoMP's share it was to be divested. Amendments to the Housing Board Act,
1972,enabling MPHB to participate in public-private partnerships, were contemplated in FY2002,
with a cabinet decision seeking the housing and environment directorate to effect changes to
the act. However, corporatization of the board and divestment of the GoMP stake in MPHB
could not be effected because of the board's negative net worth. MPHB initiated restructuring
measures including automation of management information systems, increased use of private
architects on contract, and personnel rationalization through attrition and abolishment of posts.
While MPHB continues to be engaged in low-cost housing projects--as well as construction of
commercial complexes such as Centre Point, Platinum Plaza etc., and re-densification of old
properties such as Indore Central Jail--the recommendations of a task force on the further
restructuring of MPHB's operations have been submitted to GoMP. The recommended
measures include: (i) a VRS or redeployment covering a substantial number of employees;
(ii) urban planning activities, including development of roads, sewerage lines, etc. being
allocated to MPHB; and (iii) exploring public-private partnerships in re-densification schemes.
The Government's approval is awaited on proposals to split MPHB's assets and liabilities
between Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.

25.     Highlights of the financial performance of the four enterprises before (FY2000) and after
restructuring (FY2003) are in Table A5.2.
                                                                                                        Appendix 5           109



                  Table A5.2: Highlights of Financial Performance of Enterprises
                                 Identified for Partial Divestment

            Govt investment - before reforms    Govt investment - after reforms    Performance before        Performance after

     State                                                                                   Accumulated               Accumulated
  Department Loans Equity          Guarantee Loans       Equity        Guarantee   PAT        Profit/Loss   PAT         Profit/Loss
(in Rs. Lakhs)

 MPSIndDC     1,365        8,109        1,843    1,364         8,109       1,820   (4,594)       (22,495)   (27,781)       (58,845)
 MPSAIDC        198          210          -        197           210         -         31            (34)       (77)          (256)
 MPSRTC       2,250       14,140        7,341   18,929        14,140       2,572   (6,490)       (63,934)   (10,003)       (68,830)
 MPSFC          347        6,254       41,059      173         6,254      48,695      202        (13,403)    (2,812)       (23,872)
 MPHB          NA         NA           NA        NA           NA          NA       NA            NA          NA            NA
- = zero, NA = not available, MPSFC = Madhya Pradesh Financial Corporation, MPHB = Madhya Pradesh Housing
Board, MPSAIDC = Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation, MPSFC = Madhya Pradesh
State Financial Corporation, MPSIDC = Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation,
MPSRTC = Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, PAT = profit after tax.
Source: Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

26.     Over 2001­2003, the performance of these selected PSUs has been disappointing,
without exception. Primarily because of the provisioning for NPAs, the operating performance of
MPSIDC showed a significant deterioration--a net loss of Rs2.78 billion was recorded in
FY2003 compared with a net loss of Rs460 million in FY2001. The performance of MPSAIDC
also deteriorated--a net loss of Rs7.7 million was recorded in FY2004 compared with a net
profit of Rs3.1 million in FY2000. This resulted from operating losses, as revenues have been
more or less static. The net losses of MPSRTC increased from Rs650 million in FY2001 to
Rs1 billion in FY2003, mainly because of a decline in revenues coupled with rising fuel costs
and relatively fixed employee costs. MPSFC recorded a net loss of Rs280 million in FY2003
compared with a net profit of Rs20 million in FY2001, because of a reduction in revenues and
relatively fixed interest costs. All four PSUs continue to be a drain on scarce state budget
resources.

27.      PSU Restructuring ­ Closure. Eight enterprises were identified for closure. The
program design did not specify what closure entailed, and there are at least three interpretations:
(i) closing down operations of the PSU and retrenching all but a core team of staff necessary to
achieve financial closure; (ii) closing the finances of the PSU, including receipt of the funds from
the sale of assets and meeting all creditor's obligations, include the possibility of a court
appointed liquidator being involved; and (iii) the legal closure of the PSU in accordance with the
relevant law. This led to GoMP requesting clarification from ADB on the interpretation with
regard to meeting tranche conditions and non-tranche covenants. It was mutually agreed that
closure would mean the operational closure of the respective PSUs. While GoMP succeeded in
effecting operational closure of the selected PSUs, the final liquidation of the enterprises and
recovery of proceeds in respect of their assets has not been completed. In the case of the
Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation Limited, after achieving operational closure,
GoMP decided to revive it to manage a central Government-funded police modernization
program to construct police housing in the state.
110       Appendix 5


28.     Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation Limited (MPSIC). All MPSIC units,
including the head office, were closed down and all employees extended VRS; one employee's
case is still pending in the court. While two MPSIC sugar mills have been transferred to local
cooperatives, two other units are currently being managed by private companies on a contract
basis. The valuation reports for 11 units, compiled by authorized chartered engineers in FY2006,
have been forwarded to GoMP for further action. While no activity, other than recovery of old
receivables, is being carried out, a GoMP guarantee is being sought to facilitate submission of a
solvency declaration by the directors, to facilitate initiation of closure proceedings in respect of
the company. The legal process to wind up MPSIC cannot begin until the estimated
Rs30 million owed to creditors and expenses relating to court cases of around Rs14 million
have been settled from the proceeds of asset sales.

29.     Madhya Pradesh Slum Clearance Board (MPSCB). The order to close MPSCB was
issued by the administrative department concerned in March 2001 and all officers were shifted
to vacancies in urban local bodies. All MPSCB operations have been discontinued, and local
bodies have been given the responsibility for land survey, execution, and monitoring of slum
projects in conjunction with the respective district administration.

30.     Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation Limited (MPPHC). The order to close
MPPHC operations was issued in FY1998 and all employees were offered VRS. Some core
staff were retained to assist in winding up MPPHC, and other staff returned to the police ranks.
In 2004, the Government implemented a nationwide police modernization program, including
construction of police housing. GoMP decided to revive MPPHC to manage the construction of
police housing complexes. Former employees were posted back from the police or rehired in
the revived MPPHC.

31.       Madhya Pradesh State Leather Development Corporation Limited (MPSLDC).
Orders to close MPLeaDC were issued in FY1999 and operations were discontinued in FY2000,
with VRS to all employees, save a core team, and statutory dues being paid. However, an
official liquidator is yet to be appointed for the company, and the PSU lacks legal and secretarial
assistance to implement the legal procedures relating to winding up. While the auction process
for selected properties is being carried out, decisions by GoMP and the respective district
administrations are awaited for disposal of certain assets. A claim has been preferred with
GoMP for a grant to meet legal expenses and for settlement of certain creditor claims.

32.    Madhya Pradesh State Export Corporation Limited (MPSEC). The closure order was
issued in July 2001 and all employees, except for a core team of 12, were offered VRS. MPEC
funded the VRS from its own resources; it was the only PSU to have done so, having adopted a
VRS scheme that envisaged offering a higher compensation package to severed employees
than the GoMP scheme. MPEC has been subject to operational and financial closure; its assets
and liabilities were initially vested in MPSIDC before being transferred to Madhya Pradesh
Trade and Investment Facilitation Corporation Limited in June 2004.

33.     Madhya Pradesh State Fisheries Development Corporation (MPSFDC). Consequent
to the issue of the closure order for the PSU in March 1998, the activities of MPFDC were
assigned to the Fisheries Federation, an autonomous apex body of the Fisheries Cooperative
Union. MPFDC was merged with the Federation on 31 August 1999.3



3
    Note of Project Management Unit, Department of Finance, Government of Madhya Pradesh.
                                                                                   Appendix 5     111


34.    Madhya Pradesh State Land Development Corporation (MPSLandDC). Operations of
MPSLandDC were discontinued in June 2001, after receipt of the order for closure. With the
settlement of the issue of interim relief, all employees except 15 were offered VRS and the
disbursements took place in September 2001. However, information on recovery of sale
proceeds regarding the assets and settlement of liabilities is not available.

35.    Madhya Pradesh State Textile Corporation Limited (MPSTC). Operations at an
owned mill and two mills managed by private players under management contract were
discontinued and the concerned employees were retrenched. Closure of the head office was
ordered in July 1998, and VRS was disbursed to the majority of employees. The release of the
balance amount was delayed because of cases filed by individual employees. The status on
sale of assets of the company and settlement of outstanding liabilities, besides the position
regarding litigation pertaining to employees, is unascertained. Certain key parameters regarding
the above enterprises that were subject to closure are presented in Table A5.3.

         Table A5.3: Key Parameters in Respect of GoMP Enterprises Subject to Closure

                                                           Capital blocked
                                                           at the time of
                   VRS payout              No.of employees closure                 Payback
  State Department (Rs.Lakhs)              for VRS         (Rs.Lakhs)              (Years)



    MPSIC                          3,208               1,822               4,232                 6.4
    MPSCB                            NA                  NA                  NA
    MPPHC                            153                  67                 NA
    MPSLDC                           168                 145                 158                 7.4
    MPEC                             -                   -                    80
    MPSFDC                           NA                  NA                  NA
    MPSLandDC                      1,651                 522                 NA
    MPSTC                          3,975               1,907               8,566
 - = zero, NA = not available, GoMP = Government of Madhya Pradesh, MPEC = Madhya Pradesh Export
 Corporation Limited, MPSFDC = Madhya Pradesh State Fisheries Development Corporation, MPPHC = Madhya
 Pradesh Police Housing Corporation, MPSCB = Madhya Pradesh Slum Clearance Board, MPSIC = Madhya
 Pradesh State Industries Corporation, MPSLDC = Madhya Pradesh State Leather Development Corporation,
 MPSLandDC = Madhya Pradesh State Land Development Corporation, MPSTC = Madhya Pradesh State Textile
 Corporation, VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
 Source: Note on VRS from the Project Management Unit, Department of Finance, Government of Madhya
          Pradesh and Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

36.     A total of Rs1.3 billion is blocked in the enterprises in the form of GoMP investments in
equity and loans. VRS payments totaling Rs916 million have been disbursed to
4,463 employees out of the SRF. The VRS for 48 employees of MPEC, totaling Rs21 million,
was funded out of MPEC own resources. Moreover, the VRS payback period was 6.4 years for
MPSIC and 7.4 years for MPLeaDC, considering the VRS payout vis-à-vis the reduction in
annual recurring GoMP support, after closure. Since the extent of support from the Government
to MPSTC actually increased after operational closure, the computation of the payback period
for the enterprise is not relevant.

       5.      PSU Restructuring ­ Lease/Sale of Property

37.    Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation Limited (MPSTDC) was the
only PSU identified under this category. Of the 70 tenders initially received for sale of individual
properties, 22 were found to be eligible, but no offers were received from players in the
hospitality sector so the offers were rejected. The Confederation of Indian Industries arranged
112           Appendix 5


for interactions between MPSTDC and a major private hotel chain, but there was no progress in
the negotiations because of the poor infrastructure at many properties. However, as a number
of MPSTDC properties have heritage status, the Government's Archaeological Survey of India
has invested in their upgrading over the past 4 years. A combination of improved upkeep of the
properties and upgraded road infrastructure at major tourist locations in the state has resulted in
increased numbers of foreign and local tourists, and encouraged GoMP to shelve attempts to
sell or lease out properties. As a result, the operating performance of the company has
improved. Net profit of Rs2.7 million was recorded in FY2003 (FY2002 net loss: Rs3.6 million),
compared with a net loss of about Rs16 million in FY2000. This was primarily because of
improved operating margins, although revenues declined by around 9% during the period (Table
A5.4).

                        Table A5.4: Highlights of Financial Performance of MPSTDC
                                      Before and After Restructuring

      State        Government Investment - before reforms   Government Investment - after reforms   Performance - before   Performance - after
                                                                                                            Accumulated           Accumulated
 (in Rs. Lakhs      Loans          Equity     Guarantee       Loans        Equity     Guarantee     PAT      Profit/Loss   PAT     Profit/Loss

 MPSTDC              -       2,324         -        -         2,497 -     (158)     (1,103)     27                                      (1,224)
- = zero, MPSTDC = Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation, PAT = profit after tax.
Source: Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

              6.      Social Safety Net Mechanism

38.    The status of VRS disbursements from the SRF for the PSUs identified for reform under
  MPSTDC
the MPPRMP is outlined in Table A5.5.

      Table A5.5: Details of Voluntary Retirement Scheme Disbursement in GoMP Enterprises

                                                                        Total          Number of             VRS            VRS per
                                                                      Number of        Employees          Disbursed        Employee
                                                                      Displaced        Availing of           (Rs
         PSU                                                          Employees          VRS               million)           (Rs)
        MP State Land Development Corporation              556            522          165      320,000
        MP Leather Development Corporation Ltd.            145            145            17     120,000
        MP Road Transport Corporation                    5,000          4,453        1,648      370,000
        MP State Industries Corporation Ltd.             1,822          1,822          321      180,000
        MP State Textile Corporation Ltd.                1,948          1,907          398      210,000
        MP Police Housing Corporation Ltd.                 215             67            15     230,000
        MP Fisheries Development Corporation                53             53            11     210,000
                 Total                                   9,739          8,969        2,575
        GoMP = Government of Madhya Pradesh, MP = Madhya Pradesh, PSU = public sector undertaking,
        VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
        Source: Note of the Project Management Unit, Department of Finance, Government of Madhya Pradesh.

39.     The average payout on VRS was Rs180,000­Rs370,000 per employee, computed in
line with the VRS formula (para. 22). In addition, MPEC spent about Rs21 million on a self-
designed VRS program for 48 employees, implemented from its own resources, with the
average payout being about Rs440,000 per employee. In all, almost 9,000 employees received
VRS, compared with a design estimate of 16,500.
                                                                                                 Appendix 5   113


40.     Contrary to the MPPRMP design, the SSN did not proceed. Not one displaced employee
was retrained as the GoMP decided it did not wish to set a precedent of funding such training; in
so doing, the budget impact was minimized. Given that $120.4 million was estimated in the
design for the costs of the VRS and SSN, and a total of around $57 million was spent on the
VRS, the commitment of the GoMP to provide retrenched employees with the support
envisaged is in question. While institutions such as Madhya Pradesh State Consultancy
Services, Bhopal and Small Industries Services Institute, Indore were engaged in offering
counseling and retraining for employees displaced by restructuring of the Government's PSUs
in Madhya Pradesh, no such SSN programs were undertaken for employees affected by the
restructuring of state PSUs. The OEM was informed that the VRS disbursed, together with the
alternative employment opportunities in the informal sector, is estimated to have provided for
around 65% of the remuneration that was being earned by the employees prior to
retrenchment.4

           7.       Sustainability of PSU Reforms

41.     Finance department officials associated with the PSU reforms indicated to the OEM that
the GoMP remains committed to pursue reforms. For enterprises that are not providing social
services, the consensus has been that in the event of a failure to effect divestment of identified
enterprises, the GoMP should close them to save budget resources. The Financial
Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2005, which forms the basis of the allocation of the
Government's incentive funds to GoMP, requires states to curtail government expenditure,
reinforcing the value of PSU reform as a key component of expenditure reduction.

42.     However, unlike other states such as Gujarat and Karnataka, which have adopted
proactive strategies for PSU reforms, it appears that there has been no significant activity to
continue or expand the ambit of PSU reforms in Madhya Pradesh beyond the life of the
MPPRMP. The existing coordination mechanisms with individual administrative departments are
weak, and DPE has little power to ensure its mandated responsibilities are achieved.

43.     While DPE was created as part of the MPPRMP, it has neither the human resources nor
the administrative authority to meet its mandated responsibilities effectively. It is staffed by two
officers reporting to a secretary. Inadequate coordination with the administrative departments
that have jurisdiction over the PSUs identified for restructuring, limits DPE's ability to oversee
reforms. PSU targets were often published with a 1-year time lag, and after the actual
performance data was available. Moreover, annual reports on the performance of PSUs are
delayed--the report for FY2003 was published only in September 2005--indicating the absence
of timely inputs to DPE from concerned PSUs and line departments. A system of monitoring
PSU performance through MOUs exists on paper, but the MOUs for FY2006 were not finalized
until October 2006, showing the obstacles faced by DPE in terms of inadequate information and
limited support from the PSUs and GoMP line departments.

44.      The MPPRMP design envisaged the establishment of a technical secretariat as an
advisory body to (i) undertake preparatory measures and technical analysis regarding PSUs
identified for restructuring, including valuation; and (ii) provide assistance on technical aspects
of restructuring and divestment. However, the secretariat was not set up, resulting in the
absence of expert guidance in restructuring PSUs identified for reforms.



4
    Interview with social safety net program expert. As no surveys have been conducted, this is conjecture.
114    Appendix 5



C.     Issues

45.    Most PSUs (MPSIDC, MPSAIDC, MPSRTC, etc.) continue to be a major source of
concern, given the deterioration in their operational performance after reforms; continued
dependence on GoMP resources; and inadequate operational processes, controls, and
professional capabilities which have led to high NPA levels.

46.     While it may be necessary to retain some PSUs under government ownership because
of their socioeconomic mandate, which may be dischargeable only by Government, it is fairly
well accepted that existing government practices suffer inherent limitations in specific areas
such as recruiting qualified and experienced professionals, enforcing adequate accountability,
motivating high performance while discouraging underperformance, etc. Consequently, for any
PSU reform initiative to be sustainable, it is necessary to put in place appropriate frameworks
and mechanisms to improve corporate governance, human resources management, and
operations. For example, some state governments are exploring options of hiring experts for key
PSU positions at market-linked salaries, implementing formal performance management
systems as in private sector companies, and maintaining an arm's length relationship between
the GoMP and the PSU.

47.     Experience suggests that there needs to be a nodal agency for PSU reforms to ensure
proper implementation, as the administrative departments lack the requisite expertise and time
for this purpose. While the MPPRMP design envisaged establishing a technical secretariat for
offering technical advice and support for implementing PSU reforms, it was not set up and DPE
was designated the nodal agency for PSU reforms. To ensure sustainability, it is necessary to
have a nodal agency with representation from multiple departments and equipped with requisite
skill sets (some of which are likely to be contracted exogenously), as demonstrated in other
similar programs. In addition to acting as a central repository of knowledge and experience, the
nodal agency usually plays a key role in identifying relevant best practices; standardizing
processes, practices, and documentation; and acting as a secretariat to the forum empowered
to take key decisions on the PSU reform initiative. However, DPE's limited staffing and
restricted powers do not equip it with sufficient ability to carry out the functions required of the
nodal agency.

48.      The classification of PSUs into three categories--partial divestment, closure, and
restructuring through sale/lease of properties--does not appear to have been preceded by an
audit or an in-depth study of the operational and financial performance of the PSUs concerned.
Hence, the decision on categorization at the program design stage was probably based on
insufficient or incomplete information on the status of the enterprises, thereby limiting the
effectiveness of the program measures.

49.     It may have been possible to optimize outcomes further in some cases, through adoption
of alternate PSU reforms strategies. Thus, while retention of a 51% equity stake by the GoMP
(with management control) may be advisable for selected enterprises with a predominantly
socioeconomic mandate, offering a majority stake (and management control) to the private
sector partner for other enterprises would have probably increased the chances of successful
divestment. In the existing scheme of things, all PSUs in the partial divestment category would
continue to be controlled by the state government and managed by bureaucrats after listing,
thereby severely limiting opportunities for effective corporate governance reform and the
necessary performance improvement. Similarly, around Rs6.75 billion of outstanding GoMP
investments are currently blocked in the 10 PSUs undergoing closure through liquidation, a
process which takes 1­5 years. Possible options that could have been explored to free up
                                                                                Appendix 5     115


capital invested by GoMP earlier include a 100% equity stake sale to potential private sector
investors, with GoMP underwriting all existing liabilities until the date of the transaction.

50.      The operational performance of almost all enterprises has deteriorated at least through
2003, resulting in increased GoMP budgetary support. Experience in similar situations suggests
that, unless some of the fundamental issues associated with government ownership--such as
inadequate accountability, managerial bandwidth, and excessive interference--are effectively
addressed, a one-time exercise involving financial, operational, and personnel restructuring is
insufficient to generate sustainable viability.

51.    For many of the enterprises undergoing partial divestment, a two-stage process of
divestment was adopted, with the GoMP initially selling a part of its stake, followed by a second
tranche of divestment after an interval of 1­2 years. While a two-phase divestment may
potentially enable higher value realization, it also has associated risks such as the potential for
GoMP to lose interest in divesting the balance because of policy changes, changes to elected
representatives, or transfer of key officials. There is also a risk of a change in interests and
prerogatives of the private sector investor because of internal policies or market forces.

52.     While some key corporate governance measures--such as providing performance
incentives through differential remuneration, etc.--were envisaged as part of the program
design, there was limited implementation. The MOUs between individual enterprises and DPE
were used primarily for performance reporting instead of an actionable performance monitoring
mechanism for facilitating an arm's length relationship between GoMP and the PSU. It was
proposed that district primary education officials assess candidates for the positions of
functional directors and senior managerial positions. However, a mechanism of constituting
expert committees--comprising a mix of prominent public and private sector officials--is likely
to yield superior results given the nature and depth of experience of its members. The
availability of suitable candidates for key managerial positions is also likely to be an issue until
market-linked compensation is adopted.

53.     The PSU component of the Program appeared to have limited emphasis on assessing
the socioeconomic impact of large-scale personnel displacement. No tracer studies were
conducted to assess the impact of PSU reforms on the displaced workers under the MPPRMP.
Failure to implement the SSN because of high support costs and a view that the displaced
workers would proactively adopt alternate livelihoods raises a question as to the commitment of
GoMP with regard to the long-term welfare of retrenched employees. Experience in similar
programs in states like West Bengal suggests that a formal program for counseling and
retraining of displaced workers usually goes a long way in mitigating the associated trauma and
adverse socioeconomic impact of retrenchment.

54.    The dwindling allocation to the SRF from the state budget appears to have adversely
affected the settlement of employees under the VRS scheme. The allocation to the SRF
declined from Rs230 million in FY2004 to Rs50 million in FY2005, with GoMP seeking funds
from international aid agencies and the Government for replenishment of the SRF. Moreover,
access to the SRF was becoming progressively limited despite continuing demand from PSUs
for VRS assistance. For example, VRS to 100 employees of MPSAIDC, who had opted for the
scheme, could not be effected because the SRF had inadequate funds.

55.     The Program did not unambiguously define "closure," resulting in the agencies in charge
of program implementation interpreting the term to mean operational closure, rather than
financial and legal closure. The relative ease with which GoMP revived the MPPHC, which had
116    Appendix 5


discontinued all its operations, points to the need for greater clarity on the definition of "closure"
at the program design stage. However, given the cumbersome process involved in the legal
closure of enterprises and the fact that the Program only had a 3-year tenure, while legal
closure of the identified PSUs could not possibly have been identified as an outcome of the
Program, financial closure should have probably been mandated to prevent the revival of
operationally closed PSUs.

D.     Recommendations

56.    Decisions on the most appropriate type of reform for a PSU must include an audit to
ensure that financial records are in order, and involve outside experts in PSU reform at an early
stage to ensure that the most appropriate options are considered.

57.    Given the technically complex and politically sensitive nature of PSU reform, a policy
body (chaired by political leaders, chief minister, and ministers of relevant departments) should
be advised by a technical secretariat headed by a senior civil servant reporting to the principal
secretary, with sufficient resources to engage experienced consultants as required.

58.    Using budgetary impact parameters as tranche release conditions instead of divestment
milestones for specific PSUs is likely to provide greater flexibility to the GoMP in implementing
PSU reform. If milestones are necessary, then it is important to recognize the time and
resources required to close a PSU and ensure that at least financial closure is achieved.

59.    Extensive policy dialogue with government officials is required to ensure that they
understand that a formal mechanism for counseling and training of displaced workers and their
dependents will mitigate adverse socioeconomic outcomes is positively received by all
stakeholders.

60.     Conducting periodic studies to assess the socioeconomic impact of retrenchment on the
displaced workers will provide valuable inputs to revise appropriate SSN interventions, such as
providing insurance and training support for mitigating adverse socioeconomic impacts.
                                                                                          Appendix 6       117


     THE USE OF MADHYA PRADESH ENVIRONMENT AND REHABILITATION POLICIES
                  IN ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK SECTOR LOANS

1.      Under the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program (MPPRMP), the
government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) approved an environment policy in 1999, and a
rehabilitation policy in 2002. The intent behind formulating these policies was to ensure that the
state government had policies in place to guide the impact of development projects on the
environment and people who were required to resettle. The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
(EPA), of the Government of India (the Government) provides a framework for the coordination
of central and state authorities, as was established under the Water (Prevention and Control)
Act, 1974, and Air (Prevention and Control) Act, 1981. Under the EPA, the Government is
empowered to take the necessary measures to protect and improve the quality of the
environment by setting standards for emissions and discharges; regulating the location of
industries; management of hazardous wastes, and protection of public health and welfare. From
time to time, the Government issues notifications under the EPA for the protection of
ecologically sensitive areas or issues guidelines for matters under the EPA. The EPA and other
central and state level legislation and regulations provide the legal and regulatory framework for
the state's environment policy.

A.        Environment

2.      In addition to conditions to formulate and implement the state's environment policy and
action plan, the MPPRMP legal agreement included three specific covenants relating to the
environment, two of which had broader implications for the institutionalization and sustainability
of the policy. In particular, the Borrower (the Government) was required to ensure that, in
formulating infrastructure policy and regulatory reforms, the state would make adequate
provisions for enforcement of environmental mitigation measures consistent with the applicable
state laws and monitoring of environmental impact in key infrastructure sectors, and also to
cause the state to support the environmental sustainability of economic growth by adoption of a
state environment policy that would stipulate a time-bound action plan for implementation of
market-based instruments for environmental management.

3.      Asian Development Bank (ADB) projects financing of infrastructure development in the
state refer to relevant laws and regulations of the Government in their respective project loan
environmental assessments. It may also be expected that the state government's environment
policy would also be a reference document. However, the Madhya Pradesh environment policy
is not referred to in the main text of the Report and recommendation to the President to the
Board of Directors (RRP) or in the relevant appendix addressing environment issues of the
three sector loans processed after the policy's approval.

4.      The first power sector loan1 approved in 2001 was classified category B according to
ADB's environmental assessment guidelines.2 The summary initial environmental examination
appended to the RRP refers to the Environmental Protection Act, 1986, and includes a table
evaluating the degree to which the Madhya Pradesh Power Reform Act, 2001, addresses
potential environmental impacts. No reference is made to the Madhya Pradesh environment
policy.

1
    ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program. Manila.
2
    ADB. 2003. Environmental Assessment Guidelines. Manila. Available:
    www.adb.org/documents/guidelines/environmental_assessment/ Environmental_Assessment_Guidelines.pdf
118       Appendix 6




5.      The roads sector project3 approved in 2002 was classified category B, as the project was
financing the rehabilitation of existing roads with no additional right-of-way required. The initial
environment examination verified that the limited environmental impacts during construction and
operation could be mitigated by implementing the environmental management action plan
recommended in the initial environment examination. No environmentally sensitive areas were
to be disrupted by the project, mainly because the criteria for selecting subprojects excluded
roads in environmentally sensitive areas.4

6.      The first and second tranche components of the second power sector loan 5 are
classified category B. The summary initial environmental examination appended to the RRP
states that the environmental assessment is being conducted following ADB and central
government environmental assessment regulations and guidelines. Schedule 5, Clause 8 of the
Framework Financing Agreement states "the State will ensure that environmental assessment
of the Subprojects are conducted according to the ADB's Environment Policy, 2002; INDIA and
the State's environmental laws, regulations, and standards; and the EARF" (footnote 5).

B.        Resettlement

7.      Neither the first power sector nor road sector projects required any resettlement.
However, the power sector loan approved in December 2006 required resettlement. Unlike the
environment policy, the RRP recognizes the existence of the state's rehabilitation policy. The
summary resettlement plan appendix contains a comparative analysis of the Madhya Pradesh
rehabilitation policy, the Government's national policy on resettlement and rehabilitation for
project affected persons, and ADB's Involuntary Resettlement Policy (1995) against 18 policy
principles. The Madhya Pradesh policy matches ADB's in 13 principles. Of the five where a
difference is identified, only the principle related to entitlements under the policy does not fulfill
ADB's specifications. Regarding the other four principles, the table notes the status in the
Madhya Pradesh policy but makes no comment in the remarks column as to the significance of
the difference.

8.      In the absence of a commentary on the findings of the comparative assessment, the
reader must assume that the major constraint to adopting the state government's policy is the
entitlements arrangements. The only statement that is made is that the resettlement framework
will be revised if there are major changes to relevant policies and laws during project
implementation--implying that the Madhya Pradesh policy is not acceptable. The framework
assumes that ADB's policy will be implemented.

9.      With increasing concern from ADB's developing member countries for use of country
systems, including for resettlement, the challenge facing the governments of India and Madhya
Pradesh is the implementation and successful enforcement of the policy rather than its content.
The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) notes that a recent review of the application of
rehabilitation measures for families affected by the Sardar Sarovar Project is scathing about the
application of the measures and the findings of an oversight group commissioned by the

3
    ADB. 2002. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors for Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance Grant for Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program. Manila (Loan 1959-
    IND).
4
    The implications of this decision are discussed more fully in the recently completed special evaluation study of
    environmental safeguards. Available: http://www.adb.org/Documents/SES/REG/sst-reg-2006-13/ses-es.asp.
5
    ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors for the Proposed Multitranche
    Financing Facility India: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program. Manila.
                                                                                             Appendix 6       119


Government, endorsed by the Indian Supreme Court, to survey damage affected villages and
report to the court and prime minister. 6 Levien argues the project illustrates a fundamental
problem with the "paradigm of giganticism" where the social and environmental consequences
of operating at such a large scale are beyond the ability of governments to respond to ensure
that citizens' rights and entitlements are protected in accordance with their own laws. In this
case--with the project displacing over 35,000 families (500,000 people)--given the land
shortage in India, it was simply impossible to meet the legally required rehabilitation of
2 hectares of cultivatable, irrigable land, and community resettlement sites with civic amenities,
let alone restoring people's livelihoods. The issue then is not necessarily the rehabilitation
measures per se, but their implications for large-scale development projects affecting such large
numbers of people. Although Levien does not excuse the failings of the Government to
rehabilitate displaced families, the study argues that the task of uprooting and reestablishing
communities fails "because the social, economic, and ecological relationships that characterize
any village, much less hundreds of villages, cannot be adequately understood (and therefore
replicated) from above." The results illustrate the failings of human institutions overwhelmed by
the scale of a challenge, which from the outset was an "impossible undertaking for a half million
people."




6
    Levien, M. 2006. Narmada and the Myth of Rehabilitation. Economic and Political Weekly. XLI (33): 3581­3585.
120        Appendix 7



    CAPACITY BUILDING FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISE REFORM AND SOCIAL SAFETY NET
                             IN MADHYA PRADESH

A.         Background

           1.      Basic Data

    Cost ($)                                                       Estimated                     Actual
    Foreign Exchange                                              350,000.00                    327,982.12
    Local Currency                                                250,000.00                    242,417.00
    Total                                                         600,000.00                    570,399.12

    Number of Person-Months (consultants)                     43.0                                42.0
    Executing Agency The State Development Planning Commission

    Milestones                                                                                   Date
    President's/Board Approval                                                            14 December 1999
    Signing of TA Agreement                                                                     7 April 2000
    Fielding of Consultants                                                                     3 July 2000
    TA Completion: Expected                                                                     3 April 2001
                      Actual                                                                31 October 2001
    TCR Circulation                                                                       28 December 2004

    Mission Type                                                    Number                        Date
    Inception                                                         1                         August 2000
    Operations Evaluation                                               1                 2­28 October 2006
TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report.

           2.      Rationale

1.       In the early 1980s, India embarked on a path of economic liberalization, which gained
pace in the 1990s when the Government of India (the Government) and some state
governments began reforming their respective public sector undertakings, as a part of broader
fiscal reform measures. Following support to Gujarat government's reforms in 1996, in 1997 the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) provided technical assistance (TA) to the fiscal reforms of the
government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP). Two TA projects1 were approved during the design of
the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program (MPPRMP) loan. One TA
supported public finance reform, and the other TA supported strengthening local government
institutional capacity. Based on their preliminary findings, it was apparent that additional TA2
would be required for the loan component reforming public sector undertakings (PSUs). The TA
under review was approved, as part of the MPPRMP on 14 December 1999.




           3.      Objectives and Scope of the TA

1
    ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance
    Reform and Institutional Strengthening. Manila (for $780,000, approved on 15 December); and ADB. 1997.
    Technical Assistance to India for Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh. Manila (for $700,000,
    approved on 15 December).
2
    ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to India for the Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety
    Net in Madhya Pradesh. Manila (for $600,000, approved on 14 December 1999).
                                                                                          Appendix 7       121



2.       The outcome (objective) of the TA was to support the GoMP's efforts to develop and
implement a comprehensive and socially sustainable program of PSU reform.3 There were three
outputs: (i) institutional mechanisms effectively managing PSU reform, including the social
safety net (SSN); (ii) improved PSU corporate governance, including strengthening accounting
and information systems; and (iii) government officials capable of undertaking PSU reform. The
scope of the TA includes: (i) providing advice on PSU divestment (including valuation, tendering
and bid evaluation, and labor issues), and restructuring (including reviewing existing corporate
governance structures and accounting systems and reporting requirements and enhancing
operational autonomy and accountability); (ii) training policy makers, PSU managers, staff of the
Department of Public Enterprise (DPE), and a technical secretariat (including strategies and
establishing links to local institutions for long-term sustainability); and (iii) designing suitable
institutional mechanisms for the SSN.

          4.      TA Completion Report

3.      The TA completion report (TCR) rated the TA "partly successful." The TCR noted that
the TA contributions could have been more effective if ADB monitoring had been more frequent,
and advice on the client's concerns had been addressed more quickly. GoMP was expected to
establish a technical secretariat to act as an advisory body, undertaking technical analysis of
PSUs and providing technical advice on restructuring and divestment implementation. The TA
consultants were expected to work in close collaboration with DPE and the technical secretariat,
in addition to being the resource persons during seminars and training. As the technical
secretariat was not established, the consultants worked with the finance department and DPE
regarding PSU restructuring and SSN. The TCR found that the inputs were used efficiently, and
that the original outputs were delivered, with the exception of activities related to the technical
secretariat. The TCR observed that progress in the restructuring of Madhya Pradesh State
Road Transportation Corporation (MPSRTC) and Madhya Pradesh Finance Corporation
(MPSFC) was slow because of limited availability of funds to offer a voluntary retirement
scheme (VRS) to their employees. The same pace was also observed in identifying additional
PSUs for restructuring.

B.        Assessment of Implementation Performance

          1.      Design of the TA

4.     The TA was attached to a 3-year program loan. However, its 9-month time frame was
overly ambitious, as a number of the manuals and reports to be produced by the TA
complemented MPPRMP loan conditions or covenants. Further, this was the first time GoMP
had undertaken PSU reform, which takes time, is technically complex, and requires attitudinal
changes--particularly among PSU managers and government officials. The output statements
could have been more clearly defined, with indicators identified and monitored throughout the
TA.




3
    A TA framework was not included in the TA paper, although the TA was approved 2 years after the TA framework
    was required.
122    Appendix 7



       2.     Engagement of Consultants

5.      Six firms were short-listed and three proposals were submitted. Adam Smith
International was engaged in accordance with ADB's Guidelines on the Use of Consultants
(2006, as amended from time to time) to provide consultancy services. Consultants were fielded
in July 2000. A total of five contract variations were made during the period of engagement,
including provision for government officials' attendance at a privatization conference in
Hyderabad. A total of 12 consultants (international and national) were provided by Adam Smith
International. By the time of TA completion, consultants' inputs totaled 42 person-months (31.59
national and 10.41 international) of the 43 person-months proposed consulting services.

       3.     Organization and Management

6.      The GoMP finance department was the Executing Agency (EA). GoMP established a
policy level public resource management committee chaired by the chief minister to guide
reforms, and PSU reforms were overseen by a technical level empowered committee chaired by
the chief secretary. In the absence of the technical secretariat, the finance department and DPE
supported the committee.

       4.     Implementation Schedule and Financing Arrangements

7.     The TA was extended by 13.5 months and was completed 22.5 months after approval.
Consultants were fielded 3 months after the TA became effective. However, the TA design
underestimated the time required to restructure or close PSUs. Further, as the consultants took
responsibility for many of the tasks expected of the technical secretariat, additional time was
required. It was also reported that TA completion was delayed because of additional information
required to support consultant's final statement of eligible expenses. The total cost of the TA
was estimated at $750,000 equivalent, including $350,000 of foreign exchange, and $400,000
equivalent of local currency. ADB provided $600,000, on a grant basis, from the ADB-funded TA
program to finance the entire foreign exchange costs, and $250,000 equivalent in local currency
to cover remuneration of national consultants, and the in-country training activities. The actual
disbursement by ADB was $570,399, almost 13% of the estimated cost.

       5.     Supervision

8.     The TA was supervised from ADB headquarters through an inception mission and two
review missions. India resident mission staff provided in-country monitoring support.

C.     Evaluation of Outputs

       1.     Outputs (i) PSU reform institutional mechanisms, and (ii) improving
              corporate governance

9.      High quality diagnostic and advisory reports were produced, including: (i) restructuring
PSUs, e.g., MPSRTC, MPSFC and Madhya Pradesh State Export Corporation (MPSEC); (ii) a
framework for implementing the SSN program; (iii) improving PSU corporate governance;
(iv) technical manuals on valuation of assets, tender procedures, accounting standards, and
PSU closure procedures; (v) an analysis of the cooperative sector; (vi) an analysis of the small
and medium-sized enterprise sector; and (vii) the institutional framework to establish the
technical secretariat. The technical assistance institutional framework report was an additional
task, prepared as part of discussions with the United Kingdom Department for International
                                                                                                      Appendix 7         123


Development (DFID) to support the technical secretariat. The planned training program budget
was reallocated to fund this. However, DFID funding did not eventuate. While the consultant's
reports contained appropriate advice, the failure to establish the technical secretariat and to
implement the SSN meant that the ability to strengthen a key institution was negated. Corporate
governance reforms supported by the MPPRMP were not successful, despite the advice
provided through the TA.

           2.       Output (iii) Capacity Building

10.     The consultants conducted a 2-day workshop on SSN in December 2000, which
explored future SSN options with public sector and private sector organizations involved in
training and employment placement in Madhya Pradesh. A study tour to Hyderabad in
November 2000 was undertaken by the Department of Finance assistant director, to learn from
their privatization experiences, PSU reform institutional arrangements, and implementation of
the SSN. The training approach was changed to on-the-job training, including specific
presentations. Consultants worked with "core staff" of PSUs, including Madhya Pradesh Land
Development Corporation (MPSLandDC), Madhya Pradesh Leather Development Corporation
(MPSLDC), Madhya Pradesh State Textile Corporation (MPSTC), MPSExC, and Madhya
Pradesh State Industries Corporation (MPSIC). This created a pool of government officials
familiar with implementing VRSs and closing PSUs.

           3.       Performance of Consultants

11.    Both the Government and ADB found the performance of consultants "satisfactory." The
consultants were flexible, adapting well to the changes required after the technical secretariat
was not established.

           4.       Outcomes and Impact of the TA

12.      The quality of TA reports, PSU analysis, technical manuals, and training advice was
commendable. However, the impact of the TA was constrained by the failure to establish the
technical secretariat. Further, DPE had insufficient staff to effectively take over these
responsibilities and, while the consultants performed a number of these tasks, they can not
replace government officials. The formulation of SSN procedures was completed, but not
utilized, as GoMP chose not to implement the SSN. Advice on corporate governance
improvements was sound, but neither PSU management nor the responsible government
officials were rigorous in enforcing change management measures. Practically, the considerable
effort expended through the TA had little impact on the overall effectiveness of PSU reforms.

D.         Overall Assessment

13.    Overall, the Operations Evaluation Mission rated the TA "partly successful."4 The TA was
"relevant," supporting GoMP's reform agenda, MPPRMP implementation, and being consistent
with ADB's India country strategy (footnote 4). The TA was rated "less effective." 5 The

4
    Overall performance is based on four criterion: "relevance," "effectiveness," "efficiency," and "sustainability." Each
    criterion was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: "irrelevant" (0), "less relevant" (1), "relevant"
    (2), and "highly relevant" (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with "highly
    successful" > 2.7, "successful" 1.6 < S < 2.7, "partly successful" 0.8 < PS < 1.6, and "unsuccessful" < 0.8. ADB.
    2006. Guidelines for Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
5
    Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: "ineffective" (0), "less effective" (1), "effective" (2), and "highly
    effective" (3).
124        Appendix 7


production of reports was not sufficient to achieve the outputs, as GoMP and ADB failed to
ensure that the necessary institutional mechanisms were in place to implement the advice.
Refocusing training to on-the-job was appropriate. However, with the high turnover of GoMP
officials, the study tour and workshops were less effective, since those staff trained in the
finance department and DPE have moved. The TA was rated "less efficient."6 Despite the fact
that the consultants produced quality advice, and adjusted the changed situation, the failure to
achieve outputs questions the TA's value for money. The TA was rated "less likely sustainable."7
Although the reports and manuals remain relevant today, their use will depend on GoMP's
commitment to sustain PSU reforms, and the provision of exogenous resources to provide the
level of technical advice required to assist GoMP to complete the reforms begun under the
MPPRMP.

E.         Conclusions

           1.       Key Issues and Lessons

14.     Two issues arise from implementing the TA. First, expecting a 9-month TA to support
reforms to be implemented through a 3-year program loan, suggests the designers
underestimated the complexity of the reforms and the scale of support that would be required.
Second, the failure to establish the technical secretariat undermined the effectiveness of the TA.
The technical secretariat was established in August 1998, but delays in ADB's approval of the
program loan resulted in it being disbanded within 3 months. Although DFID had been in
discussions with both GoMP and ADB to support the reforms with a grant of up to £70 million,
this did not eventuate after significant time and effort being expended by all parties. Given that
the technical secretariat was a key feature of both the program loan and this TA design, it is
unfortunate that ADB did not find the necessary resources to ensure that it was established.

15.    These two issues point to one lesson, i.e., the need to ensure that sufficient TA
resources are provided to support complex reform programs.

           2.       Follow-Up Actions and Recommendations

16.        No actions are proposed.




6
    Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: "inefficient" (0), "less efficient" (1), "efficient" (2), and "highly
    efficient" (3).
7
    Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: "unlikely sustainable" (0), "less likely sustainable" (1),
    "sustainable" (2), and "most likely sustainable" (3).
   MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE PROGRAM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
    REPORT FOR THE MADHYA PRADESH PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
                   PROGRAM IN INDIA (Loan 1717-IND)



         On 10 August 2007, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       1.    We appreciate OED's evaluation of the Madhya Pradesh Public Sector
       Resource Management Program (the Program).

       2      We agree with the overall findings and assessment of the above Project
       Performance Evaluation Report. There were external and political factors that
       contributed to start-up and implementation delays of the Program. We support
       the PPER's suggestion that we need to give due consideration to assess political
       and external factors in formulating such a program, and to develop mechanisms
       to ensure that reform targets are realigned with changing government policies
       should the need arise.

       3.     We support the proposed follow-up action relating to the need to review
       ADB's state support strategy in formulating the India 2007-2010 country
       partnership strategy.
