          ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
        Operations Evaluation Department




PROJECT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORT


                                   IN


                                INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response.
Performance Evaluation Report




Project Number: PPE: IND 29062
Loan Numbers: 1480/1481-IND
September 2006




India: Private Sector Infrastructure Facility




Operations Evaluation Department
                             CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                         Currency Unit ­ Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)

               At Appraisal      At Project Completion          At Operations Evaluation
              (16 Sep 1996)            (16 May 2002)                    (March 2006)
Re1.00   =       $0.0282                   $0.020                          $0.023
$1.00    =       Rs35.50                  Rs48.99                          Rs43.97
                                   ABBREVIATIONS
         ADB         ­        Asian Development Bank
         ALM         ­        asset liability management
         BME         ­        benefit monitoring and evaluation
         BOT         ­        build-operate-transfer
         BSNL        ­        Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
         CAR         ­        capital adequacy ratio
         CDMA        ­        code division multiple access
         CEA         ­        Central Electricity Authority
         DST         ­        debenture securitization trust
         EBITDA      ­        earnings before interest, tax depreciation and amortization
         EIRR        ­        economic internal rate of return
         FIRR        ­        financial internal rate of return
         FX          ­        foreign exchange
         FY          ­        fiscal year
         GDP         ­        gross domestic product
         GOG         ­        government of Gujarat State
         GOHP        ­        government of Himachal Pradesh
         GSM         ­        global system for mobile communication
         HPSEB       ­        Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board
         ICICI       ­        Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited
         IEI         ­        Innovation and Efficiency Initiative
         IFCI        ­        Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited
         KERC        ­        Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission
         KPTCL       ­        Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited
         LIBOR       ­        London interbank offered rate
         MOEF        ­        Ministry of Environment and Forests
         MOF         ­        Ministry of Finance
         NCD         ­        non-convertible debenture
         NHAI        ­        National Highways Authority of India
         NPL         ­        nonperforming loan
         OED         ­        Operations Evaluation Department
         OEM         ­        Operations Evaluation Mission
         PCR         ­        project completion report
         PCU         ­        passenger car unit
         PFI         ­        participating financial intermediary
         PLF         ­        plant load factor
         PLR         ­        prime lending rate
         PPA         ­        power purchase agreement
         PPER        ­        project performance evaluation report
         PPP         ­        Public-Private Partnership
         PSIF        ­        Private Sector Infrastructure Facility
         PTC         ­        pass-through certificate
         RBI         ­        Reserve Bank of India
         RRP         ­        report and recommendation of the President
         SCICI       ­        SCICI Limited
         SLR         ­        statutory liquidity ratio
         TA          ­        technical assistance
         TNEB        ­        Tamil Nadu State Electricity Board
         TNPCB       ­        Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board
                                  WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

                        kl                     ­            kilo-liter
                        km                     ­            kilometer
                        m                      ­            meter
                        m2                     ­            square meters
                        mt                     ­            million tons
                        MU                     ­            million units
                        MW                     ­            megawatt


                                           NOTES
       (i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government ends on 31 March. FY before a calendar
              year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, for example, FY2000 ends
              on 31 March 2000.

       (ii)   In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



                                            Key Words

asian development bank, development effectiveness, performance evaluation, private sector
infrastructure facility, credit line, public-private partnership, indian corporate debt market



Director General    :    B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director            :    R.B. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

Team Leader         :    T. Ito, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
Team Members        :    V. Ramos, Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
                         R. Perez, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant,
                         Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

                          Operations Evaluation Department, PE-690
                                             CONTENTS
                                                                                                 Page

 BASIC DATA                                                                                           ii
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                   iii
 MAP                                                                                                vii

 I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                 1
        A.   Evaluation Purpose and Process                                                          1
        B.   Expected Results of the Project                                                         3

 II.    DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION                                                                    3
        A.   Formulation                                                                             3
        B.   Rationale                                                                               3
        C.   Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                                             4
        D.   Procurement and Scheduling                                                              5
        E.   Design Changes                                                                          5
        F.   Outputs                                                                                 6
        G.   Loan Covenants                                                                          8

 III.   PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT                                                                      9
        A.   Overall Assessment                                                                     9
        B.   Relevance                                                                              9
        C.   Effectiveness                                                                         11
        D.   Efficiency                                                                            13
        E.   Sustainability                                                                        14

 IV.    OTHER ASSESSMENTS                                                                          15
        A.   Impact                                                                                15
        B.   Asian Development Bank Performance                                                    17
        C.   Borrowers Performance                                                                 17

 V.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                                                     18
        A.    Issues                                                                               18
        B.    Lessons                                                                              20
        C.    Follow-Up Actions                                                                    22

 APPENDIXES
 1.   Profile of Industrial and Investment Corporation of India Limited and ICICI Bank             23
 2.   Profile of Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited                                   27
 3.   Overview of Subloans under Loan 1480-IND (ICICI)                                             30
 4.   Overview of Subloans under Loan 1481-IND (IFCI)                                              31
 5.   Subproject Profile                                                                           32
 6    Overview of Subproject Performance                                                           69
 7.   Corporate Debt Market Development in India                                                   70

 Attachment:        Management Response

The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department on avoiding conflict of
interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report. The fieldwork
was undertaken by international consultants: Shubhranshu Patnaik (power expert), Arpita Pal
Agarwal (telecommunications expert), and Vishwas Udgirkar (transport expert) under the guidance of
the mission leader. To the knowledge of the management of the Operations Evaluation Department,
there were no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
                                             BASIC DATA

               Loans 1480 and 1481-IND: Private Sector Infrastructure Facility

                                      Loan 1480-IND                      Loan 1481-IND
                                As per ADB                        As per ADB
                                   Loan                              Loan
                                Documents        Actual           Documents         Actual
Key Project Data ($ million)
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization         150.0              150.0         100.0                62.5
ADB Loan Cancellation                                                                     37.5

Key Dates                        Expected            Actual         Expected            Actual
Fact-Finding                                       6 May 1995                          6 May 1995
Appraisal                                         11 Aug 1995                         11 Aug 1995
Loan Negotiations                                   1 Oct 1996                          1 Oct 1996
Board Approval                                     7 Nov 1996                          7 Nov 1996
Loan Agreement                                    14 Aug 1997                         14 Aug 1997
Loan Effectiveness              13 Nov 1997       25 Sep 1997      13 Nov 1997        26 Sep 1997
First Disbursement                                29 Oct 1997                          1 Dec 1997
Loan Closing                    26 Sep 2002       13 Nov 2001      27 Sep 2002        16 May 2002

ADB = Asian Development Bank.

BORROWERS: Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Ltd. (later, ICICI Bank) (Loan 1480-IND)
           Industrial Finance Corporation of India Ltd. (IFCI) (Loan 1481-IND)

GUARANTOR: Government of India

MISSION DATA:
Type of Mission                             No. of Missions                  No. of Person-Days

Consultation                                       1                                  9
Fact-Finding                                       1                                 42
Appraisal                                          1                                 60
Project Administration
- Inception (Contact)                              1                                 12
- Review                                           3                                 40
- Project Completion                               1                                  2
- Operations Evaluation                            1                                 53
                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

         On 7 November 1996, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved the Private Sector
Infrastructure Facility (PSIF) in India, covering Loan 1480-IND to Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation of India Limited (ICICI) for $150 million, and Loan 1481-IND to Industrial
Finance Corporation of India Limited (IFCI) for $100 million. The main purpose of the PSIF was
to facilitate private sector participation in the infrastructure sector, which was critically needed to
augment limited public sector resources. The secondary purpose was to promote the
development of a secondary market in debt securities. PSIF proceeds financed the purchase,
by ICICI and IFCI, of long-term debt securities (or securitized debts) issued by qualified private
sector enterprises for subprojects in the power, roads, ports, and telecommunications
subsectors.

        ICICI fully utilized the PSIF to finance six subloans for subprojects (3 power, 1 road, and
2 telecommunications) totaling $150 million. The loan closed on 13 November 2001. At the
merger of ICICI with ICICI Bank in March 2002, ADB approved the transfer of liabilities and
obligations under Loan 1480-IND from ICICI to ICICI Bank, the surviving entity. IFCI utilized the
PSIF to finance five subloans for subprojects (4 power and 1 port) totaling $62.5 million. The
loan closed on 16 May 2002. Of the five subprojects, two were also financed by ICICI under the
PSIF. IFCI could not fully utilize the PSIF, primarily because, from 2001, it could not meet the
requirement of the Reserve Bank of India of a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 9%, due to
deterioration of its portfolio performance. Ten of the 11 subloans under the PSIF were prepaid
after the commencement of subproject operations, because the subborrowers found alternative
means of financing.

       Loan 1480-IND is rated relevant as the (i) assessment of issues and opportunities at
appraisal was appropriate; (ii) the targeted impact, outcome, and outputs were consistent with
the Government's development priority and ADB's country operational strategy; (iii) the modality
and design in achieving the primary purpose of private sector participation in infrastructure
development was appropriate; and (iv) selection of ICICI as a participating financial intermediary
(PFI) was appropriate. It could have been rated highly relevant if the modality had also been
appropriate in achieving the secondary purpose of corporate debt market development. These
assessments are largely applicable to Loan 1481-IND as well, with the exception of the
adequacy of IFCI appraisal. The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) finds that ADB should
have paid more attention to IFCI's nonperforming loan ratio, which exceeded 10% when the
PSIF was approved. For this reason, Loan 1481-IND is rated partly relevant.

          Loan 1480-IND is rated effective in view of the (i) full utilization of the PSIF;
(ii) satisfactory achievement by the subprojects of production and/or revenue targets, and
significant demonstration effects regarding promotion of private sector participation in
infrastructure projects; and (iii) marginal contribution to development of the corporate debt
market. Loan 1481-IND is rated partly effective in view of the underutilization of the PSIF,
despite the satisfactory production and/or revenues achieved by all the subprojects.

         Loan 1480-IND is rated efficient on the basis that (i) two power subprojects were highly
efficient, and the third was efficient; and (ii) one telecommunication subproject was partly
efficient, and the second inefficient. Updated information is not available for the road subproject.
Loan 1481-IND is rated efficient on the basis that (i) two power subprojects were highly efficient,
and (ii) two additional power subprojects and the port subproject were efficient.
iv


       Loan 1480-IND is rated likely sustainable on the basis that the outcomes of the three
power subproject are likely to be sustained. The OEM could not assess the sustainability of the
road subproject and one of the telecommunications subprojects due to data constraints. The
operating entity of the other telecommunication subproject was subsequently acquired by a
competitor. Loan 1481-IND is rated likely sustainable on the basis that the outcomes of all the
subprojects are either mostly likely or likely to be sustained.

      On the basis of the above, the overall rating of Loan 1480-IND is successful and that of
Loan 1481-IND is partly successful.

       The report identified the following key lessons and policy implications for ADB
operations:
       (i)   The timeliness and complementarities of ADB's operations were key factors in
             the success of the PSIF, which was a pioneering project with a broad primary
             objective (facilitating private sector participation in infrastructure development).
       (ii)  India's Ministry of Finance (MOF) observed that the time spent by ADB in
             reviewing environmental and social impact assessment reports, prior to approval
             of subloans, was in some cases excessive. Given the relatively stringent
             environmental and social guidelines now in place in India for infrastructure
             projects, ADB may consider shifting its focus from at-entry assessments to
             compliance with the guidelines during implementation. Such a shift may enhance
             the value of ADB credit lines.
       (iii) Benchmark floating interest rates have not yet been fully established in India.
             Most subloans were prepaid during and after the period when domestic interest
             rates were decreasing. Had floating interest rate lending been more actively used,
             prepayments under the PSIF might have been reduced.
       (iv)  Under the PSIF, ADB loans were denominated in dollars. However, all the
             subloans were denominated in rupees, despite the fact that the PSIF aimed
             primarily to finance the foreign exchange costs of subprojects. While this was not
             the case for the PSIF, such a currency mismatch may constrain the usefulness of
             a credit line, depending on the availability of hedging instruments and the asset­
             liability management capability of financial intermediaries. The local currency
             loan product, newly introduced by ADB under the Innovation and Efficiency
             Initiative (IEI) reforms, would offer a solution to avoid such currency mismatches.
       (v)   Under the PSIF, only 20% of the subloan could be utilized for financing the local
             currency costs of power and telecommunication subprojects. Due to this
             restriction, IFCI could not fully utilize one of the approved subloans. With IEI in
             place, ADB can now offer more flexibility in cost-sharing arrangements, and
             expand the list of eligible expenses it can finance.
       (vi)  MOF now considers the credit facilities covered under the Government
             guarantee, such as PSIF, as no longer consistent with present government policy
             on public-private partnerships. This should be considered by ADB in formulating
             PSIF III, which is listed in the Country Strategy and Program Update 2006­2008.
             Strengthening of ADB's capacity in subsovereign and nonsovereign public sector
             financing, as envisaged under IEI, would be essential in responding to the
             changing environment and clients' needs in India.
       (vii) Credit line loan agreements should clarify the benefit monitoring and evaluation
             of subprojects which had already paid back the loans.
                                                                                   v


No specific follow-up actions were identified for the Borrowers or for ADB.




                                                    Bruce Murray
                                                    Director General
                                                    Operations Evaluation Department
 vii


MAP
                                          I.       INTRODUCTION

A.        Evaluation Purpose and Process

1.      On 7 November 1996, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved the Private Sector
Infrastructure Facility (PSIF) in India.1 The PSIF covered Loan 1480-IND to Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation of India Limited (ICICI) for $150 million, Loan 1481-IND to Industrial
Finance Corporation of India Limited (IFCI) for $100 million, and Loan 1482-IND to SCICI
Limited (SCICI) 2 for $50 million. Pursuant to the merger of SCICI with ICICI, ADB approved the
cancellation of the loan to SCICI in April 1997. ADB's Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
selected PSIF as part of the annual random sample of completed projects for performance
evaluation. This project performance evaluation report (PPER) was prepared by the Operations
Evaluation Mission (OEM) that visited India from 9 to 27 March 2006. The evaluation draws
upon a review of PSIF documents and other relevant studies, and discussions between OEM
members and representatives of the two participating financial intermediaries (PFIs), Ministry of
Finance (MOF), selected subborrowers, and other stakeholders. It also incorporates the results
of the OEM's field inspections of selected subprojects. The draft PPER was shared with the
ADB departments and offices concerned and those of the Borrowers and the Guarantor of the
PSIF, and their views have been incorporated as appropriate.

2.        In September 2003, the project completion report (PCR) rated the PSIF as successful, and
assessed the PSIF as relevant, as it appropriately addressed structural weaknesses in
infrastructure and public finances in India. The PCR did not indicate the efficacy rating, but
concluded that the PSIF substantially achieved its immediate objective of promoting private sector
participation in infrastructure by promoting private financing, and only partly achieved its
secondary objective of promoting the corporate debt market. The PCR assessed the PSIF as
efficient on the basis that (i) all nine subprojects were funded through debt securities at market-
related interest rates, and each of the subprojects appeared financially viable; and (ii) ADB's
investment of $212.5 million catalyzed investment of $2.05 billion. The PCR indicated that the
PSIF outcomes were likely to sustain, but noted the mixed performance of the PFIs. The PCR
gave a positive assessment of the PSIF's poverty reduction impact, taking into account its
contribution to (i) economic growth through removal of impediments to infrastructure development,
(ii) job creation and income generation, (iii) improved service quality through private infrastructure
operations, and (iv) the opportunity cost of government expenditures (which were freed for social
sector investments).

3.      The OEM found that the PCR assessment was generally objective. However, as the
PCR did not contain sufficient information on the nine subprojects, which began operations
during January 2000 to June 2003, the OEM focused instead on the subprojects' performance.
OEM was constrained by a lack of access to information, because eight of the nine
subborrowers prepaid the subloans to the PFIs prior to the OEM. For this reason, the PFIs
lacked sufficient updated data on the subprojects; some subborrowers were reluctant to share
the information with the OEM.3 Consequently, the OEM was unable to adequately assess the
operational performance of one subproject. The OEM otherwise accomplished the task largely
as planned, based on data offered directly by those subborrowers that participated in OEM

1
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Three Proposed Loans for
    the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility Project in India. Manila.
2
    A project finance affiliate of ICICI. SCICI Limited was the formal name adopted in 1992; formerly it was the
    Shipping Credit and Investment Company of India Limited.
3
    Five subborrowers accepted and two rejected OEM interviews. Of the remaining two subborrowers, (i) one had
    merged with a competitor; and (ii) the other remained a subborrower, and the PFI thus had updated data.
2


interviews and/or the information from PFIs, supplemented by data from publicly accessible
databases.

4.      This report evaluates Loans 1480-IND and 1481-IND based on the following criteria and
subcriteria, which were adopted from the Guidelines for Preparation of PPERs of Public Sector
Operations.4

           (i)      Relevance:
                    (a)   Adequacy of the assessment of issues and opportunities at the time of
                          project appraisal.
                    (b)   Consistency of the targeted impact, outcome, and outputs of the PSIF
                          with the Government's development strategy, ADB's strategy and
                          program for the country, and ADB's strategic objectives.
                    (c)   Appropriateness of modality of ADB's assistance, project design
                          (including project purposes and scope, selection of financial
                          intermediaries,    and    subproject   criteria),  and   implementation
                          arrangements.

           (ii)     Effectiveness:
                    (a)     PFIs' utilization of the PSIF, and catalytic roles that subloans played in
                            mobilizing funds.
                    (b)     Operational performance of subprojects and their contributions to the
                            promotion of private infrastructure projects, including their demonstration
                            effects.
                    (c)     PSIF's contribution to the development of the long-term debt market,
                            including their demonstration effects.

           (iii)    Efficiency:
                    (a) Subprojects' contributions to the improved economic efficiency of the country.
                    (b) Subprojects' spill-over effects to improve efficiency of public sector projects.

           (iv)     Sustainability:5
                    (a)    Adequacy in demand for subprojects' outputs.
                    (b)    Appropriateness in pricing of subprojects' outputs.
                    (c)    Financial viability of subprojects' operating entities.
                    (d)    Financial internal rate of return of subprojects.
                    (e)    Availability of continued funding to maintain proper operations and
                           maintenance of subprojects.
                    (f)    Appropriateness of the policy and institutional environment to maintain
                           proper operations of subprojects.
                    (g)    Appropriateness of policy and institutional environment to maintain PSIF
                           achievements in the area of the capital market development.
                    (h)    Environmental, social, technological, and natural resource risks of
                           subprojects.

4
    ADB 2006. Guidelines for Preparation of PPERs of Public Sector Operations. Manila.
5
    In view of PSIF's main purpose of emphasizing the subproject achievements, PFIs' financial viability is not
    considered in the sustainability criteria, but discussed separately in the section on institutional impact. Unlike credit
    lines for small and medium enterprises that involve many subloans and include elements of institution building, the
    PSIF covered only 11 large subloans (each exceeding $7 million) covering 9 subprojects and had no capacity
    building component. All subloans except one have been repaid. Thus the PPER focuses on analysis at the
    subproject level.
                                                                                                3



B.     Expected Results of the Project

5.      The main purpose of the PSIF was to facilitate private sector participation in the
infrastructure sector in India, which was critically needed to augment limited public sector
resources. The secondary purpose was to promote the development of a secondary market in
debt securities. To achieve these purposes, PSIF proceeds were intended to finance PFIs'
purchase of long-term debt securities (or securitized debts) issued by qualified private sector
enterprises for subprojects in the power, roads, ports, and telecommunications subsectors.

6.       Under the PSIF, qualified subprojects in the power subsector were (i) to be located in
states that undertook, or were in the process of undertaking, restructuring measures; (ii) not to
exceed 500 megawatts (MW) power generation capacity; and (iii) to be assured priority, if such
qualified projects related to power plants that would benefit multiple rather than single users.
Where state electricity boards were involved in joint ventures with private sponsors, or
purchased not less than 60% of the power generated by such private sponsors in the concerned
state, the state electricity boards were to satisfy a minimum performance requirement of 3%
return on net assets. Qualified subprojects in the telecommunication subsector were to service
users, and be substantially located, in non-metropolitan centers. Qualified subprojects in the
road subsector were to (i) encompass construction or repair and modernization of bypasses,
bridges (and roads thereon), elevated roads and, if appropriate, selected expressways within a
state (or portions thereof); and (ii) be, wherever possible, small- to medium-scale projects.
Qualified subprojects in the port subsector were to support (i) establishment of independent
facilities for ship repair, dry dock, warehousing, storage, and cargo handling; and (ii)
privatization of ports and terminal facilities.

                           II.    DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A.     Formulation

7.        During ADB's 1994 Annual Meeting, discussions were held between ADB and SCICI
with regard to jointly sponsoring a "Seminar on Private Investment in Infrastructure". The
seminar was held in Bombay, New Delhi and Bangalore in August 1994. In conjunction with the
seminar, ICICI requested ADB provide a credit facility for onlending to infrastructure projects in
India's private sector. In response, ADB fielded loan processing missions between January and
August 1995. During appraisal, ICICI, SCICI, and IFCI confirmed their participation in the credit
facility. The loan negotiation was conducted in September­October 1996, 10 months later than
scheduled at appraisal. The delay reflected the lengthy negotiation process for setting the
guarantee fee paid to the Government by PFIs under the PSIF.

8.     ADB approved the PSIF on 7 November 1996; no technical assistance (TA) grant was
attached. The loan agreements with ICICI and IFCI and the guarantee agreements with the
Government were finalized in August 1997, and the loans to ICICI and IFCI became effective on
25 September 1997 and 26 September 1997, respectively.

B.     Rationale

9.     The Expert Group on the Commercialization of Infrastructure Projects, which was
appointed by the Government in 1995 to enhance the role of private sector in infrastructure
development, released a report in June 1996 estimating the total investment requirement for
4


infrastructure to be approximately $330 billion­$345 billion for the coming decade, which served
to justify the PSIF.

10.     At the time of the PSIF appraisal, India's policy, regulatory, and institutional framework
required concerted effort and interface between the public and private sectors to promote
private sector participation in infrastructure development. This consideration was reflected in the
sectoral criteria (para. 6) under the PSIF. Moreover, it was expected that individual subprojects
supported by the PSIF would provide the basis for dialogue and additional policy reform and
improve the private sector participation framework over time.

11.      ADB's Country Operational Strategy in India, 6 circulated to the Board in July 1996,
identified the need for a concerted effort and interface between the public and private sectors in
order to achieve significant progress in infrastructure development. The strategy prioritized
assistance for energy, transport, communications, and urban infrastructure. ADB approved the
PSIF in November 1996 in the midst of (i) liberalization of various subsectors within the
infrastructure sector, and (ii) the creation of an enabling environment for private sector
participation. The PSIF was expected to bolster Government initiatives to promote private sector
participation in infrastructure development, attract private capital through long-term debt
financing, and promote a policy dialogue establishing an appropriate regulatory framework.

C.        Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

12.     Under the PSIF, ICICI and IFCI were the Borrowers of Loans 1480-IND and 1481-IND,
respectively (Appendixes 1 and 2). The Government of India guaranteed the repayments and
interest payments of the Borrowers to ADB. At appraisal, projects eligible for PSIF in ICICI's
pipeline totaled around $16 billion, of which ICICI was to take up about 13%. Projects in IFCI's
pipeline totaled around $2 billion, of which IFCI was to take up about 13%.

13.     Direct and indirect foreign exchange (FX) costs of the goods, service, and civil works
required for projects in the power, telecommunications, roads, and ports subsectors were
eligible for subloans under the PSIF. Subject to sector limits,7 a portion of the loan proceeds
could also be utilized for financing the local currency costs of eligible subprojects. The key
subloan financing criteria included: (i) the amount of each subloan was not to exceed a
maximum of 30% of the total subproject cost, subject to a maximum of $75 million; and (ii) each
subloan was to finance only the issuance, by a qualified enterprise, of long-term debt securities
(or securitized debts).

14.     Each eligible subborrower was to (i) maintain at least 51% private sector ownership, (ii)
be in a satisfactory financial condition, (iii) comply with federal and state environmental laws and
regulations, and (iv) have entered into underlying infrastructure concessions and/or license
agreements providing for satisfactory cost adjustment and escalation. All subloans to be
financed under the PSIF were to be subject to ADB's prior approval.



6
    ADB. 1996. The Bank's Operational Strategy in India. Manila.
7
    This includes (i) 70% of the amount of financing extended by ADB for subprojects in the roads and ports
    subsectors, and (ii) 20% of the amount of the financing extended by ADB for subprojects in the power and
    telecommunications subsectors.
                                                                                                                         5


15.     The market-based loan window8 was applied to the interest rate of Loan 1480-IND and
Loan 1481-IND, which were disbursed in dollars. Market interest rates were to be applied to
subloans. The loan agreement did not specify a currency (or currencies) for subloans, while it
stipulated "the Borrower shall at all times make adequate provision to protect itself against any
loss resulting from changes in the rate of exchange between rupees and the currency or
currencies in which the Borrower's outstanding money obligations will have to be met." A
commitment charge of 0.75% per annum was to accrue on the increasing portions of the loans
(less amounts withdrawn from time to time) provided in the Loan Agreements.9 The guarantee
agreements (between the Government and ADB) did not indicate the guarantee fee to be paid
by PFIs to the Government.10

D.       Procurement and Scheduling11

16.     No deviation was observed in the international competitive bidding procedures,
undertaken in accordance with ADB's Guidelines for Procurement for contracts involving supply
and installation of equipment amounting to $10 million or more, and civil works amounting to
$20 million or more. In the case of a build-operate-transfer (BOT) project and its variants, the
project sponsor or engineering, procurement, and construction contractor (if selected through
competitive bidding among international entities in accordance with procedures acceptable to
ADB), might apply its own procedures for procurement, provided that such procurement would
be for goods and works from, or procured in, ADB member countries.

17.    The closing dates for submission of an application for ADB subproject approval were to
be 4 years, and for disbursement, 5 years from the date of loan effectiveness. The ADB loan
had a maturity of 20 years (with a grace period of 5 years), while the maturity periods for
subloans were to be 15­20 years (with a grace period of 5 years). As per the loan agreements,
PFIs were to be able to utilize the proceeds received from disposition of debt instruments
funded under the PSIF, or the revolving fund, to purchase debt instruments issued by eligible
enterprises for eligible subprojects.

E.       Design Changes

18.    Of the total $150 million loan to ICICI under the PSIF, $5 million was initially set aside as
the project development facility for ICICI capacity building. Likewise, of the total $100 million
loan to IFCI, $3 million was set aside for this purpose. However, ICICI and IFCI subsequently
cancelled the facilities, and the corresponding amounts were reallocated to subproject financing.

19.       At the merger of ICICI with ICICI Bank in March 2002, ADB approved the transfer of
liabilities and obligations under Loan 1480-IND from ICICI to ICICI Bank, the surviving entity.

8
   Under the MBL, each PFI was to choose a (i) floating interest rate, (ii) fixed interest rate, (iii) optional floating
   interest rate, or (iv) optional fixed interest rate. The floating rate reflected the sum of the six-month London
   interbank offered rate (LIBOR), plus a margin of 0.4%; the fixed rate reflected the sum of the relevant swap rate,
   plus a margin of 0.4% subject to resetting as defined in the loan agreement; the optional floating rate reflected the
   sum of the relevant swap rate, plus a margin of 0.525%; and the optional fixed rate reflected the sum of the
   relevant swap rate, plus a margin of 0.525%, subject to resetting as defined in the loan agreement. ICICI and IFCI
   chose the floating interest rate.
9
   Fifteen percent during the first 12-month period; 45% during the second 12-month period; 85% during the third 12-
   month period; and thereafter, the full amount of the loans.
10
   The PFIs actually paid 0.6% of the outstanding balance under the PSIF to the Government as the guarantee fees.
11
   This section is usually titled as "Procurement, Construction, and Scheduling" in a PPER as per the Guidelines. The
   information on construction is not particularly relevant to the evaluation of credit lines, and this section heading was
   consequently modified.
6


F.       Outputs

         1.       Utilization of the Facility

20.     Loan 1480-IND. ICICI fully utilized the PSIF to finance six subloans (for 3 power, 1 road,
and 2 telecommunication subprojects) totaling $150 million by 13 July 2001. The loan closed on
13 November 2001, 10 months earlier than planned at appraisal (Appendix 3). The total cost of
the six subprojects was around Rs67.2 billion ($1.4 billion), of which Rs44.5 billion ($930 million)
was financed by debts. 12 All the subloans were extended in the form of non-convertible
debentures (NCDs) in rupees. Only in those instances where eligibility could not be fully
confirmed by ICICI did ADB disapprove subloan applications. A few subloan applications had to
be withdrawn by ICICI before ADB could make a decision.

21.      The initial subloan interest rates ranged from 6.5% to 19.5%, reflecting market interest
rates and risk premiums. The interest rates of some subloans were subsequently reduced,
reflecting the downward trend in interest rates during PSIF implementation. The amortization
periods of subloans ranged from 5 to 17 years (including grace periods ranging from 3 to 5
years). The outstanding balance of all subloans was prepaid during March 2001­March 2006,
because subborrowers found alternative means of financing. 13 ICICI Bank has utilized the
proceeds received from prepayments to finance infrastructure projects, as per the Loan
Agreement. At the time of the OEM, ICICI Bank's receivable from one remaining subloan was
Rs1.375 billion (equivalent to $30 million), while its payable to ADB was $125.45 million. The
balance of about $95 million stands to be the revolving fund under the PSIF.

22.    Loan 1481-IND. IFCI utilized the PSIF to finance five subloans (for 4 power and 1 port
subprojects) totaling $62.5 million14 by 18 October 2000 (Appendix 4); the loan closed on 16
May 2002, 4 months earlier than planned at appraisal. In some instances ADB did not approve
subloan applications from IFCI because the eligibility of the subborrowers was not fully
confirmed. IFCI also withdrew subloan applications for the same reason, prior to a decision from
ADB. IFCI could not fully utilize the PSIF primarily because, from 2001, it could not meet the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) requirement of a minimum capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of 9%, due
to deterioration of its portfolio performance. For this reason, IFCI suspended new lending
operations as of fiscal year (FY) 2003, while continuing disbursements (para. 60).

23.     The total cost of the five subprojects was around Rs43.5 billion ($890 million), of which
Rs34.5 billion ($700 million) was financed by debts.15 All the subloans were extended in the
form of NCDs in rupees, and met the PSIF eligibility criteria. The initial subloan interest rates
ranged from 15.5% to 20%,16 reflecting market interest rates and risk premiums. The interest
rates of some subloans were subsequently reduced, reflecting the general downward trend in
interest rates during PSIF implementation. The amortization periods of subloans ranged from
8.5 to 17 years. At the time of the OEM, IFCI's receivable from one remaining subloan was
Rs198.26 million (equivalent to $4.55 million), while the other four subloans had been fully

12
   The FX rate at closing of Loan 1480-IND (end November 2001) was used in calculating the dollar amounts.
13
   The OEM could not obtain detailed information on these refinancing instruments, except for P-2-CF, for which ICICI
   Bank converted NCDs to a subloan. This responded to the RBI rule (announced in August 2005) limiting financial
   institutions' investments in unlisted debt securities to 10% of their total investments in debt securities.
14
   Of the five subprojects, two were also financed by ICICI under the PSIF. Therefore, the PSIF supported 11
   subloans for 9 subprojects in total.
15
   The FX rate at closing of Loan 1481-IND (end May 2002) was used in calculating the dollar amounts.
16
   This does not cover the subloan to P-4-F, for which interest rate was set at the IFCI's prime lending rate (PLR) plus
   3.5%. The OEM could not verify the PLR at the time of subloan disbursement.
                                                                                                                   7


settled through regular repayments and prepayments. The four subborrowers prepaid the
subloans because they found alternative means of financing.17 At the OEM, IFCI's payable to
ADB was $28.6 million. Of the remaining $33.9 million, IFCI settled $10.4 million through regular
repayments and prepaid $23.5 million, corresponding to one prepaid subloan. IFCI plans to fully
settle the remaining payable with ADB by June 2007, through regular repayments and
prepayments corresponding to the three prepaid subloans. IFCI intended to utilize the proceeds
received from these prepayments to finance other infrastructure projects, but its failure to meet
the RBI requirement on a CAR prevented it from doing so.

        2.       Subproject Achievements

24.      Subproject achievements under the PSIL are detailed in Appendix 5 and summarized in
the following paragraphs.

25.     Loan 1480-IND. Of the six subloans extended by ICICI, three were for power projects
totaling $67.79 million equivalent (45.2% of the total), two were for telecommunication projects
totaling $75.73 million equivalent (50.5%), and one for a road project totaling $6.48 million
(4.3%). As envisaged at appraisal, the physical outputs of the six subprojects included (i) 2 x
130 MW corex and coal based thermal power plant (subborrower's/subproject's code name18:
P-1-CF), operational from January 2000; (ii) 3 x 100 MW hydroelectric power plant (P-2-CF),
operational from June 2003; (iii) 1 x 250 MW lignite based thermal power plant (P-3-C),
operational from December 2002; (iv) a 30.35 kilometer (km) two-lane bypass on National
Highway 4 (TR-1-C), operational from October 2000; (v) the facility of fixed telephone services,
including over 4,000 km of fiber network and 100,000 copper access points (TE-1-C), completed
in 2002; and (vi) the facility of cellular mobile services for a capacity of 1.74 million subscribers
(TE-2-C), completed in 2002.19

26.     There was no significant cost overrun or delay in implementing four of the six
subprojects. There was no cost overrun for P-1-CF, but its project completion was delayed by
about 1.5 years, due to delays in financial closure. As to P-2-CF, delay in finalizing the power
purchase agreement (PPA), deviations in the quantity of civil work, and an unprecedented flash
flood affecting the project site in July 2000, resulted in changes in the total project cost and a
more than 2-year delay in project implementation. The OEM was not informed of any delays in
interest payments and repayment by the six subborrowers prior to their prepayments.20

27.     Loan 1481-IND. Of the five subloans extended by IFCI, four were for power projects
totaling $38.94 million equivalent (62.3% of the total) and one was for a port project totaling
$23.56 million (37.7%). The five subloans and subprojects met the PSIF eligibility criteria. The
physical outputs of the five subprojects included (i) 2 x 130 MW corex and coal based thermal
power plant (P-1-CF), operational from January 2000; (ii) 3 x 100 MW hydroelectric power plant
(P-2-CF), operational from June 2003; (iii) a 355 MW naphtha-based combined cycle power
plant (P-4-F), operational from October 2000; (iv) an 86 MW hydroelectric power plant (P-5-F),

17
   The OEM could not obtain detailed information on the refinancing instruments, except for TR-2-CF, which used the
   proceeds from divestment from the affiliated company for the prepayment.
18
   Some of the subborrowers were reluctant to share information with the OEM unless they were given assurance
   that the final report would not indicate their names. Accordingly this PPER uses code names for all the
   subborrowers.
19
   TE-1-C and TE-2-C commenced operations prior to the subloans, and the OEM could not identify the exact month
   in which the subprojects were completed.
20
   ICICI lowered the interest rate of the subloan to TR-1-C, as the subproject generated insufficient revenues in the
   initial operations stage, prior to prepayment.
8


operational from July 2001; and (v) full-fledged port facilities for public use, including a
multipurpose finger-type jetty, a barge jetty and port backup facilities, including storage facilities,
general cargo, chemical terminal and LPG terminal (TR-2-FG),21 operational from October 2002.

28.      The subproject outputs and their total costs were as envisaged at appraisal, except for
TR-2-FG. Initially conceived as a smaller-scale captive port, TR-2-FG was expanded in scope to
an all-weather, direct berthing deep-sea port. Total costs increased from Rs3.37 billion, planned
at initial subloan approval in March 1998, to Rs7.61 billion in October 2000.22 The start of TR-2-
FG's commercial operations was delayed by 3 years from the original schedule. P-4-F was
implemented as originally envisaged. P-5-F was completed 3 months ahead of the original
schedule. The implementation of P-1-CF and P-2-CF was delayed (as explained in para. 26).
The repayments and interest payments of the subloans were on schedule, except TR-2-FG,
which faced liquidity problems in the initial operations stage, resulting in repayment and interest
payment delays.

G.      Loan Covenants

29.      In addition to standard loan covenants, the Loan Agreements for the PSIF stipulated
sectoral criteria (para. 6), subloan financing criteria (para. 13), subborrower eligibility criteria
(para. 14), and borrower eligibility requirements. The key borrower eligibility requirements
included (i) a CAR of 8% (subsequently raised to 9%); (ii) a debt service coverage ratio of at
least 1.1; and (iii) compliance with the RBI's guidelines on income recognition, asset
classification, and debt provisioning.

30.     Loan 1480-IND. In conjunction with the transfer of liabilities and obligations under Loan
1480-IND from ICICI to ICICI Bank, the minimum debt service coverage ratio requirement was
replaced by a requirement to (i) conform to interest cover, whereby the merged entity's profit
before interest, provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation, and other non-cash charged
for the relevant current financial year are at least 1.1 times the interest and commitment charges
payable by it for the relevant financial year; (ii) conform to RBI stipulations on statutory liquidity
ratio and CAR, as amended from time to time; (iii) conform to the asset liability management
(ALM)-liquidity management guidelines of RBI, and share with ADB the internal norms and risk
management policies adopted by its management, along with status of conformity to such
guidelines; and (iv) maintain a debt equity ratio of more than 12:1.23

31.      ICICI Bank confirmed its (and ICICI's) compliance with the standard covenants and the
borrower eligibility requirements. Likewise, the six subloans largely complied with the (i) sectoral
criteria, (ii) subloan financing criteria, and (iii) subborrower eligibility criteria.24

32.    Loan 1481-IND. IFCI complied with standard covenants, but subsequent to late 2000
could not comply with the financial requirement on the capital adequacy ratio, as noted earlier.


21
   The original subborrower was TR-2-F. In October 2000, ADB approved the transfer of the subloan from TR-2-F to
   TR-2-FG, jointly owned by TR-2-F and the state-owned company.
22
   The OEM could not identify the total project cost at completion.
23
   This change was made because of the difficulty of matching inflows with outflows (due to short term maturities
   without fixed repayment schedules), which made the debt service coverage ratio cumbersome to use and not as
   meaningful for commercial and/or universal banks.
24
   In addition to the six subloans, ADB approved a subloan of $22,932,060 to a port project. However, the majority
   private sector ownership did not materialize as originally planned, and the subloan was consequently cancelled.
   Accordingly, the amount to be disbursed to this project was reallocated to other subprojects.
                                                                                                                       9


The five subloans complied with the (i) sectoral criteria, (ii) subloan financing criteria, and (iii)
subborrower eligibility criteria.

                                  III.     PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT

A.       Overall Assessment

33.     The PSIF covered 9 large subprojects and had no capacity building component for the
PFIs. All subloans except one have been repaid. Therefore, the performance assessment
focused on analysis at the subproject level (see footnote 5). On this basis, Loan 1480-IND is
rated as successful, and Loan 1481-IND is rated as partly successful (Table 1). These overall
ratings reflect weighted averages of the individual ratings for four criteria: relevance (20%),
effectiveness (30%), efficiency (30%), and sustainability (20%). Individual criterion ratings are in
whole numbers from 0 to 3, in increasing order of project performance.25 As discussed in detail
in the following sections, Loan 1480-IND is assessed as relevant, effective, efficient, and with
likely sustainability; Loan 1481-IND is assessed as partly relevant, partly effective, efficient, and
with likely sustainability. The overview of subproject performance is in Appendix 6.26

                                Table 1: Overall Performance Assessment

Criteria                                          Loan 1480-IND                            Loan 1481-IND

1. Relevance                                               2                                        1
2. Effectiveness                                           2                                        1
3. Efficiency                                              2                                        2
4. Sustainability                                          2                                        2

           Total Ratinga                                  2.0                                      1.5
a
  Highly successful > 2.7; successful 2.7  S  1.6; partly successful 1.6 > PS  0.8; unsuccessful < 0.8.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

B.       Relevance

         1.       Loan 1480-IND

34.     Loan 1480-IND is rated relevant on the basis of the (i) appropriateness of the
assessment of issues and opportunities in private sector participation in infrastructure
developments made at the time of appraisal; (ii) consistency between the targeted impact,
outcome, and outputs with that of the Government's development priority and ADB's country
operational strategy at the time of approval, as well as at OEM; 27 (iii) appropriateness of the
modality and design of the PSIF in achieving the primary purpose of private sector participation
in infrastructure development, considering the Government's policy on this subject and the



25
   For example, irrelevant = (0), less relevant = (1), relevant = (2), and highly relevant = (3).
26
   These assessments are based on the information (i) submitted to the OEM by the ICICI Bank and IFCI; and (ii)
   directly offered to the OEM by P-3-C, TR-2-F, and TE-2-C (with field inspections), and P-2-CF and P-5-C (without
   field inspections). In addition, the OEM requested that ICICI Bank arrange visits by the OEM to P-1-CF's and TR-1-
   C's projects sites, but these subborrowers rejected the OEM's request.
27
   The Government's midterm appraisal of the ongoing 10th Five-Year Plan pointed to the urgent need to upgrade
   infrastructure facilities. ADB's assistance program for 2006­2008 reflects this priority, with infrastructure projects
   (transport, urban, and energy) accounting for nearly 77% of the 3-year pipeline.
10


financial market environment at the time of approval;28 (iv) appropriateness of the selection of
ICICI as the PFI by virtue of its financial strength and that of the infrastructure project pipeline;
and (v) complementarity of the PSIF with ADB's other ongoing operations, 29 and efforts to
implement follow-on interventions in support of private sector participation in infrastructure
development.30 During the OEM, ICICI Bank did not raise any particular issues with respect to
the PSIF project design. Loan 1480-IND is not rated "highly relevant" for reasons explained
below.

35.      The modality of the PSIF was not fully appropriate in achieving its secondary objective of
corporate debt market development. For this specific purpose, the program loan might have
been more appropriate. It should be noted that the Government established a high level expert
committee on corporate bonds and securitization, which drafted a number of recommendations
in its final report, issued in December 2005 (Appendix 7). The OEM concluded that the PSIF
could have better complemented the Government's efforts by way of issuance of corporate
bonds by the PSIF subborrowers, had the Government undertaken significant policy measures
promoting the corporate bond market early during PSIF implementation.

36.     India's financial sector has changed significantly since 1991: traditional development
financial institutions are mostly consolidated, and commercial banks have expanded term
lending for industrial and infrastructure projects. The Government's fiscal policy and approach to
private sector infrastructure projects have also changed. 31 For example, MOF no longer
considers credit facilities requiring Government guarantee, such as the PSIF, as meeting the
Government's needs in the present context. Evidently, the pioneering and demonstration roles
of the PSIF are diminishing, although ICICI Bank continues to utilize its revolving fund.

         2.       Loan 1481-IND

37.     The assessments in paras. 34­36 are also applicable to Loan 1481-IND, except for the
appropriateness of the selection of IFCI as the PFI. The OEM finds that ADB should have paid
more attention to IFCI's portfolio performance during appraisal. At the time of the PSIF approval,
IFCI's nonperforming loans (NPLs) exceeded 17% of its total loans and advances, and 9% of
total assets. The report and recommendation of the President (RRP) did not adequately discuss
the justification for this relatively high NPL ratio and its associated risks. This draws into
question the adequacy of the appraisal, and the qualification of IFCI as a PFI. Due to the
subsequent deterioration in its portfolio performance, since FY2003 IFCI has suspended new
lending operations while pursuing expeditious recovery of nonperforming loans. IFCI could


28
   Considering ADB's limited capacity in non-recourse lending, and the Government's willingness to offer the
   guarantee at the time of appraisal, the modality of the PSIF could be justified. If ADB had directly financed these
   subprojects (without using the PFIs, and without the Government guarantee), ADB would have faced significant
   additional appraisal and monitoring costs. In the absence of the PSIF, PFIs might have been less active in
   infrastructure financing. The nine subprojects selected by the PFIs were relevant in terms of the immediate
   purpose of the PSIF. These observations support the positive view of the PSIF's design.
29
   Such operations included Loan 1274-IND: National Highways Project, Loan 1506-IND: Gujarat Public Sector
   Resource Management Program, and TA 2611-IND: Institutional Support for Telecommunications Development,
   from the public sector window; and Inv 7211-IND: AIG Indian Sectoral Equity Fund and AIG Indian Equity Advisers,
   and Inv 7138-IND: Infrastructure Development Finance Company Limited (IDFC), from the private sector window.
30
   Such interventions included Loan 1868-IND: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program, Loan 1871-
   IND: Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at State Level (PSIF-II), Loan 1968-IND: State Power Sector Reform
   Project from the public sector channel, and Loan 2169-IND: IDFC; and Inv 7181-IND: The Infrastructure Fund of
   India, Inv 7183-IND: Tala-Delhi Transmission Project, Inv 7211-IND: IDFC, from the private sector window.
31
   In July 2005, MOF issued the Scheme for Support to Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in Infrastructure, defining
   PPP projects that can be supported under the Government's scheme of viability gap funding or grants.
                                                                                                                   11


utilize only 62.5% of Loan 1481-IND, and its revolving fund needs to be prepaid. In view of this,
Loan 1481-IND is rated as partly relevant.

38.     IFCI considers PSIF appropriately designed, but with four reservations. First, the PSIF
required that IFCI resort to a debt instrument, which could not be issued in foreign currency
under the prevailing regulation. Thus, all the subloans were denominated in rupees, despite the
fact that PSIF aimed primarily to finance foreign currency portions of project costs. In IFCI's
view, this obvious mismatch can be considered a deficiency in the project design.32 Second, the
ceiling on domestic cost financing of power projects (i.e., 20%) constrained the usefulness of
the PSIF.33 Third, ADB's cumbersome process for, and delays in, subproject approval resulted
in changes in the means of finance of subborrowers and potential subborrowers.34 Fourth, the
commitment charge, during the phase that ADB suspended its disbursement, should have been
waived.

C.       Effectiveness

         1.       Loan 1480-IND

39.      Loan 1480-IND is rated effective in view of the (i) full utilization of the approved loan
amount ($150 million), which catalyzed additional borrowing of $780 million from other sources;
(ii) satisfactory outcomes of most subprojects (with reservations because of data limitations on
TR-1-C), leading to significant demonstration effects in promoting private sector participation in
infrastructure projects; and (iii) marginal contribution to developing the corporate debt market.

40.      Power. The OEM assessed the three subprojects as effective on the basis that (i) P-1-
CF has kept the plant load factor (PLF) at above 90% over the past 5 years; (ii) P-2-CF has
consistently maintained its average plant availability above 96% since FY2004; and (iii) P-3-C's
current PLF is 90%, an increase from around 80% in FY2004­FY2005. The three subprojects
contributed to narrowing the electricity demand­supply gaps, as originally envisaged. The OEM
noted the significant demonstration effects of these subprojects as pioneering developments in
pursuing private sector participation in power development under the Government policy in
effect from 1991.

41.     Road. The OEM could not effectively assess the outcome of TR-1-C because (i) ICICI
Bank has not updated the operational information since the time of prepayment in 2001, and (ii)
TR-1-C did not accept the OEM's visit. The available information indicates that in the first year
of operations TR-1-C achieved only 33% of the targeted traffic. ICICI concluded that weak
enforcement of the ban on commercial through-traffic resulted in lower-than-projected
diversions to the bypass. The enforcement of the ban reportedly been improved. The OEM
noted that TR-1-C was one of the first public-private partnerships (PPPs) in the road subsector
in India, and lessons learned have been considered in improving subsequent PPP projects.



32
   ICICI Bank did not feel this mismatch was a major deficiency of the PSIF. Denomination of the ADB loan in dollars
   did not particularly constrain the ICICI's ALM, and did not cause particular FX losses. Likewise, the PSIF does not
   appear to have caused particular FX losses in IFCI.
33
   IFCI could utilize only 61% of the approved amount of subloan for P-2-CF because of this ceiling. ICICI Bank did
   not consider this to be a major constraint.
34
   IFCI could not fully utilize the approved amount of subloans for P-4-F and P-5-F for this reason. ICICI Bank did not
   consider this to be a major constraint, as it lacked IFCI's liquidity problems, and intended to extend loans to
   subborrowers irrespective of the PSIF.
12


42.      Telecommunications. TE-1-C is operational in 123 cities and 4,000 villages in the state
of Rajasthan, with a subscriber base of around 220,000 as of the end of FY2005 (20% lower
than projected at appraisal). However, the OEM assessment rated TE-1-C as effective as it
continues to be the second largest fixed phone operator in Rajasthan, while competing with
larger providers with nationwide coverage in fixed and mobile phone services. The OEM noted
that this subproject was a pioneering development under the ADB-supported telecommunication
reforms pursued by the Government in the mid-1990s.35 TE-2-C gained more than 1 million
subscribers by early 2001, much faster than projected at appraisal. In this regard, TE-2-C was
effective. Because the mobile telephone market grew faster than projected, however, tariffs
dropped significantly over the years, resulting in lower­than-projected revenues. Exacerbating
this situation was a financial problem encountered by the main promoter in its core business; its
partner was reluctant to make additional capital contributions, rendering the company unable to
maintain the desired level of investment and market share. As a result, it merged with another
mobile phone operator in January 2004.

43.    Corporate Debt Market. There was virtually no liquidity in NCDs issued under Loan
1480-IND,36 thus its contribution to corporate market development was marginal.37

44.    There has been no significant increase in issuance and liquidity of corporate bonds in
India during and after the PSIF period. Although the private placements of corporate bonds
increased steadily, from Rs454 million in FY2002 to Rs554 million in FY2005, public issues of
corporate bonds decreased steadily during the same period, from Rs53 million to Rs41 million.
Public sector undertakings, banks, and other financial institutions continue to be the major
issuers of corporate bonds, and issuance of bonds by the corporate sector for manufacturing
and services has been very low.

         2.       Loan 1481-IND

45.     Loan 1481-IND is rated partly effective in view of (i) utilization of only 62.5% of the loan
($62.5 million), which catalyzed additional debts of $637.5 million from other sources, and IFCI's
disqualification to utilize the revolving fund; (ii) satisfactory outcomes of subprojects leading to
significant demonstration effects in promoting private sector participation in infrastructure
projects; and (iii) the marginal contribution to developing the corporate debt market.

46.     Power. The OEM assessed the four subprojects as effective on the basis that (i) P-1-CF
has kept the PLF above 90% over the past 5 years; (ii) P-2-CF has maintained its average plant
availability constantly above 96% since FY2004; (iii) P-4-F has consistently achieved an
average plant availability of over 80%; and (iv) P-5-F generated 346.2 million units in FY2004
and 275.4 units in FY2005, against a design energy of 372 million units. These subprojects
contributed to narrowing the electricity demand­supply gaps, as originally envisaged. P-4-F was
the first project cleared by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) route for international

35
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Institutional Support for Telecommunications Development. Manila
   (TA 2611-IND, for $575,000 million, approved on 18 December).
36
   All the subprojects financed under the PSIF issued debt securities. India's existing secondary debt market was
   primarily for AA+ to AAA rated securities. Because most of these subprojects were in their early stages of
   commercial operations and perceived as high-risk, they were unlikely to obtain such ratings. This made liquidity in
   the debt securities of subprojects highly limited.
37
    In March 2001, ICICI transferred the NCDs issued by P-1-CF and TR-1-C under the PSIF to Debenture
   Securitization Trusts (DSTs) established by ICICI. The DSTs in turn issued pass-through certificates (PTCs), which
   were subscribed by third-party investors.37 However, there was virtually no liquidity in these PTCs. At P-1-CF's and
   TR-1-C's prepayments, these PTCs were also prepaid.
                                                                                                                      13


competitive bidding for power projects in India, while P-5-F was the first merchant hydro power
plant without a long-term PPA.

47.     Port. The OEM assessed TR-2-FG as effective, because it has emerged as India's
largest private sector port, and one of the fastest growing. The amount of cargo actually handled
by TR-2-FG in FY2006 was lower than projected at prepayment in 2001. Nonetheless, the traffic
at this port is expected to increase significantly in coming years, considering the progress in
ongoing large projects for the site adjacent to the port, including a 4,000 MW ultra mega power
project. The OEM also noted that this subproject was a pioneering development under the port
reforms pursued by the state government of Gujarat since 1996, and supported by ADB.38

48.    Corporate Debt Market. NCDs issued under Loan 1481-IND had virtually no liquidity,
thus the loan's contribution to the corporate market development was marginal (see para. 44).

D.       Efficiency

         1.       Loan 1480-IND

49.     Loan 1480-IND is rated efficient on the basis that (i) P-1-CF and P-3-C are assessed as
highly efficient; (ii) P-2-CF is assessed as efficient; (iii) TE-1-C is assessed as partly efficient; (iv)
TE-2-C is assessed as inefficient; and (iv) spillover effects of the three power subprojects, which
lead to improved efficiency of public power plants, are important. The basis for the highly
efficient ratings for P-1-CF and P-3-CF are EIRRs of greater than 18%, as estimated by the
OEM.39 The efficient rating for P-2-CF is based on an FIRR of slightly lower than 16.3%, as
estimated by the OEM. The mixed assessment for TE-1-C reflects its (i) insufficient economy of
scale, resulting in the financial losses in FY2004 and FY2005; and (ii) value added and quality
services.40 The inefficient rating for TE-2-C reflects its insufficient economies of scale, leading to
acquisition by a competitor. The efficiency of TR-2-C could not be assessed due to data
constraints.

         2.       Loan 1481-IND

50.     Loan 1481-IND is rated efficient on the basis that (i) P-1-CF and P-5-F are assessed as
highly efficient; (ii) P-2-CF, P-4-F and TR-2-FG are assessed as efficient; and (iii) spillover
effects of all the subprojects, leading to the improved efficiency of public sector projects in the
relevant subsectors, are important. The "highly efficient" rating for P-5-F is based on its
construction cost, which was significantly below the industry average, resulting in outstanding
profitability over the last 3 years. The "efficient" rating for TR-2-FG is based on its (i)
contributions to (a) reducing congestion at the other major port in Gujarat and (b) savings in fuel




38
   ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loan to India for
   Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved on 18
   December).
39
   EIRRs were computed in the application documents of subloans for P-1-CF, P-3-C and TR-1-C, but not for the
   others.
40
   Value-added services include caller ring back tunes, 32-party conferencing, video on-demand, unified messaging
   platform, game shows, and occasion-based contests. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India quality report on
   telecommunications service providers benchmarked TE-1-C with respect to four out of six service parameters: (i)
   time to connection (first), (ii) mean time to repair (first), (c) customer complaint closure (first), and (iv) customer
   request closure (first).
14


costs; and (ii) operational efficiency, as compared with Gujarat's other port.41 The efficient rating
for P-4-F reflected the EIRR42 and FIRR of slightly lower than 16.1% and 21.1%, respectively,
estimated by the OEM based on the lower-than-expected PLFs. The efficiency of P-1-CF and P-
2-CF is discussed in para. 49.

E.       Sustainability

         1.      Loan 1480-IND

51.     Loan 1480-IND is rated likely sustainable on the basis that P-1-CF, P-2-CF, and P-3-C
are likely sustainable. The OEM has the following reservations: (i) the sustainability of TR-1-C
and TE-1-C could not be assessed due to data constraints, and (ii) TE-2-C was not applicable
as it was subsequently acquired by another company. The sustainability ratings for the three
power subprojects are made on the basis that the operating entities are (i) financially viable; (ii)
not constrained by policy and institutional environments; and (iii) not exposed to significant
environmental, social, technological and natural resources risks. In addition, the continuing
demand­supply gap for electricity in India is another key factor for the ratings. In addition to the
data constraint issues associated with TR-1-C and TE-1-C, uncertainties in financial viability of
these subprojects are attributable to (i) changes in regulations and growing competition (TE-1-
C), and (ii) difficulty in demand projections and enforcement of traffic regulations (TR-1-C).

         2.      Loan 1481-IND

52.      Loan 1481-IND is rated likely sustainable on the basis that (i) P-5-F and TR-2-F are
most likely sustainable, and (ii) the remaining three subprojects are also likely sustainable. P-5-
F is expected to remain highly competitive owning to its merchant status in a power-starved
northern grid, and is likely to earn progressively higher tariffs. It will thus continue to yield high
returns in coming years, while generation cost will decrease as a result of loan repayment and
depreciation. P-5-F is therefore rated most likely sustainable. It is expected that revenues of TR-
2-F will significantly increase during FY2007­FY2014 in conjunction with development of one of
country's largest special economic zones adjacent to the port. Moreover, TR-2-F is not (i)
constrained by policy and institutional environment; or (ii) exposed to significant environment,
social, technological and natural resource risks. Therefore, TR-2-F is rated likely sustainable. P-
4-F is rated sustainable largely for the same reasons as P-1-CF and P-2-CF as indicated in para.
51, but this rating is premised on a sufficient and constant supply of gas.




41
   The key factors in this assessment are higher draft and higher level of mechanization at TR-2-FG. Moreover, unlike
   the other port, TR-2-FG offers all services, including custom clearance, under one roof, resulting in time savings
   and better services.
42
   EIRRs were computed in the IFCI's appraisal documents for P-1-CF and P-4-F, but not for the others.
                                                                                                                     15


                                       IV.       OTHER ASSESSMENTS

A.       Impact

53.    The PSIF RRP noted that ADB developed the computer system for ICICI and IFCI to
monitor subproject benefits. However, the RRP did not include the design and monitoring
framework, and specified neither performance indicators nor targets. 43 Hence, the benefit
monitoring and evaluation (BME) of the PSIF was inherently weak. Therefore, the OEM could
obtain only partial information on the socioeconomic and environmental aspects of subprojects
from accessible subborrowers, supplemented by the data submitted by ICICI and IFCI at the
time of the PCR, and publicly available data. The OEM findings are presented in ensuing
paragraphs.

         1.       Socioeconomic Impact

54.    In addition to facilitating growth by removing infrastructure impediments, PSIF's pro-poor
contribution can be assessed from two other perspectives: (i) the opportunity cost of
government expenditure (which is freed for investment in the social sector), and (ii) the direct
and indirect effects of infrastructure investment on poverty reduction.44

55.   Through their operations, the four power subprojects (P-1-CF, P-2-CF, P-3-C, and P-5-F)
are employing about 650 people. TR-2-FG operations are contributing to direct employment of
2,500 skilled and unskilled workers, and the indirect employment of 2,000 people. In the
construction phase, it contributed to creation of 2,000 jobs for 3 years. The TE-1-C's subscriber
base of 220,000 currently corresponds to a teledensity of 0.3% in the state of Rajasthan. The
OEM estimated that TE-2-C contributed to direct employment of 1,700 people and indirect and
support employment of 36,000.

56.     P-3-C resulted in the displacement of about 50 families. P-3-C ensured that it had
offered appropriate compensation and employment opportunities to these families, in
compliance with ADB's involuntary resettlement policy.45 The OEM did not have the opportunity
to obtain direct feedback from any of these 50 families. Based on the information provided by
ICICI Bank, IFCI and subborrowers, the OEM did not discern any negative socioeconomic
impacts arising from the PSIF subprojects.

         2.       Environmental Impact

57.    The OEM did not discern any adverse environmental impacts associated with the
subprojects, on the basis of information provided by ICICI Bank, IFCI and the subborrowers that

43
   The Loan Agreements referred to ADB's Guidelines on benefit monitoring and evaluation (ADB. 1992. A Handbook
   for Bank Staff, Staff of Executing Agencies and Consultants. Manila.) as a reference. The guidelines indicated the
   data to be collected by financial intermediaries in the case of credit lines from subborrowers: (i) subborrower
   profiles, (ii) subproject profile, (iii) subproject completion dates, (iv) subproject cost and means of financing, (v)
   subproject production data, (vi) subproject and enterprise financial performance data, and (vii) subproject and
   enterprise socioeconomic data. However, the guidelines did not specify the timing of data collection and
   submission.
44
   ADB. 2000. REG 5947: Assessing the Impact of Transport and Energy Infrastructure on Poverty Reduction. Manila.
   The study conducted under this RETA suggest that (i) investment in infrastructure, especially for road construction,
   leads to substantial job creation for semiskilled and unskilled workers; and (ii) the poor indirectly benefit from
   infrastructure development, especially from cheaper commodities, quicker travel time, less pollution, fewer
   accidents, better penetration of development effects to rural areas, and general improvements in quality of life.
45
   ADB 1995. Involuntary Resettlement. Manila.
16


were visited. A review of the project files confirmed that the ICICI and IFCI had submitted the
subproject environmental impact assessment reports to ADB at the time subloans were
approved, as required in the Loan Agreements. ADB's internal correspondence in the project file
indicates that the ADB departments concerned reviewed the environmental impact assessment
reports.

58.     The corex plant of P-1-CF demonstrates "clean coal technology", which uses exhaust
gases from a steel blast furnace to drive a combined cycle plant. The process significantly
reduces the amount of CO2 produced from a mix of coking and steaming coal in the smelting
process, and instead produces a clean low-calorific gas that serves to fuel the combined cycle
plant. P-3-C has successfully implemented ISO 14001 for environmental management. TR-2-
FG has been ISO 9000 compliant, with respect to environmental aspects, for the last 3 years.

       3.      Institutional and Policy Impact

59.     The total disbursement of $150 million equivalent under Loan 1480-IND is not
substantial when compared with ICICI Bank's total assets of Rs1,784 billion (about $40 billion)
and total borrowings of Rs384 billion (about $8.5 billion), as of end FY2005. Nevertheless,
given the limited opportunity for long-term funding, ICICI Bank acknowledged the financial
contribution of the PSIF. Moreover, ICICI Bank also considers that the PSIF played a significant
role in promoting ICICI Bank's infrastructure finance operations.

60.     IFCI also acknowledged the contribution of the PSIF in supporting IFCI's infrastructure
finance operations. The PSIF contributed to maintenance of IFCI's performing loan portfolio,
even under the severe financial conditions that ensued from FY1999. However, the impact of
PSIF was not sufficient to prevent IFCI from suspending new lending operations since FY2003.
This was also partly attributable to the tightening of RBI guidelines on asset classification which
came into effect in FY2001 and FY2002, resulting in significant amounts of loan-loss
provisioning and financial losses from FY2002-FY2004 (Appendix 2). At the time of OEM, IFCI
management noted the progress of the financial restructuring and the reduction of losses in
FY2005. Because of large, one-off provisions, the average return to equity was significantly
negative from FY2002 to FY2004, ranging between -232% and -170%. The situation improved
significantly in 2005, but the return was still negative (-10%). An NPL ratio of 10% or less was
set as a benchmark to resume new lending operations. However, despite the progress that has
been made, the IFCI's NPL ratio was still high at 28% at end FY2005, and prospects of full
recovery in lending operations remain to be seen. Currently, the management is exploring the
opportunity of merging with other banks or financial institutions.

61.      Although there was no policy component attached to the PSIF, it contributed in various
indirect ways to policy reforms that facilitate private sector participation in infrastructure
development. The policy dialogue during PSIF formulation encouraged the Government to
pursue reforms. Likewise, the PSIF encouraged state governments to pursue reforms by
explicitly targeting "pro-reform" states. Moreover, lessons learned from subprojects under the
PSIF, which can be considered to be the first generation of private sector infrastructure projects,
formed the basis of subsequent reforms and relevant ADB follow-on operations.

62.    The High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and Securitization recently
concluded that regulations were the major reason for the low level of private sector mobilization
through bonds, as these limit market availability to top-rated companies. The committee also
pointed out that the low liquidity of corporate bonds could be partly due to inadequate disclosure
about corporate bonds that are issued mainly through private placements. The PSIF did not
                                                                                                                      17


address these crucial issues, and its impact on the institutional and policy aspects of the
corporate debt market was negligible.

B.       Asian Development Bank Performance

63.    The PSIF complemented several other ongoing and follow-on operations aimed at
promoting private sector involvement in infrastructure development (para. 34). For instance,
Loan 1274-IND: National Highways Project (approved in 1993) supported the Government to
develop a framework for road projects on a BOT basis, resulting in TR-1-C. Likewise, Loan
1274-IND: Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program (approved in 1996) supported
the State Government of Gujarat to develop an enabling environment for private sector
investment in infrastructure projects, leading to TR-2-F. Moreover, lessons learned from the
PSIF were considered in processing Loan 1871-IND: Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at
State Level 46 (approved in 2001) and Loan 2169-IND: Infrastructure Development Finance
Company Limited (approved in 2005).47 The OEM positively considered these aspects in overall
assessment of ADB's performance in conjunction with the two loans under the PSIF, as
presented in the following paragraphs.

64.     Loan 1480-IND. The OEM assessed ADB's performance as satisfactory based on the
following observations: (i) its appraisal was largely satisfactory, except that it did not adequately
assess the bottleneck issues hindering corporate debt market development; (ii) it diligently
assessed subloan applications, and responded reasonably to ICICI's and ICICI Bank's requests
for changes in implementation arrangements and reallocation of subloans; (iii) project
supervision by India Resident Mission officers was generally adequate, and project review
missions were properly conducted; and (iv) the PCR was prepared in a timely manner, but did
not provide sufficient information on subproject achievements, reflecting weaknesses in BME.

65.      Loan 1481-IND. The OEM assessed ADB's performance as satisfactory bordering on
less than satisfactory, based on the following observations. First, ADB's appraisal was generally
satisfactory except that it did not adequately assess the (i) risks associated with IFCI's high NPL
ratio, and (ii) bottleneck issues hindering corporate debt market development. Second, although
ADB diligently assessed subloan applications, delays in ADB's subloan approval at times
resulted in subborrowers changing their means of finance, leading to underutilization of the
credit line. Third, although the PCR was prepared in a timely manner, it did not provide sufficient
information on subproject achievements, reflecting weaknesses in BME.

C.       Borrowers Performance

66.     Loan 1480-IND. The OEM assessed ICICI's and ICICI Bank's performance as
satisfactory in view of (i) capacity in identifying, appraising, and implementing infrastructure
projects; (ii) adequacy and timeliness of the provision of counterpart or bridge financing; (iii)
timeliness of the submission of financial statements and other required documents; and (iv)
commitment to complying with loan covenants. The OEM noted that ICICI Bank's staff quality
was generally very high, although the limited meetings the OEM was able to hold with credit
officers who had appraised and implemented the subloans hampered evaluation of the
Borrower's performance.

46
   This project addressed the institutional constraints for infrastructure development at the state level, which was
   highlighted in the PCR on the PSIF.
47
   This project responded to the transformation of traditional development financial institutions in India, as highlighted
   in the PCR on the PSIF.
18


67.      Loan 1481-IND. The OEM assessed IFCI's performance as less than satisfactory
because it utilized only 65% of the loan and could not utilize the revolving funds, due to its
inability to meet one of the financial requirements, and the subsequent suspension of new
lending. It is noted, however, that IFCI demonstrated adequate ability in identifying, appraising,
and implementing infrastructure subprojects, as exemplified by the subprojects' satisfactory
performance.

                       V.      ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.        Issues

          1.       Power

68.    All the power subprojects were pioneering developments under the policy declared by
the Government of India in 1991 for private sector participation in the power sector. By
extending long-term finance, the PSIF contributed positively to private sector participation in
power generation in India. Successful execution of a number of private projects since 1991 has
improved the confidence of financial institutions in the sector. Over the longer term, non-
recourse finance from India's commercial banks became available, which was considered a
remote possibility before 1991.

69.     Since 1991 there has also been a significant debate on the efficacy of a generation-
oriented reform program and the adoption of a cost-plus approach to tariff setting in the power
subsector. Many of the generating projects constructed pursuant to the 1991 policy yielded
significantly higher tariffs, while large-scale inefficiencies still remained in public sector
distribution and supply utilities in India, threatening the security of payments to the generating
companies. This has also been observed in the P-1-CF, P-2-CF, and P-3-C, which have had
disputes regarding tariffs with their respective Electricity Regulatory Commissions. In the case
of P-1-CF, the Order of the Commission to reduce tariffs was contested in the Karnataka High
Court and a favorable verdict obtained by P-1-CF.

70.      Pursuant to promulgation of the Electricity Act 2003, the new regulatory and legislative
framework seeks to address these issues for the future. New power generation projects for
supply to distribution licensees will henceforth be developed on the basis of tariff-based
competitive bidding. Provision of non-discriminatory open access under the Electricity Act 2003
is likely to encourage generation and trading. This new framework places significant emphasis
on reforms in distribution and supply.

          2.       Roads

71.     During the last decade or so, India's federal and state governments realized the
importance of building and maintaining a good road network, and its contribution to sustainable
economic growth. Considerable progress has been achieved, particularly at the federal level,
including (i) the enhanced role of National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) in national
highway improvement; 48 (ii) development of a standardized concession agreement through
which PPPs are implemented; (iii) use of PPPs on a BOT basis for about 10% of the road
developed under National Highway Development Programs (NHDPs) I and II; (iv) the private
sector's positive response to NHAI bidding; and (v) growing interest of financial institutions and

48
     NHAI has been entrusted with stretches of national highway under National Highway Development Programs
     (NHDPs) I to VII.
                                                                                                  19


banks in road projects. Progress varies from state to state, with some doing better than others,
and incorporating the NHAI nodal executing agency model at the state level. However, in many
states progress is reportedly minimal to moderate.

72.     Despite the progress and success achieved so far, issues yet to be resolved include (i)
the lack of realistic traffic assessment, resulting in significant traffic risks (which are borne by
private developers) associated with developments reliant on traffic projections; (ii) land
acquisition delays, resulting in implementation delays; (iii) resistance to tolls; (iv) the need to
structure and select the correct model of PPP; (v) the limited domestic capacity to cope with the
need for private sector participation; (vi) the lack of interest shown by international developers
and/or investors; and (vii) the lack of innovative financing structures to suit the requirement and
revenue profiles of road PPPs.

       3.      Ports

73.     The introduction of port reforms in India in 1996 stemmed from experiments, in the early
1990s, in micro-level privatization of various berths and jetties in minor Gujarat ports, allocated
on a dedicated basis to large captive users. The port reform process accelerated in the mid-
1990s following development by the Government of a policy on private sector participation in
major ports, and provision of licenses to P&O Ports for a few major container terminals at Nhava
Sheva port, on a build-operate-own-transfer basis. The 1996 policy included measures to allow
private sector participation in ports, including investments by overseas port developers in
building various port-related assets, and lease-based operation of port services. In a clear
departure from the preceding four decades of complete public ownership of ports, the
Government's policy also sought to institutionalize various approaches to PPP initiatives in
major ports. Subsequently, a few port projects, including TR-2-F, have been developed through
private sector participation.

74.      Although private investment in the sector has increased in the past few years, it still falls
short of its potential. Some of the issues and constraints relating to private sector development
include (i) lack of an integrated approach to port development, (ii) the need for further incentives,
(ii) issues relating to pricing and tariffs, (iv) legacy issues such as the large labor force employed
at major ports, and (v) the limited focus on development of minor state ports.

       4.      Telecommunications

75.      Since liberalization in the early 1990s, the Indian telecom market has evolved from an
integrated, incumbent monopoly operation to a multi-service, multi-operator environment with
private participation. TE-1-C and TE-2-C, with private ownership, were part of the key outcome
of this liberalization initiative. Today, the telecom industry is one of the fastest growing sectors
of the Indian economy, with the private sector contributing over 50% of the total access lines.
India's telecom sector is adding nearly 5 million access subscribers every month. There are
pending policy/regulatory issues (e.g., related to spectrum, access deficit charges,
implementation of carrier access codes for selection of long distance carriers, infrastructure
sharing, and unified licensing regimes) that require resolution to further spur growth in this
sector. In addition, India retains one of the most highly regulated cost structures, with over 30%
of telecom revenues passing to the Government by way of various levies.

76.    The dramatic growth in Indian telecom notwithstanding, the biggest challenge is to
bridge the growing urban­rural telecom divide. Nationally, India has significantly increased its
telecommunication access, with overall teledensity at about 12% (as of March 2006). Urban
20


populations are disproportionately served, however, and only 13% of the country's telephone
lines serve the 71% of the population living in rural areas. The economic and social health of
rural India has a significant and direct bearing on the country's economic development. Rural
subscribers are less able to afford telecom services, and face higher service provision costs; the
consequent impact on the viability of operators is often cited as a primary reason for deficient
and poor quality of connectivity services in rural areas.

           5.        Corporate Debt Market and Infrastructure Financing

77.      Development of the corporate bond market has been slow, despite the floating of bonds
for infrastructure sector investment by a few government agencies, such as NHAI and Rural
Electrification Corporation of India Limited, who are eligible for certain fiscal incentives. Public
bond issues remain stagnant, while secondary market trading has been negligible. Accordingly,
the corporate bond market has played little role in infrastructure development. The report
prepared by the High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and Securitization (issued in
December 2005) included the following recommendations for promotion of debt instruments and
securitization in conjunction with private sector participation in infrastructure development: (i)
provision of special purpose vehicle status to special debt funds for infrastructure development,
and establishment of a regulatory framework for such funds; (ii) provision of a credit
enhancement to special purpose vehicles and secured assets in general; and (iii) clarification of
the definition of "securities" as tradable instruments under the Securities Contract Regulation
Act. Moreover, the chairman of the committee noted that the stamp duties imposed by state
governments on debt instruments remain a major distortion hindering the development of the
corporate bond market.

           6.        Public-Private Partnership

78.      The central Government's fiscal deficit for FY2005 is estimated at 4.1% of gross
domestic product (GDP), and its outstanding liabilities reached 63.5% of GDP in end FY2005.
This severely limits the ability of the Government to meet future infrastructure financing
requirements, and the Government expects the private sector to play a greater role in
infrastructure development. However, the Indian financial sector's financing capacity available
for infrastructure developments remains limited. In response, the Government recently set up
the scheme for viability gap funding to support PPP projects. Implementation of this scheme is
expected to promote further involvement of the private sector in infrastructure development. 49

B.         Lessons

           1.        Timeliness and Complementarities

79.     The PSIF was timely, as it complemented the Government's policy reforms, which
began in the mid-1990s, and aimed to promote private sector participation in infrastructure
development. Likewise, several other ongoing and follow-on ADB operations complemented the
PSIF (para. 63). Institutional and policy reforms supported by public sector operations resulted
in PSIF-funded subprojects; satisfactory outcomes of these subprojects enhanced further
involvement of the private sector in infrastructure development, offering various opportunities for
49
     The Government defines a PPP project as a project based on a contract or concession agreement, between the
     Government or statutory entity on one side and a private sector company on the other, for delivering an
     infrastructure service on payment of user charges. The Government announced the scheme's implementation
     guidelines in July 2005, defining the eligibility criteria, scope of Government support, approval process for project
     proposals, procurement process for the selected projects, and roles of a lead financial institution.
                                                                                                                    21


ADB public and private sector operations. In this way, the PSIF demonstrated that the
timeliness and complementarities of ADB operations were key factors in the success of a
pioneering project with a primary objective as broad as private sector participation in
infrastructure development.

80.    PSIF achievement in the area of corporate debt market development was marginal. It
could have better complemented the Government's efforts by way of issuance of corporate
bonds by the PSIF subborrowers, had the Government undertaken significant policy measures
promoting the corporate debt market early during PSIF implementation.

81.    Review of PSIF project files and relevant OEM interviews did not suggest regular
contacts and information sharing between ADB's public and private sector operations. Closer
collaboration might result in more synergies. The ongoing special evaluation study on private
sector operations will look into this aspect from a broader perspective.

         2.       Flexibility in Financing Arrangement

82.     Under the PSIF, ADB loans were denominated in dollars. However, all subloans were
denominated in rupees,50 despite the fact that the PSIF was aimed primarily at financing the FX
costs of subprojects. Such a currency mismatch may constrain the usefulness of ADB's credit
lines, depending on the availability of hedging instruments and the capability of financial
intermediaries in ALM.51 It is expected that the local currency loan product, newly introduced by
ADB under the Innovation and Efficiency Initiative (IEI) reforms, will respond to issues related to
the currency mismatch between credit lines extended by ADB and subloans extended by
financial intermediaries.52

83.      Under the PSIF, only 20% of the subloan could be utilized for financing local currency
costs in power and telecommunication subprojects. Due to this restriction, IFCI could not fully
utilize one of the approved subloans. In conjunction with the IEI reforms, ADB can now offer
more flexibility in cost-sharing arrangements, and expand the list of eligible expenses that ADB
can finance.53

         3.       Assessment at Entry and Implementation

84.    MOF observed that in some cases ADB spent excessive time reviewing environmental
and social impact assessment reports prior to approval of subloans. Given that relatively
stringent environmental and social guidelines for infrastructure projects are now in place in India,
MOF was of the view that ADB should shift its focus to implementation and enforcement of
these guidelines from at-entry assessments. The MOF considered that such a shift would
contribute to quality control of subprojects, while improving the usefulness of ADB credit lines.
The OEM supports MOF's view.




50
   The Loan Agreement did not specify the eligible currency (or currencies) under the PSIF, but it required the
   issuance of securities or equivalent instruments by subborrowers. However, private sector companies have not
   been allowed to issue such instruments in foreign currency.
51
   As noted in footnote 32, in the case of the PSIF the currency mismatch did not particularly constrain the ICICI's and
   IFCI's ALM.
52
   ADB issued Indian rupee bonds, with a principal amount of Rs5 billion and a bullet maturity of 10 years, in the
   domestic capital market of India on 27 February 2004.
53
   ADB 2005. Innovation and Efficiency Initiative: Pilot Financing Instruments and Modalities. Manila.
22


        4.       Lack of Benchmark Floating Interest Rates, and Prepayments

85.     According to several OEM interviewees, benchmark floating interest rates (such as the
London interbank offered rate [LIBOR]) have not yet been fully established in India, and fixed
interest rates (renewable every 2­3 years) were still predominantly used for long-term financing,
as in the cases of most subloans. This related to the fact that most subloans were prepaid
during and after the period when domestic interest rates were decreasing. Had floating interest
rate lending been more actively used, there might have been fewer instances of prepayment
under the PSIF.

        5.       Support for Public-Private Partnership

86.     MOF now considers the credit facilities covered under the Government guarantee, such
as PSIF, as no longer in keeping with the present government policy on PPP. ADB should
consider this point and take an innovative approach in formulating the PSIF III listed in the
country strategy and program update.54 Strengthening of ADB's capacity in subsovereign and
nonsovereign public sector financing, as envisaged under IEI, would be essential in responding
to the changing economic environment and client needs in India

        6.       Weak Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation

87.      The information provided by ICICI Bank and IFCI was not entirely sufficient for the OEM
to examine the development impacts of subprojects. This is understandable given that (i) most
subloans had been prepaid before the OEM, and (ii) the Loan Agreements did not clarify the
BME of prepaid subprojects. Aside from these specific factors in the PSIF, weakness in BME
has been a common issue in ADB's credit lines.55 These experiences underscore the need for
ADB to consider an alternative approach to creating a functional monitoring framework that
balances increased administrative costs with the need for, and use of, the data collected. One
possibility is to specify the required data and timing of data collection in a loan agreement.
Another option is to select sample subprojects for detailed performance evaluation. 56 In any
case, loan agreements need to clarify the BME of prepaid subprojects (e.g., subprojects which
may pay back the loans before maturity). What is important is a clear and pragmatic solution for
the purpose of developing an effective and efficient monitoring and evaluation framework for a
credit line.

C.      Follow-Up Actions

88.     No specific follow-up actions were identified for the Borrowers or for ADB.




54
   ADB 2005. Country Strategy and Program Update 2006­2008 India. Manila.
55
   Two other recent PPARs (ADB. 2004. Project Performance Audit Report on the Second Development Finance
   Project in Indonesia. Manila; ADB. 2005. Project Performance Audit Report on the Financial Sector Intermediation
   Loan in Pakistan. Manila) also highlighted this issue.
56
   In pursuing this option, ADB may need to seek cooperation from the selected subborrower at the time of subloan
   approval, while ensuring subborrowers' names are not indicated in ADB's completion and evaluation reports.
                                                                                                 Appendix 1       23


              PROFILE OF INDUSTRIAL CREDIT AND INVESTMENT CORPORATION
                            OF INDIA LIMITED AND ICICI BANK

A.        Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation Limited (­FY2001)

1.      Scope of Operations. Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited
(ICICI) was formed in 1955 to provide medium- and long-term project financing to Indian
businesses. Until the late 1980s, ICICI primarily focused its activities on project finance,
providing long-term funds to industrial projects. With the liberalization of the financial section of
India in the 1990s, ICICI transformed itself into a diversified financial service group offering a
wide variety of services to take advantage of the growing opportunities in India. ICICI business
is composed primarily of corporate banking activities including project finance, corporate
finance, and working capital finance. ICICI established independent operations through the
incorporation of subsidiaries and affiliates in venture capital funding (1988), investment banking
(1993), commercial banking (1994), asset management marketing (1994), personal finance
(1997), internet stock trading (1999), home finance (1999), and insurance (2000). As a
diversified financial service provider, ICICI provided a complete spectrum of wholesale banking
products and services including project finance, hybrid financing structure, syndication services,
treasury-based financial solutions, cash-flow-based financing products, lease financing, equity
financing, risk management tools, and advisory services.

2.     Ownership Structure. ICICI was a listed company, and its shares were traded in the
major Indian stock exchanges. ICICI's American Depository Shares and Global Depository
Shares were listed in the New York Stock Exchange. Prior to the merger with ICICI Bank (as of
13 November 2002), ICICI's major shareholders were American Depository Shareholders
(32.65%); Indian financial institutions such as the Life Insurance Corporation, General Insurance
Corporation, and commercial banks (collectively equaling 33.2%); foreign institutional investors
and nonresident Indians (15.1%); corporations (7.5%); and domestic individuals (10.2%).

3.      Financial and Portfolio Performance. ICICI's key financial ratios during fiscal year
(FY) 1998­FY2001 (Table A1.1 and Table A1.2) 1 indicated that (i) the loan portfolio grew
steadily; (ii) profitability decreased in FY2000­FY2001 relative to the previous 2 years, reflecting
the reduced interest margin, (iii) nonperforming loans were kept within the range of 5.2%­8.1%;2
and (iv) the capital adequacy ratio remained satisfactory, and ICICI complied with all applicable
prudential guidelines set by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as well as the financial covenants
under the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility (PSIF).




1
    The date will be further verified and assessed based on the ICICI's annual reports being dispatched by ICICI Bank.
2
    The net worth was significantly reduced by Rs10 billion during FY2001, due to the set-off against reserves for
    provisioning for nonperforming loans (NPLs). Provisioning for NPLs increased significantly during FY2000 and
    FY2001.
24       Appendix 1



                                Table A1.1: Key Financial Ratios of ICICI


           Item                                                     FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001
           Growth of loans and other credit facilities (%)                       26.3      11.9        20.6
           Return on average equity (%)                                21.0      20.3      16.8        16.4
           Return on average assts (%)                                   2.4      2.1        2.1        2.1
           Earning per shares (Rs)                                     18.2      18.2      17.0        17.0
           Average cost of borrowings (%)                              11.6      12.1      12.1        11.7
           Gross yields (%)                                            14.9      14.6      13.9        13.5
           Net interest margin (%)                                       3.3      2.5        1.8        1.8
           Net nonperforming assets/total loan assets (%)                7.6      8.1        7.6        5.2
           Rs = rupees, FY = fiscal year, ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited.
           Source: Information submitted by ICICI Bank to the Operations Evaluation Mission.

                                Table A1.2: Financial Covenants of PSIF

       Item                                                  FY1997     FY1998     FY1999      FY2000     FY2001
                                       a
      Debt service coverage ratio (%)                              1.9       1.7        1.8          1.6      1.7
      Capital adequacy ratio (%)b                                12.4       13.0      12.5         17.2      14.6
     FY = fiscal year, PSIF = Private Sector Infrastructure Facility
     a
         Under the PSIF, the Borrower was to maintain a debt service coverage ratio of at least 1.1.
     b
         Under the PSIF, the Borrower was to maintain a capital adequacy ratio of 8%, in accordance with the RBI's
         prudential guidelines. The capital adequacy ratio has since been changed to 9% (effective 2000).
     Source: ADB's internal documents (as of 13 November 2002).

B.       Merger of ICICI with ICICI Bank (FY2002)

4.       In view of the benefits of transformation into a bank, and RBI's pronouncements on
universal banking, ICICI explored corporate structuring alternatives for its transformation into a
universal bank. ICICI Bank also considered strategic alternatives, in the context of emerging
competition in the Indian banking industry and the move towards universal banking. The
identified benefits associated with conversion of ICICI into a commercial bank through merger
with ICICI Bank included:

          (i)     the resulting larger capital base and size and scale of operations, both of which
                  were considered to be key factors for success in the Indian banking industry;
          (ii)    the strong business synergies between the two entities; and
          (iii)   the ability of banks to (a) accept low-cost demand and savings deposits, which
                  constitute a relatively more stable source of funding, (b) offer a wider range of
                  products and services, and (c) earn nonfund-based income in the form of banking
                  fees and commissions.

5.      After considering the benefits of the merger and the external financial advisers'
recommendations, the board of directors of ICICI and ICICI Bank approved their merger on 25
October 2001, at a share exchange ratio of one ICICI Bank equity share (face value Rs10 per
share) for every two ICICI equity shares (face value Rs10 each). The merger of ICICI with ICICI
Bank was agreed under the Indian Company Act, 1956 and approved under the requisite orders
of the High Court of Judicature at Mumbai (ICICI Bank is registered at Mumbai) on 11 April
2002, and the High Court of Gujarat (ICICI was registered in Gujarat) on 7 March 2002. RBI
approved the merger on 26 April 2002. Following the merger of ICICI with ICICI Bank, with ICICI
Bank as the surviving entity, all assets, liabilities, permits, consents, licenses, etc. were vested
                                                                                                Appendix 1       25


in the transferee company (i.e., ICICI Bank), effective 30 March 2002,the date on which RBI
approval of the amalgamation became effective.3 There was no major reduction in staff strength
in ICICI and ICICI Bank following this merger.

C.        ICICI Bank (FY2002 to date)

6.      Scope of Operations. ICICI Bank's commercial banking operations for retail customers
consist of retail lending and deposits, private banking, distribution of third party investment
products and other fee-based products and services, as well as issuance of unsecured
redeemable bonds. In the area of corporate banking, ICICI Bank provides a range of products
and services to India's leading corporations, growth-oriented middle market companies, and
small and medium enterprises, including loan products, fee- and commission-based products
and services, deposits, and foreign exchange and derivatives products. ICICI Bank also offers
project finance and agricultural and rural banking products. ICICI Bank's treasury operations
include maintenance and management of regulatory reserves, proprietary trading in equity and
fixed income, a range of products and services for corporate customers, such as forward
contracts and interest rate and currency swaps, and foreign exchange products and services.
ICICI Bank's management believes that international markets present a major growth
opportunity and has therefore expanded the range of ICICI Bank's commercial banking products
for international customers. 4 During the 6 months ending 30 September 2005, ICICI Bank
acquired Investment Credit Bank, a Russian bank with total assets of approximately $4.4 million
at year end FY2005. Moreover, ICICI Bank has received approvals to establish branch offices in
Sri Lanka and the United Arab Emirates from the respective regulatory authorities and has
applied for a branch license in the United States.

7.      Project Finance. ICICI Bank has developed cross-sectoral project financing expertise
and is well positioned to leverage emerging opportunities. ICICI Bank's project financing
strategy focuses on origination of tightly structured projects by leveraging its international quality
due diligence skills, coupled with syndication capacity. The projects are structured to ensure
easy syndication and also subsequent sell-down of its exposure in order to manage portfolio
risk. Major deals during FY2005 included lead arranger mandates for a telecommunication
project, an international airport project, a green field container transshipment terminal and steel
capacity expansion project.

8.      Ownership Structure and Staff Strength. ICICI Bank is a listed company, and its
shares are traded in all the major stock exchanges in India. ICICI's major shareholders are
foreign institutional investors (46.3%), American Depository Shareholders (26.8%), government
financial institutions (12.9%), domestic individuals (6.6%) and domestic corporations (4.8%).
ICICI Banks staff increased from 7,700 people at end FY2002 to 13,609 at end FY2004, and
further to 24,078 at end December 2005.

9.       Financial and Portfolio Performance. ICICI Bank's loan portfolio grew from Rs470
billion in end FY2002 to Rs964 billion in end FY2005, while its investment portfolio (including
debentures) increased from Rs350 billion to Rs547 billion over the same period. ICICI Bank
remained profitable during this period with a return on average equity ranging from 17% to 22%
(Table A1.3), assisted by the steady increase in net interest margin, from 1.3% in FY2003 to
3
    As a result, all ADB loans in the name of ICICI were assumed by ICICI Bank, effective on the date of the merger
    and as per ADB's approval in December 2002.
4
    ICICI Bank has subsidiaries (in Canada, Russia, and United Kingdom); branches (in Bahrain; Hong Kong, China;
    and Singapore); and representative offices (in Bangladesh, People's Republic of China, South Africa, United Arab
    Emirates, and the United States).
26     Appendix 1



2.3% in FY2005. In April 2004, ICICI Bank raised additional equity capital of Rs32.5 billion
(equivalent to 40.5% of net worth at 31 March 2004), at a price of Rs280 per share. As a result,
return on average equity in FY2005 declined to 17.9% from 21.8% in FY2004, while the capital
adequacy ratio increased to 11.8% from 10.4%. The nonperforming loan ratio decreased
steadily from 5.1% at end FY2003 to 2.0% at end FY2005. Of ICICI Bank's total advances,
infrastructure finance (road, port, railways, telecoms, and power) constituted 4.7% at end
September 2005, a decrease from 7.9% at end FY2004 and 5.7% at end FY2005. This reflected
the selective approach of ICICI Bank in this area. Overall, ICICI Bank's financial and portfolio
performance has been satisfactory.

                          Table A1.3: Key Financial Ratios of ICICI Bank

           Item                                                  FY2002 FY2003 FY2004 FY2005
         Growth of advances (%)                                              13.3     21.9        48.4
         Return on average equity (%)                               17.8     18.3     21.8        17.9
         Return on average assets (%)                                1.1      1.2      1.4          1.4
         Earning per share (Rs)                                    11.6      19.7     26.7        27.6
         Average cost of borrowings (%)                              7.5      8.9      7.1          5.8
         Gross yields (%)                                            9.7     10.2      9.1          8.1
         Net interest margin (%)                                     2.2      1.3      2.0          2.3
         Net non-performing assts/total loan assets (%)              4.7      5.1      3.1          2.0
         Capital adequacy ratio (%)a                                11.4     11.1     10.4        11.8
         Rs = rupees, FY = fiscal year.
         a
             Under the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility, the Borrower was to maintain a capital
             adequacy ratio of 8% in accordance with the Reserve Bank of India's prudential guidelines.
             As of 2000, the capital adequacy ratio has been changed to 9%.
         Source: Annual Reports of ICICI Bank, FY2002­FY2005.
                                                                                                     Appendix 2       27


              PROFILE OF INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED

1.      Pre-PSIF Period (­FY1995). The Government of India established the Industrial
Finance Corporation of India (IFCI) in 1948 under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act of 1948
with the basic objective of making medium- and long-term credits to industrial concerns in India.
IFCI was converted into a IFCI Limited, a public limited company, in 1993 under the new
Industrial Finance Corporation Act of 1993. With this conversion, IFCI was to have greater
operational autonomy and better focused business strategies. IFCI's major shareholders at the
time of Private Sector Infrastructure Facility (PSIF) approval were the general public (35.2%),
Industrial Development Bank of India (28.6%), the Government (20.6%), and employees and
various private and public financial institutions (collectively 15.6%). From fiscal year (FY) 1991
to FY1996, IFCI's financial performance can be summarized as follows: (i) total assets grew by
102%; (ii) profit after tax grew on average over 40%; (iii) the debt service coverage ratio ranged
from 1.2 to 1.7; and (iii) the capital adequacy ratio was maintained above 11% (FY1993 to
FY1996). The proportion of nonperforming loans (NPLs) in the total loan portfolio was 17.6% at
end FY1996.

2.      PSIF Implementation Period (FY1996­FY2002). IFCI underwent two contrasting
phases of financial performance, i.e., the first phase lasting from FY1996 to FY1998, and the
second from FY1999 to FY2002 (Table A2). IFCI's performance in the first phase can be
summarized as follows: (i) total assets grew by 52.8%, (ii) the return on average equity was over
24%, (iii) the NPL ratio1 improved slightly, from 17.6% at end FY1996 to around 13­14% at end
FY1997 and FY1998, (iv) the capital adequacy ratio was kept above 10%, and (v) the net
interest margin was reduced from 5.2% in FY1996 to 3.3% in FY1998. The IFCI's performance
in the second phase can be summarized as follows: (i) total assets were largely unchanged; (ii)
the return on average equity was slightly negative in FY1999, slightly positive in FY2000; and
significantly negative in FY2001 to FY2002; (iii) the NPL ratio remained over 20%; 2 (iv) the
capital adequacy ratio remained above 8% from end FY1999 to FY2000, and lowered to 6.2% in
end FY2001, and further to 3.1% in end FY2002; (v) the net interest margin remained slightly
positive during FY1999­FY2001, and became negative in FY2002. The significant amount of
bad debts that were written off explains the financial deterioration during FY1999­FY2001, while
provisioning for bad and doubtful debts of over Rs6 million in FY20023 resulted in substantial
reduction in net worth.

3.      Post-PSIF Period (FY2003 to date). IFCI's financial results in this period can be
summarized as follows: (i) total assets declined from Rs229 billion to Rs177 billion; (ii) the
persisting financial loss peaked in FY2004 due to a significant amount of additional




1
    This ratio was calculated based on NPLs as a proportion of the total loans and advances. The NPLs as a
    proportion of the total assets equaled 9.8% in FY1996.
2
    Two NPLs had outstanding amounts exceeding Rs1,000 million each, which represented over 10% of the top 100
    NPLs' total amount outstanding. The textile and synthetic fiber and yarn industry, together with the iron and steel
    industry, were the major contributors, with outstanding amounts totaling 55.6% of the top 100 NPLs' total amount
    outstanding (IFCI. 2001. Annual Report 2000-2001. New Delhi).
3
    Changes in the regulatory environment, which came into effect in FY2001 and FY2002, included the following: (i)
    as of 31 March 2001 the concept of "past due" was dispensed with, as regards asset classification, removing the
    one-month grace period available for classification of NPLs; and (ii) from FY 2002 a financial institution asset would
    be treated non-performing if interest and/or principal remained overdue for 180 days (shortened from 360 days),
    resulting in additional provisioning on the NPLs from FY2003 (IFCI. 2001. Annual Report 2000-2001. New Delhi).
28        Appendix 2



provisioning; 4 (iii) the NPL ratio reached 32.3%in FY2004 and declined slightly to 28% in
FY2005; and (iv) net worth became negative in FY2004 and FY2005. IFCI has suspended new
lending operations since FY2003, while pursuing expeditious recovery of NPLs and
restructuring of its liabilities. To support these efforts, the Government has financially supported
IFCI with (i) grants of Rs52.2 million (available in FY2000­FY2008), (ii) a convertible bond of
Rs4 billion (issued in FY2002), and (iii) a loan of Rs5.23 billion (disbursed in FY2003). IFCI staff
numbers were reduced from 850 at end FY2003 to 489 at end FY2005, through a voluntary
retirement scheme. IFCI management noted the progress of the financial restructuring in
FY2005, while setting a NPL ratio of 10% or less as a benchmark to resume lending operations.
Currently, the management is exploring the opportunity of merging with other banks such as the
Industrial Development Bank of India and Punjab National Bank.

4.      During FY1998­FY2000, 24%­29% of IFCI's total disbursement was directed to
infrastructure projects. Between 15% and 20% of IFCI's disbursements were for infrastructure
projects during FY2001­FY2004, with a temporary increase to 62% in FY2005, reflecting
progress in an ongoing large power project. According to the management, the portfolio of
infrastructure financing has been performing relatively well.




4
    In accordance with Reserve Bank of India guidelines on graded higher provisioning norms for the secured portion
    of doubtful assets, IFCI made a 100% provision of the secured portion of assets classified as doubtful for more
    than three years on or after 1 April 2004. Further, in accordance with the guidelines, assets classified as doubtful
    for more than three years as of 31 March 2004 are provided for in a graded manner over 3 years (i.e., 60% by end
    FY 2005, 75% by end FY2006, and 100% by end FY2007 (IFCI. 2005. Annual Report 2004-2005. New Delhi).
                                                   Table A2: Key Financial Ratios of IFCI (FY1996­FY2005)

Item                                                     1996        1997        1998       1999          2000     2001       2002        2003        2004       2005
Return on average equity (%)                              25.62       25.22       24.21      (0.19)         0.49   (32.08)   (232.18)    (189.12)    (169.87)    (10.04)
Return (Profit after Tax) on average assets (%)            2.88        2.43        1.93        0.11         0.26    (1.15)      (3.97)      (1.19)      (7.16)    (2.24)
Earning per share (Rs)                                    10.07       10.73       10.28      (0.07)         0.09    (5.09)     (14.57)      (4.78)     (51.28)    (5.79)
Average cost of Borrowings (%)a                           11.55       13.71       11.98      12.40         12.60    12.58      12.04         9.29        7.90      6.73
               b
Gross yield (%)                                             16.75      17.58      15.26          13.08     13.11    13.75      11.31         7.71        5.90       9.75
Net interest margin (%)                                      5.20        3.87       3.28          0.68      0.51     1.17      (0.73)      (1.58)      (2.00)       3.02
Debt equity ratio                                            7.71        9.50     11.57          12.60     12.17    15.57      19.22       23.29       (6.91)     (5.27)
Capital adequacy ratio (%)                                  12.35      10.07      11.57           8.37      8.80     6.22        3.12        0.95     (17.03)    (23.46)
Net nonperforming assets/ total loan assets (%)             17.62      14.24      13.83          21.23     20.68    20.99      22.21       29.50        32.25      28.00
Non interest operating expenses/ total income (%)            7.18        6.63       6.97          6.50      5.91     4.72        4.82        6.13       11.83       5.24
 ( ) = negative, IFCI = Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited, Rs = rupees, FY = fiscal year.
 a
   Total interest expense (including interest tax) divided by average interest-bearing liabilities.
 b
   Equal interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
 Source: Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited.




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 2
                                                                                                                                                                           29
                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 3
                                         OVERVIEW OF SUBLOAN UNDER LOAN 1480-IND (ICICI)

 Item                               P-1-CF              P-2-CF                P-3-C              TR-1-C              TE-1-C            TE-2-C
 Date of ADB subloan              24 Oct 1997         26 Nov 1999          26 Nov 1999         26 Nov 1999         6 Dec 2000        13 Jul 2001
 approval
 Total subloan amount                 25.82               36.94                15.64                7.58               9.50              66.8
 approved by ADB ($
 million)
 Total amount disbursed by            22.93               30.79                14.06                6.48               8.92              66.8
 ADB ($ million)
 Total amount disbursed by            1,400               1,500                 730                 689               2,000             3,750
 ICICI to subborrowers (Rs
 million )
 Interest rate (%)a and             19.5                  8.5                15.7                 13.9                6.5              14.5
 maturity                        Repayable by         Repayable by        Repayable by         Repayable by       Repayable by      Repayable by
                                    2011                 2016                2013                 2013               2005              2006
 Form of debt                    Nonconvertible           NCDsa               NCDs                 NCDs               NCDs              NCDs
                                  Debentures
                                    (NCDs)
 Repayment performance               Prepaid              Prepaid            Prepaid              Prepaid            Prepaid           Prepaid
                                                     (refinanced with
                                                        term loan)
 Prepayment date                    Mar 2001            Mar 2006b            Mar 2005            Dec 2004           May 2004          Jun 2004
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited, Rs = rupees.
a
  The interest rates for P-2-CF and TE-1-C were at prepayment and conversion (from NCDs to term loan), respectively, while the interest rates of the
  remaining were at approval.
b
  Date of the conversion from NCDs to term loan.
Source: Data submitted by ICICI Bank to the Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                             Appendix 4     31


                                   OVERVIEW OF SUBLOAN UNDER LOAN 1481-IND (IFCI)


                                                                                                               TR-2-F
 Item                              P-1-CF              P-2-CF               P-4-F             P-5-F       (later TR-2-FG)

 Date of ADB subloan            25 Nov 1997          18 Oct 2000        26 Oct 1998        18 Oct 2000     17 Jul 1998
 approval
 Total subloan amount                7.49                32.4               18.75             15.47           25.07
 approved by ADB
 ($ million)
 Total amount disbursed              7.49               19.55               8.68               3.20           23.56
 ADB ($ million )
 Total amount disbursed              300                1,500               1,500             1,500              970
 by IFCI to subborrowers
 (Rs million)
 Interest rate (%) and             20                 16.5­18.5           PLR+3.5              15.5           16.22
 maturity                         19.5                                  Repayable for       Repayable     Repayable for
                                  19.5                                 8.5 years semi-     for 10 years     10 years
                               Repayable by                             annually up to       quarterly    quarterly up to
                                  2011                                   15 Jun 2010                      15 April 2012
 Form of debt                 Non-convertible           NCDs                NCDs              NCDs            NCDs
                               debentures
                                 (NCDs)
 Repayment                         Prepaid             Prepaid             Regular           Prepaid         Prepaid
 performance

ADB = Asian Development Bank, IFCI = Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited, Rs = rupees.
Source: Data submitted by IFCI to Operations Evaluation Mission.
32     Appendix 5



                                         SUBPROJECT PROFILES

                                 I.       P-1-CF (Thermal Power Plant)

A.     Background

       1.      Company and Project

1.      P-1-CF was incorporated in 1994 as a join venture between BG-1 (a family-owned
diversified business group with core activities that include steel and pipe production) and E-1 (a
European company) to set up a corex and coal based thermal power plant with an installed
capacity of 2x130 megawatts (MW) in the state of Karnataka. In accordance with two
agreements--the power purchase agreement (PPA) and the fuel supply agreement with S-1 (a
steel company of BG-1, which produces 1.25 million tons [mt] of hot rolled coils)--S-1 would
procure power from P-1-CF, and would also supply the corex and coal required for the plant. S-
1 was to consume about 60% of the subproject outputs with the remaining to be sold to
Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited (KPTCL). Table A5.1 indicates the key
subproject data as per appraisal.

                                      Table A5.1: Key Subproject Data

                Item                                           Rs million    $ million
                Total Subproject Cost                             11,950       330.20
                      Foreign Currency Cost                        4,120       113.84
                      Local Currency Cost                          7,830       216.36

                Proposed Financing                                  11,950     330.20
                     Equity (Local Currency)                         3,240      89.53
                     Rupee Loans                                     4,590     126.83
                     Foreign Currency Loan                           4,120     113.84

                Planned Subproject Completion              July 1998
                    Rs= rupees.
                    Source: Asian Development Bank project files.

2.      The plant was commissioned late in January 2000 due to delays in financial closure. The
actual project cost was Rs11.95 billion. In December 2001, E-1 sold its share to Industrial
Development Bank of India, Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited
(ICICI), and BG-1. Currently, BG-1 fully owns P-1-CF.

       2.      Details of Subloan

               a.         Approval and Disbursement

3.     In October 1997 and November 1997, ADB approved subloans of $9.96 million and
$3.83 million for ICICI and Industrial Financial Corporation of India Limited (IFCI), respectively,
to extend subloans to P-1-CF. These subloans, syndicated with other institutions and banks,
covered part of the total project cost of Rs11.95 billion. ICICI was the leading bank in the
syndication. The approved amounts of the two subloans were subsequently raised, with final
sanctioned amounts for ICICI and IFCI of $22.93 million and $7.49 million, respectively. ICICI
and IFCI withdrew the entire sanctioned subloan amounts, and disbursed the equivalent
amounts in the form of rupee-denominated non-convertible debentures (NCDs).
                                                                                                    Appendix 5       33


                    b.       Repayment Performance

4.      The effective interest rate of the two subloans to P-1-CF was 19.5% and was repayable
in quarterly installments until 2011. ICICI transferred the NCDs to a debenture securitization
trust (DST), which in turn issued pass-through certificates (PTCs) in March 2001. The PTCs
were subscribed by a local bank. P-1-CF prepaid the subloans to ICICI Bank and IFCI in fiscal
year (FY) 2001 for the following reasons: (i) interest rates in India began dropping significantly
from 1997, and (ii) the Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission (KERC) and KPTCL urged
P-1-CF to restructure its debt and lower its costs for power sales to KPTCL. Subsequently, the
DST also prepaid that part of the PTCs corresponding to the amount prepaid by P-1-CF. There
was no delay in P-1-CF's repayments and interest payments to ICICI Bank and IFCI.

B.        Operational Performance

5.     Over the past 5 years, the subproject has consistently generated above 1,800 million
units (MU = 1 million kilowatt per hour) at a plant load factor (PLF)1 of over 90%, as
demonstrated in Table A5.2. On this basis, the OEM considered this subproject effective.

                                    Table A5.2: Operational Performance

       Operating Parameters              Units        FY2005        FY2004        FY2003       FY2002        FY2001
       Gross Generation                   MU         1,966.77      2,184.69      2,160.97     2,184.30      1,730.22
       Plant Load Factor                    %              86            96            95           96            89
       Auxillary Consumption              MU           140.77        135.48        128.77       122.75        157.91
       Auxillary Consumption                %            7.16           6.2          5.96         5.62          9.13
       Net Generation                     MU         1,826.00      2,049.21      2,032.20     2,061.55      1,572.31
       Sales to KPTCL                     MU           496.45        780.17         903.1       966.55      1,082.48
       Sales to S-1 and others            MU         1,329.55      1,269.04      1,129.10     1,095.00        489.83
      FY = fiscal year, KPTCL = Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited, MU = million units.
      Source: ICICI Bank.

C.        Financial and Economic Analysis

6.      At appraisal, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) for this subproject was projected
to be 21.2%, and the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) to be 29.1%. In FY2005 P-1-CF
obtained higher returns than anticipated at appraisal (Table A5.3), as a result of (i) its inherently
low cost of power generation,2 which makes it feature low in merit order3 in the southern grid;
and (ii) the merchant nature of the plant, which in the absence of a long-term PPA, provides it
with the flexibility to trade in the market (in the currently constrained supply scenario, the market
is prepared to pay higher tariffs). Given these factors, the actual FIRR and EIRR for the
subproject are likely to remain higher than projected. On this basis, the OEM considered the
project highly efficient.



1
    The annual PLF is the ratio of the actual energy output of a power plant over a year to the theoretical energy output
    of the plant, if operating at maximum output throughout the year.
2
    The low cost is achieved by utilizing waste gas from the steel-making process.
3
    Merit order is the order in which power stations are scheduled (called to generate power) every day by buyers. To
    optimize the overall cost of power purchases, stations are scheduled in an order starting with those having the
    lowest variable cost; stations with increasing costs are scheduled subsequently, until the buyers' entire demand is
    met. Stations with high variable cost therefore run the risk of not being scheduled.
34       Appendix 5



                           Table A5.3: Financial Performance (Rs million)

     Item                                             FY2005     FY2004     FY2003     FY2002     FY2001
     Total Revenues                                     4,937      5,580      5,219      5,447      3,979
     Operating Expenses                                 2,769      2,796      2,874      3,135      1,950
     Operating Profit                                   2,168      2,784      2,346      2,312      2,029
     Depreciation and Write-offs                          695        862        664        666        576
     Interest and Finance Charges                         481        613        919      1,024        958
     Profit before Exceptional Item and Tax               992      1,309        763        622        495
     Exceptional Itema                                      0        810      (524)          0          0
     Profit before Tax                                    992      2,119        239        622        495
     Provision for Tax                                    389        164         24         56         36
     Profit After Tax (PAT)                               603      1,956        215        566        459
     ( ) = negative, Rs = rupees, FY = fiscal year.
     a
        Indicates provision made to account for reduction in tariffs as per Karnataka Electricity Regulatory
        Commission order. Item reversed the following year as per Karnataka High Court order.
     Source: Published annual accounts.

7.      About 40% of the outputs have been sold to KPTCL under a 5-year PPA. The tariff was
negotiated at Rs2.60 per unit for FY2001, and was to be escalated 5% per year. Although
KERC approved the PPA, it reduced the starting tariff to Rs2.36 per unit, with an annual
increase of 2.5%. P-1-CF contested the KERC order in the Karnataka High Court, which
decided in favor of P-1-CF (vide its order dated April 2004). The pre-existing PPA became
effective again in April 2004, with KPTCL then paying P-1-CF Rs3.00 per unit of power; the
current tariff is Rs3.16 per unit. The OEM assessed that the outcome of this subproject would
be likely to sustain.

D.       Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

8.     P-1-CF employs about 150 trained people, and benefits several others who are locally
involved in outsourced plant services.

9.      By the end of March 2005 P-1-CF had invested over Rs900 million in environment
protection schemes. A suitable environmental monitoring program is in place, providing
continuous emission monitoring. P-1-CF is currently training its employees and implementing
systems to obtain ISO 14001 Environment Management System certification.

10.    Dry fly ash and bottom ash handling systems have been implemented to reduce water
usage. P-1-CF is currently a zero water discharge company.

11.     Several afforestation drives have resulted in planting of over 60,000 trees on 110 acres
of land, since commercial operation began.

12.    Based on the information provided by ICICI Bank and IFCI, the OEM found no significant
negative socioeconomic and environmental impacts associated with the subproject.
                                                                                    Appendix 5     35


                               II.     P-2-CF (Hydropower Plant)

A.     Background

       1.      Company and Project

13.    P-2-CF is a company promoted in 1994 by BG2 (a family-owned business group, whose
core activities are construction and cement production), for the purpose of construction,
operation and maintenance of a 3x100 MW run-of-the-river hydroelectric power plant, by
constructing a diversion barrage across River-B in the State of Himachal Pradesh.

14.     This subproject has a 40-year PPA (up to year 2043) with the Himachal Pradesh State
Electricity Board (HPSEB), which guarantees the government of Himachal Pradesh (GOHP) a
unilateral right to either (i) purchase the power plant or (ii) extend the term of the PPA for a
further 20 years, with a first right to purchase power on the same terms and conditions. In
accordance with the agreement with GOHP, 12% of the net annual power generated from the
plant would be allocated free to GOHP. Construction on the plant began in 1998 and the project
was to be completed by 2001.

15.      In accordance with the PPA signed in 1997, the initial capital cost of the power plant was
projected to be Rs7.03 billion, excluding escalation and interest during construction. The
technological and economic clearance accorded to the project by the Central Electricity
Authority was for Rs9.49 billion (December 1993 price level), including interest during
construction but excluding escalation. The project cost has since changed due to (i) deviations
in quantities of civil work, (ii) extra items, (iii) restoration of damages due to unprecedented flash
flood in July 2000, (iv) price escalation, (v) exchange rate variations and (vi) interest during
construction. In May 2001, a revised project cost (of Rs16.2 billion) and a revised
commissioning schedule were appraised by the lead lender, ICICI, and accepted as Rs16.25
billion. On this basis, P-2-HP and HPSEB agreed on a project cost of Rs15.5 billion for the
purpose of tariff setting on a cost-plus basis, as per the Supplementary Agreement concluded in
2003.

16.     The project was successfully commissioned on 8 June 2003, with the delay
subsequently recognized by parties concerned as due to force majeure conditions, which were
outside the control of P-2-CF. Table A5.4 indicates the financing arrangement for the actual
project cost claimed by P-2-CF, totaling Rs16.7 billion.

                              Table A5.4: Financing Arrangement

                              Item                          Amount
                                                           (Rs billion)
                              Equity                          4.9
                              Rupee Debt                      8.9
                              Foreign Currency Loan           0.1
                              Buyers Credit                   1.9
                              Internal Accruals               0.9
                              Rs = rupees
                              Source: P-2-CF.
36        Appendix 5



          2.      Details of Subloan

                  a.       Approval and Disbursement

17.     In November 1999, ADB approved subloans of $26.5 million to ICICI and $6.4 million to
IFCI for P-2-CF. In May 2000 and October 2000, the subloan amounts were increased
respectively to $36.9 million for ICICI and $32.4 for IFCI, totaling $69.3 under the PSIF. ICICI's
entire sanctioned subloan amount was disbursed, but IFCI could disburse only $19.6 million,
because of the cap on financing local currency costs of power projects, which limited financing
provided by IFCI under the PSIF to 20% of the total. Since P-2-CF's foreign currency costs were
significantly financed by the time the subloan was approved, IFCI could not disburse more than
$19.6 million to P-2-CF. These amounts were disbursed to P-2-CF in the form of rupee-
denominated NCDs.

                  b.       Repayment Performance

18.     The interest rate of the subloan from IFCI to P-2-CF was initially between 16.5% -
18.5%.4 Subsequent interest rate decreases in India caused P-2-CF to negotiate with IFCI and
ICICI Bank to lower the subloan interest rates. IFCI was unable to accommodate this request,
prompting P-2-CF to prepay their loan in 2004. P-2-CF's other lenders agreed to reset interest
rates between January to October 2004, lowering the subproject's effective cost of borrowing to
10.5%. In March 2006, ICICI Bank converted the subloan from NCDs to a term loan with an
interest rate of 8.5%, repayable by 2016. There was no delay in P-2-CF's repayments and
interest payments to ICICI Bank and IFCI.

B.        Operational Performance

19.     Actual energy generation by P-2-CF has been in keeping with the plant's design energy,5
as indicated in Table A5.5. According to P-2-CF, its average plant availability6 in FY2004 and
FY2005 was 96.80% and 99.77%, respectively and remained at 97.40% for January 2006. The
OEM assessed this subproject as effective.




4
    The OEM could not verify the initial interest rate of the subloan from ICICI.
5
    Central Regulatory Commission defines design energy as the quantum of energy which could be generated in a
    90% dependable year with 95% installed capacity of the generation station.
6
    The plant availability factor of a power plant is the ratio of the amount of time that it is able to produce
    electricity over a certain period, to the total amount of the time in the period.
                                                                                                 Appendix 5      37


                           Table A5.5: Design and Actual Energy Generation

                                           Saleable Design Energy                Actual Saleable Energy
             Year/Month                        (in million units)                    (in million units)
             FY2004                                 940.41                                 990.76
             FY2005                               1050.06                                 1041.92
             April 05                                41.91                                    33.42
             May 05                                  72.60                                 101.10
             Jun 05                                 169.62                                 175.82
             Jul 05                                 183.53                                 177.38
             Aug 05                                 183.53                                 190.74
             Sep 05                                 129.54                                 174.64
             Oct 05                                  69.53                                    77.44
             Nov 05                                  50.29                                    45.75
             Dec 05                                  40.98                                    34.74
             Jan 06                                  37.95                                    17.46
             Subtotal                             2,969.95                               3,061.17
            FY = fiscal year.
            Source: P-2-CF.

C.        Financial and Economic Analysis

20.    Table A5.6 indicates P-2-CF's satisfactory financial performance, with a return on equity
of around 12% in FY2004. Note, however, that the income from sales of power in FY2004
includes the accumulated receivables of Rs997.97 million from HPSEB, due to disallowance of
P-2-CF's claims on completed project cost by the Himachal Pradesh Electricity Regulatory
Commission and the delay in clearance of the total project cost by the Central Electricity
Authority (CEA).7

                   Table A5.6: Summary Income Statements of P-2-CF (Rs million)

           Item                                            FY2005                           FY2004
           Income from Sale of Power                       2,995.2                          2,953.1
           Other Income                                       18.3                             13.0
                   Gross Income                            3,013.5                          2,966.1

           Expenditure
           Operation and Maintenance                           31.1                            97.0
           Employee, Administration and                      1,55.8                           118.7
           General Expenses
           Interest and Finance Charges                    1,273.0                          1,312.4
           Other Expenses                                    163.1                             96.5
                    Total Expenditure                      1,623.0                          1,624.6

           Depreciation                                      835.6                            712.6
           Provision for Tax                                  43.9                             49.8
                   Profit After Tax                          511.0                            579.1
          Rs = rupees, FY = fiscal year.
          Source: Published annual accounts of P-2-CF.



7
    The Himachal Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission has not accepted the total project cost of Rs15.5 billion
    indicated in the Supplementary Agreement, and determined the tariff based on its own project cost calculation. In
    addition, CEA has also not cleared the total project cost of Rs16.67 billion claimed by P-2-CF.
38       Appendix 5



21.     The current agreement between HPSEB and P-2-CF stipulates that HPSEB will
reimburse P-2-CF for power consumed by HPSEB at tariffs based on the final decision made by
CEA on the total project cost.8 For P-2-CF power sold by HPSEB to other states, HPSEB will
pass on the revenue on the basis of net tariffs realized from these states, after deduction of line
losses and transmission charges.9 The gap in PPA-determined tariffs and the payments thus
realized are carried forward as receivables from HPSEB, to be repaid along with interest. P-2-
CF's tariffs, as per the PPA, will decrease in future years as loans are repaid and the plant
depreciates (indicated in Table A5.7). Against this lower tariff, HPSEB is expected to realize an
increasingly higher market price for sale of P-2-CF's power to other states. This gap will
therefore narrow, and should fully close by FY2008, with receivables repaid over the next two
years.

                                Table A5.7: PPA-Based Tariff Projections

PPA-based
tariff
projections   FY2004     FY2005     FY2006     FY2007     FY2008     FY2009     FY2010    FY2011     FY2012     FY2013

Rs/Unit          3.03     2.91      2.93     2.89       2.84           2.80      2.75       2.75       2.68       2.61
FY = fiscal year, PPA = power purchase agreement, Rs = rupees.
Source: P-2-CF.

22.    P-2-CF made an initial public offering (IPO) in March 2005, with equity shares of Rs10
priced at Rs32 per share. The issue was oversubscribed by a factor of almost seven. Issue
proceeds were intended to fund new P-2-CF projects. Apart from the tariff-related issue
discussed above, there are no significant factors affecting the financial performance of P-2-CF.
On this basis, the OEM considered P-2-CF financially viable.

23.    The project FIRR of 16.13% estimated at appraisal may be high, given the gap between
estimated tariff in the PPA and the tariff realized from HPSEB over the first four years.10 The
subloan application documents did not include the EIRR estimation.

24.   On the basis of the above, the OEM assessed this subproject as efficient, and its
outcome as likely to sustain.

D.       Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

25.    P-2-CF obtained environmental and forestry clearance from the Ministry of Environment
and Forests (MOEF) in May 2000 on the premise that they would adopt certain precautionary
measures for preventing environmental degradation. The MOEF raised concerns regarding the
treatment of the catchment area and the environment management plan. P-2-CF resubmitted its
environmental management plan to the satisfaction of MOEF, and it is currently being executed
through the state government's forest department. P-2-CF has made a provision of Rs245.20


8
   According to P-2-CF, CEA depends on a project monitor (in this case the Central Public Sector Unit of the National
   Hydro Power Corporation) to concur with actual spending and the basis of technical claims for unforeseen
   geography-related issues and delays. National Hydro Power Corporation had already agreed with the final costs as
   claimed by P-2-CF, and the latter therefore anticipated clearance by CEA would be forthcoming.
9
   According to P-2-CF, HPSEB realizes significantly higher tariffs from Delhi Transco; the Regulator is willing to have
   the P-2-CF's accumulated receivables from HPSEB adjusted against extra profits earned in future years.
10
   Although the carrying cost of such receivables is also supposed to be reimbursed by HPSEB, it will impact FIRR,
   as cash flows are impacted over the first two years.
                                                                                 Appendix 5    39


million in the accounts for the year FY2004 for implementing the environmental management
plan and the catchment area treatment plan, as well as for payments to the Himachal Pradesh
forest department for this purpose.

26.      Aside from being the primary source of socioeconomic development, the project has
provided several direct and indirect benefits to the region. Roads and bridges were constructed
in the vicinity of the project and are maintained regularly by P-2-CF, thus improving access to
the region. Funds and expertise for upgrading existing and developing new schools in the region
have been provided by P-2-CF. Health care facilities in the form of a hospital, new dispensary,
doctors and medical staff, as well as free medicines, have been arranged by the company in the
vicinity of the project, for the benefit of the people of adjoining villages. The project provides
direct employment to about 200 people, as well as indirect employment to several others.

                                      III.     P-3-C (Thermal Power Plant)

A.         Background

           1.       Company and Project

27.     P-3-C was established in 1993 as a joint venture between BG-3 (a business group
owned by a non-resident Indian) and NA-1 (a North American electricity generation company),
for the purpose of setting up a lignite-fired power plant with an installed capacity of 250 MW in
the State of Tamil Nadu. Pursuant to a tripartite agreement in February 1998, the interest of BG-
3 in the project was acquired by NA-1 and E-2 (a European company). Since then P-3-C has
been a joint venture between NA-1 and E-2, each having a 50% share in the equity capital of
the company.

28.    This subproject has a 30-year PPA with the Tamil Nadu State Electricity Board (TNEB),
and is backed by a guarantee from the Government of Tamil Nadu for any defaults of payment
by TNEB not covered by letter of credits or escrow account covers. This project is one of the
eight original "fast track" projects identified by and enjoying counter-guarantee from the
Government of India for servicing of foreign debt, in case of termination of the PPA with TNEB.
The plant was constructed in 2002 according to plan.

           2.       Details of Subloan

                    a.       Approval and Disbursement

29.     On 26 November 1999, ADB approved ICICI's request to extend a subloan of $15.64
million equivalent (Rs730 million) to P-3-C under the PSIF, which was also syndicated with
other institutions and banks.11 ADB actually disbursed $14,06 million for ICICI to purchase the
rupee-denominated non-convertible debentures of around Rs654 million.

                    b.       Repayment Performance

30.     The effective interest rate of this subloan was 15.7% and was repayable by year 2013.
P-3-C prepaid the subloan in March 2005, however. Analysis by OEM of the conditions
prevailing at that time suggest the subloan was prepaid because: (i) interest rates began falling

11
     Foreign banks led the loan syndication.
40     Appendix 5



significantly in India in 1999, enabling P-3-C to obtain an alternative less costly refinancing
facility; and (ii) the Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission and TNEB urged ST-CMS to
take all measures to restructure debt to lower fixed costs, in accordance with the PPA with
TNEB.

B.     Operational Performance

31.    P-C-3 has not fully achieved the desired generation of 1,800 million units per annum
expected at appraisal (Table A5.8). The plant has been "backed down" due to the high cost of
P-3-C compared with other power sources for Tamil Nadu. Available information, such as the
Order of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission for FY2004, suggests that P-3-C is
a marginal station under a variable-charge approach and hence runs the risk of being backed
down during off-peak periods. Nevertheless, the PLF increased from around 80% in FY2004­
FY2005 to 90% in FY 2006, reflecting the growing demand for electricity in the southern region.
On this basis, the OEM assessed this subproject as effective.

                            Table A5.8: Operational Performance

                                                 Plant Load
                                                    Factor
                                                  including        Plant          Auxiliary
                               Generation          Deemed        Availability   Consumption
        Period                (Million Units)   Generation (%)      (%)             (%)
        Dec 2002­Mar 2003          353.07           64.88           65.27           9.10
        FY2004                  1,528.73            80.57           80.55           8.08
        FY2005                  1,354.71            81.82           81.77           8.00
        Apr 2005-Feb 2006       1,279.50            90.14           89.90           8.01
       FY = fiscal year.
       Source: P-3-C.

C.     Financial and Economic Analysis

32.    Information concerning financial performance of P-3-C is not publicly available. The
available information suggests that the financial performance of P-3-C has been satisfactory.

1.      The FIRR and EIRR for the project were estimated at 12.6% and 19.83%, respectively,
at the time of subloan approval. The FIRR and EIRR, as reevaluated by the OEM, are slightly
lower, primarily reflecting the fact that no incentive payments were received, as production was
lower than expected. On this basis, the OEM assessed the subproject as highly efficient.

D.     Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

33.      The unskilled and semi-skilled workforce came from the local area and overseas. A
majority of the skilled workforce came from other parts of India. Although the addition of the
negligible community workforce associated with P-3-C had very little impact on the services and
facilities in the surrounding area, some benefits reached local towns in the form of money spent
by the new community. This subproject also had a positive impact on industrial development,
through the addition of a new source of power to meet demand.

34.     P-3-C employs about 150 full-time staff for operation and maintenance. About 100
additional semi-skilled personnel (e.g., electricians, plumbers) benefited from the plant. In
                                                                                 Appendix 5     41


addition, a further 300 unskilled staff are employed by P-3-C on contractual basis for such
services such as security, house-keeping, gardening, vehicle driving, etc.

35.     As per agreement with L-1 (a local lignite producer which provided the 220 acres of land
for the power plant and its associated facilities), of the 50 families displaced in connection with
the plant, 25 were provided permanent employment by P-3-C, while the rest were
accommodated by L-1.

36.     P-3-C is committed to pollution prevention, continual improvement of their environmental
performance, and creation of benchmark standards by (i) complying with statutory and other
requirements, (ii) optimizing energy and water consumption, (iii) reducing dust emissions and
effluents, (iv) effectively managing solid and hazardous wastes, (v) encouraging employee
participation on environmental issues, and (vi) ensuring cost effective and timely resolutions to
environmental issues.

37.      P-3-C allocates an annual budget of Rs202.8 million for environmental management,
including the annual maintenance cost for the stack and testing laboratory, and the manpower
(including direct employment and outsourced consultants) involved in environmental monitoring.
It achieved a safety excellence award for having no lost-time accidents in 2003 and 2004, and it
is likely to receive an award for 2005. It has also successfully implemented ISO 14001 for
environmental management.

38.    Among its environmental management initiatives, P-3-C has undertaken the following
steps:

       (i)     Land area equivalent to 25% of the plant area was to be developed as a green
               belt with planting of specific varieties in keeping with the guidelines of the Tamil
               Nadu Pollution Control Board (TNPCB) and the MOEF. P-3-C successfully
               completed these initiatives, and the forest area was maintained both within the
               plant and in the adjoining villages.

       (ii)    Online monitoring of stack air quality is conducted, with display of readings for
               suspended particular matter, respirable particular matters, oxides of nitrogen,
               oxides of sulfur, carbon and lead. In addition, P-3-C has appointed an
               environment consultant to conduct a monthly analysis of stack air as well as
               ambient air quality. Six monitoring stations have been established in a 5 km
               radius around the plant; ambient air quality readings are reported on a monthly
               basis to the TNPCB. In addition, TNPCB officials carry out independent analysis
               of effluent water and ambient air. To date all such analyses have yielded results
               within permitted levels under TNPCB and MOEF guidelines for thermal power
               plants in India.

       (iii)   In accordance with the Government's guidelines for fly ash utilization, P-3-C
               provides for fly ash to be collected and sold to Madras Cement Limited, whose
               factory is located about 40 km from the plant site. Bottom ash is washed into an
               ash pond. P-3-C has implementing a zero-water discharge project under which
               clarified water from the ash pond is treated and reused as make up water in the
               raw water system of the plant. Reuse of effluent water has drastically reduced
               the ground water extraction and utilization, from 990 cubic meters per hour to
               250­300 cubic meters per hour, which will have a beneficial impact on the
               groundwater table.
42     Appendix 5



39.    Social measures implemented by P-3-C include:

       (i)     providing drinking water to about 1,500 families in six large adjoining villages;

       (ii)    providing make-up water twice a year for the village reservoir, which is used for
               irrigation and sanitation;

       (iii)   organizing a medical camp, providing free health check-ups for adjoining villages
               once per year, and a free eye camp twice per year;

       (iv)    building, for its employees, a self-sufficient housing colony with modern
               amenities and school transport for children.

                                IV.     P-4-F (Thermal Power Plant)

A.     Background

       1.      Company and Project

40.     P-4-F was incorporated in 1995 as a joint-venture between L-1 (a family-owned local
company specializing in power generation) and E-3 (a European company) to construct, own,
and operate a 355 MW naptha-based combined cycle power plant in the state of Andhra
Pradesh. P-4-F was the first project cleared by the CEA under the international competitive
bidding route for power projects in India. Table A5.9 indicates the key project data as per
appraisal. The plant was commissioned successfully and on schedule on October 2000,
subsequent to financial closure and commencement of construction in December 1998. The
actual subproject cost was Rs11 billion. P-4-F entered into a PPA with Andhra Pradesh State
Electricity Board for guaranteed purchase of up to 80% of the capacity for a period of 15 years.

                                 Table A5.9: Key Subproject Data

                Item                                      Rs million   $ million
                Total Project Cost                         10,640         266.00
                Foreign Currency Cost                       6,534         163.40
                Local Currency Cost                         4,106         102.70

                Proposed Financing                         10,640         266.00
                Equity (Foreign Currency)                   1,134          28.35
                Equity (Local Currency)                     2,266          56.65
                Rupee Loans                                 1,840          46.00
                Foreign Currency Loan                       5,400         135.00

                Planned Project Completion              October 2000
                Rs = rupees.
                Source: Asian Development Bank project files.

       2.      Details of Subloan

               a.      Approval and Disbursement

41.   On 26 October 1998, ADB approved a subloan of $18.75 million to IFCI against the P-4-
F subproject under the PSIF facility. This was subsequently reduced to $9.375 million (Rs375
                                                                                               Appendix 5       43


million) on 5 February 1999, due to revised means of financing. The entire sanctioned subloan
amount was disbursed by IFCI in the form of rupee-denominated NCDs. The effective interest
rate of this subloan to P-4-F was IFCI's prime lending rate + 3.5%, and was repayable in 34
equated quarterly installments, commencing from 15 October 2001, after a grace period of 18
months.

                    b.       Repayment Performance

42.        P-4-F's interest payments and repayments have been regular.

B.         Operational Performance

43.     Linkage of natural gas through the Gas Authority of India Limited and modifications in
plant design have enabled it to operate on natural gas since September 2001, with enhanced
installed capacity of 368 MW. The project generates close to 2,300 MU per annum, with a PLF
of 71%, compared with PLF projections of 90% in the appraisal documents; the lower actual
levels reflect constraints in the supply of gas. Nonetheless, P-4-F evidently contributed to
reducing the peak deficit in the southern grid from 14­15% in FY2000 to around 8% at present.
On this basis, the OEM assessed this subproject as effective.

C.         Financial and Economic Analysis

44.     At the time of appraisal the FIRR and EIRR were projected at 21.1% and 16.1%,
respectively. Incentive payments are unlikely to accrue at lower-than-expected PLFs, and thus
actual FIRR and EIRR are likely to be lower than projected. The financial data on P-4-F is not
publicly available, but the information submitted to IFCI indicates that P-4-F has been profitable
(Table A5.10). On the basis of the limited available data, the OEM tentatively assessed this
subproject as efficient.

                                     Table A5.10: Financial Performance

             Rs million                 FY2005       FY2004       FY2003       FY2002        FY2001
             Revenues                     5,597        5,528        5,642        5,971         2,801
             Gross Profit                 2,602        2,432        2,482        3,289         2,048
             Interest                       597          822          985        1,047           386
             Depreciation                   843          866          875          835           359
             Profit After Tax             1,077          743          710          772            14
            Rs = rupees, FY = fiscal year.
            Source: IFCI.

45.      Availability of gas remains a crucial issue in Andhra Pradesh, and the sufficiency of the
gas linkage is an inherent risk for P-4-F.12 Nevertheless, the OEM considered that P-4-F's
operations are likely to sustain for the following reasons. First, the PPA provides for
reimbursement of full fixed costs if the plant is made available (although not necessarily
producing) 68.5% of the time, year-round. P-4-F has consistently recovered its fixed costs by
achieving over 80% availability. Second, it is considered likely that the southern grid power
deficit will continue, at least in the medium term.

12
     Gas supply has been a countrywide issue in India. Reportedly, almost all gas-based power stations currently
     operate at below 60% PLF. It is also reported that over 3,000 MW of projects that have closed financially have
     been put on hold by the Ministry of Power because the gas linkage is insufficient.
44     Appendix 5



D.     Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

46.     Based on the information provided by IFCI, the OEM did not discern any adverse
environmental impacts from this subproject. The project did not involve any resettlement or land
acquisition issues, because it was transferred from Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure
Corporation. It is a modern combined cycle gas turbine plant, and has no recorded issues with
regards to effluent gases or effluent water.

                               V.      P-5-F (Hydropower Plant)

A.     Background

       1.      Company and Project

47.      P-5-F was incorporated by BG-4 (a family-owned business group with core activities in
textile and garment manufacturing) to build, own, and operate a 86 MW hydropower plant by
utilizing water from River-B in the state of Himachal Pradesh. At appraisal the entire electricity
output was proposed to be wheeled across for consumption of sponsor group companies in
Rajasthan. Total cost of the project was Rs3.520 billion ($480.92 million) to be financed by a
debt/equity component of 70:30. The actual project cost of was Rs3.2 billion, financed with
Rs0.66 billion of equity and Rs2.55 billion in debt. Project construction began in April 1999 and
was expected to be commissioned in October 2001. The project was commissioned ahead of
schedule in July 2001.

48.    P-5-F is the first medium or large operational private sector hydro project in the country.
Constructed at a cost of Rs37.5 million per MW, it set a new benchmark in hydropower
construction in the country. It is also the first merchant hydropower plant in the country and does
not have a long-term PPA with any buyer to date.

49.    In 2005, LI-1 (a local investment company) acquired 49% of the holding in P-5-F at a
premium of Rs18.20 per share of Rs10 each. The proceeds are to be utilized for construction of
another 192 MW hydro project in Himachal Pradesh, being constructed by P-5-F.

       2.      Details of Subloan

               a.     Approval and Disbursement

50.     In October 2000, ADB approved a subloan of $15.47 million to IFCI for P-5-F. Since the
construction of the project had already commenced by the time of project approval, P-5-F
arranged for funds from other lenders on the basis of IFCI's appraisal of this subproject. The
disbursal amount was therefore only $3.21 million, which was in the form of rupee-denominated
NCDs. The interest (at the rate of 15.5%) was to be repaid by the 10th year after commissioning
of the project, through quarterly installments.

               b.     Repayment Performance

51.     P-5-F prepaid this loan along with the prepayment premium, as cheaper lines of finance
became available from commercial banks in India immediately after completion of the project. P-
5-F's interest payments and prepayments before the prepayment were regular.
                                                                                                  Appendix 5       45


B.       Operational Performance

52.    The design energy for P-5-F was indicated at 372 million units, which appears unlikely to
be achieved by P-5-F, as it has already experienced several dependable years, but has fallen
short of the design energy (Table A5.11). Nevertheless, this is not a serious concern as the
plant has no long-term PPA, and trades primarily as a merchant power plant.13 P-5-F has
provided 12% of its power to the Government of Himachal Pradesh at no cost. It also supplies
power at negotiated rates to the neighboring states of Delhi and Haryana. The first-year tariff
was set at Rs2.65 per unit for FY2002, which is very low in merit order in the northern region. It
has thus proven to be a low-cost power source for the neighboring states, and has helped
redress acute power shortages in the northern grid. Therefore, the OEM assessed this
subproject as effective.

                         Table A5.11: Operational Performance (Million Units)

           Item                                                             FY2005                 FY2004
           Gross Generation                                                   275.4                  346.2
           Auxiliary Consumption                                                2.8                    3.7
           Free Energy to State Government                                     40.9                   51.4
           Free Energy to HPSEB for wheeling                                    9.3                   11.6
           Net Sale outside the State                                         222.3                  279.5
           FY = fiscal year; HPSEB = Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board.
           Source: Published Annual Accounts of P-5-F.

C.       Financial and Economic Analysis

53.    P-5-F's financial performance has been outstanding14 (Table A5.12). Realized tariffs in
excess of Rs2.50, combined with its low construction cost, have earned high profits in the last 3
years. On this basis, the OEM assessed this subproject as very efficient.




13
   Design energy forms the basis for tariff determination on projects that have executed long-term PPAs and are
   under regulatory purview. P-5-F, being a merchant plant (without a long-term agreement), sells power essentially at
   periodically negotiated rates. These negotiated rates are reflective of marginal costs in the market and do not
   depend on the plant's parameters (e.g. design energy or availability). Not achieving design energy in the case of P-
   5-F has more to do with faulty design energy estimates at the point of project award by the Government of
   Himachal Pradesh, than with actual plant performance.
14
   Based on the annual accounts, the return on equity of P-5-F appears to be over 30% in FY2005. P-5-F explained
   that the return in this calculation included the capital gains realized through divestment from the associated
   company.
46     Appendix 5



                    Table A5.12: Summary Income Statements (Rs million)

     Item                                      FY2005                      FY2004
     Income from Sale of Power                  511.9                       640.5
     Other Income                                29.5                        16.4
             Gross Income                       541.4                       656.9

     Expenditure
     Operation and Maintenance                  126.0                       114.0
     Interest and Finance Charges               188.5                       156.7
     Other Expenses                              26.0                        28.3
              Total Expenditure                 340.5                       299.0

     Depreciation                               102.7                       105.7
     Provision for Tax                          (58.5)                      100.4
             Profit After Tax                   156.7                       151.9
     ( ) = negative.
     FY = fiscal year.
     Source: Annual Accounts of P-5-F.

54.      P-5-F is expected to remain competitive owing to its merchant status in a power-starved
northern grid and likely to earn progressively higher tariffs. This will continue to yield high
returns for P-5-F in the following years, as repayment of loans and depreciation will reduce P-5-
F's generation costs. On this basis, the OEM assessed that the P-5-F's operations are most
likely to sustain.

55.     Though IFCI's appraisal documents projected cash flows and financial parameters, it did
not contain FIRR and EIRR computations. The OEM could not obtain sufficient information to
calculate the FIRR and EIRR.

D.     Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

56.     P-5-F is a run of the river hydropower plant which did not involve any rehabilitation and
resettlement in the region. It has been engaged in maintaining access roads to the project site
and has undertaken repair works to ensure year-round accessibility to the project site.

57.    The project is the largest organized industrial activity in this remote location and has
contributed to economic development of the region. It employs about 150 people directly, and
contributes to the indirect development of ancillary service establishments. P-5-F also has a
small project township, which houses a healthcare facility open to local communities. It has also
funded the development of schools in the region.
                                                                                          Appendix 5   47


                                    VI.      TR-1-C (Bypass Road)

A.     Background

       1.      Company and Project

58.    The project envisaged construction of a two-lane bypass on National Highway 4
connecting city A and city B in the southern state of Karnataka. The traffic within city A was as
high as 45,000 passenger car units (PCUs) per day, indicating extremely congested conditions.
This adversely affected through traffic, which passed through the towns of city A and city B. The
construction of the bypass was aimed at easing the traffic situation in the region.

59.   The project was awarded to TR-1-C on a build-operate-transfer basis. TR-1-C was a
new special purpose vehicle promoted by IC-1, a reputed Indian corporate.

60.     To make the bypass accessible to traffic as soon as possible, the project was
implemented in two phases. The total length of the bypass was 30.35 km. Under Phase I of the
project, TR-1-C constructed 18 km of the bypass. Under Phase II of the project, the remaining
12.35 km were constructed.

61.    The project was completed on 24 October 2000, largely as originally planned, with
Phase I completed on 7 June 2000, and Phase II on 24 October 2000.

62.     The initial project cost was estimated at Rs775 million (Table A5.13). The revised cost of
the project on completion was Rs940 million. The overrun of Rs165 million was due to additional
earth and pavement work. The original and revised means of financing for the project are
provided in Table A5.14.

                              Table A5.13: Cost Breakdown (Rs million)

             Particulars                                              Original      Completed

             Construction Cost                                              577.0       741.3

             Interest during Construction                                    51.0       105.1

             Preliminary and Preoperative                                    35.0        51.2

             Provision for Contingency                                       59.0         0.0

             Debt Service Reserve Fund                                       42.0        42.0

             Free Cash and Bank Balance                                      11.0         0.4

                      Total                                                 775.0       940.0
            Rs = rupees.
            Source: ICICI Appraisal Report and Project Completion Report.
48     Appendix 5



                           Table A5.14: Means of Financing (Rs million)

            Particulars                                                   Original         Final

            Equity Share Capital                                           209.0           209.0

            Non-Convertible Debentures from ICICI                          500.0           450.0

            Infrastructure Bonds (IDBI)                                       0.0          125.0

            Rupee Loan (Subordinated)                                       50.0           140.0

            Bank Guarantee from Promoters for Debt Service                  16.0            16.0
            Reserve Account
                     Total                                                 775.0           940.0
            ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited, IDBI, Rs = rupees.
            Source: ICICI appraisal report and project completion report.

       2.      Details of Subloan

               a.       Approval and Disbursement

63.    ADB approved the subloan of $7.58 million to ICICI for TR-1-C in November 1999. ICICI
drew a sum of $6.48 million to purchase NCDs issued by TR-1-C, and the balance was
cancelled. The availed loan was within the prescribed cap of 30% of project cost.

               b.       Repayment Performance

64.    In March 2001 ICICI sold the NCDs of TR-1-C to the Debenture Securitization Trust
(DST), a trust established by ICICI. An investor had subscribed to the PTCs issued by the DST
at an annualized yield of 12.75%. As this subproject did not generate enough revenues to make
the subloan interest payments, ICICI Bank switched to a "step­up" interest rate from the
constant interest rate throughout the regime, keeping the overall yield at the same level. In
December 2004, TR-1-C prepaid the debentures without charging any prepayment fee.
Consequently the DST also prepaid the corresponding amount of the PTCs held by the investor.

B.     Operational Performance

65.    The road was designed for 30,000 PCUs per day. According to PCR projections, traffic
between the two cities was expected to be 34,000 PCUs per day, of which 20,875 PCUs per
day (more than 60%) would be diverted to the bypass. In March 2001, 11,350 PCUs were using
the bypass (33%).

66.      ICICI commissioned a traffic study in April 2001, which showed that the actual traffic was
lower than that projected because: (i) actual growth in corridor traffic was lower than projected;
(ii) enforcement of the ban on through commercial traffic was inadequate, resulting in lower-
than-projected diversion to the bypass; (iii) the notification from the Government of Karnataka
banned only the through truck traffic from entering city A and city B, whereas the concession
agreement provided for banning of all through commercial traffic. At present through commercial
vehicles other than trucks (e.g., private tourist buses, mini buses, and light commercial vehicles)
remain able to use city roads. While the actual toll rates were as projected, toll collections were
lower because of lower than projected traffic.
                                                                                 Appendix 5    49



67.    The OEM could not obtain any further updated information on TR-1-C's operations, and
thus could not assess the effectiveness of this subproject.

C.     Financial and Economic Analysis

68.     The post-tax FIRR, as provided by ICICI Bank in the data sheet dated 1998, was 24.9%.
The FIRR based on actual performance of the project was not available. During its first year, the
project earned lower revenues than projected at appraisal, largely due to lower traffic volumes,
and the local authorities' failure to implement the ban on use of the existing road by commercial
vehicles. In the first 6 months of operations, toll revenues totaled Rs47.5 million, with a cash
loss of Rs22 million in that period. The performance was expected to improve, as enforcement
of the ban has reportedly improved.

69.     The traffic within City A reached 45,000 PCUs per day, indicating extremely congested
conditions. This adversely affected the through traffic forming a major share of the National
Highway 4 traffic, which had to pass City A and City B. Data showed that the average time
required for a truck to commute from City A and City B was reduced from 100 minutes to 40
minutes after the completion of bypass road. It was expected that traffic congestion between
City A and City B would be reduced and 20,875 PCUs (above 60%) of the traffic would be
diverted to the bypass. In March 2001 about 11,350 PCUs were using the bypass. The EIRR
(post tax) as per ICICI's analysis at appraisal in 1998, was 36.7%. Since no subsequent
information is available, the OEM could not reevaluate the EIRR.

70.     Due to data constraints, the OEM could not assess the efficiency and sustainability of
this subproject.

D.     Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

71.    Based on the information provided by ICICI Bank, the OEM did not find any significant
negative socioeconomic and environmental impacts associated with this subproject.

                                      VII.   TR-2-F (Port)

A.     Background

       1.      Company and Project

72.      BG-5 (a family-owned diversified business group with core activities in trading and
retailing) incorporated TR-2-F in 1993 to develop and implement Port-A in Gujarat State in the
western part of India. BG-5 originally conceived Port-A as a captive port and later envisaged
developing a multipurpose finger-type jetty along with a barge jetty and port back up facilities,
including godowns for general cargo, a liquid storage tank farm, a chemical terminal and a liquid
petroleum gas terminal. Port-A was one of the first few full-fledged port projects developed
through private sector initiatives.

73.      At IFCI appraisal in 1996, the cost of the project at completion was estimated at Rs3.370
billion, with proposed financing as per Table A5.15.
50         Appendix 5



                                    Table A5.15: Financing Plan (Rs million)

                           Item                                                  Amount
                           Debt
                              IFCI ­PSIF                                         1,000.0
                              IFCI- Foreign Currency Loan                          500.0
                              Exim Bank of India                                   500.0
                           Equity                                                1,370.0
                                     Total                                       3,370.0

                          Exim = Export-Import, IFCI = Industrial Finance Corporation of India
                          Limited, PSIF = Private Sector Infrastructure Facility, Rs = rupees.
                          Source: Appraisal document of IFCI.

74.      At the time the project was conceptualized by TR-2-F, the government of Gujarat State
(GOG) lacked a clear, declared policy regarding the development of ports through private
initiatives. In July 1997, GOG announced build-operate-own-transfer policy guidelines for the
ports sector, supported under the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program.15
TR-2-F took the opportunity to develop the project as a full-fledged modern port, rather than a
captive port, as other new ports established in the same area under the new port policy could
adversely affect the viability of TR-2-F's port. Accordingly, TR-2-F sought GOG approval to
develop the port within the framework of the new port policy. GOG approved TR-2-F's proposal
in September 1997. Subsequently, TR-2-F established TR-2-FG, along with the GOG-owned
Gujarat Port Infrastructure Development Company Limited, and further proposed restructuring
of the ongoing project to ensure optimum development of the port within the framework of the
new port policy. The lenders approved the restructuring proposal in November 2000.

75.      The salient features of the restructuring proposal were, (i) TR-2-FG would be the
developer of the port and provider of basic port infrastructure facilities, (ii) TR-2-F would remain
as the terminal operator of the multipurpose port terminal, (iii) the expenditure on the
construction of the multipurpose port terminal and approach road would be transferred to TR-2-
FG, (iv) TR-2-F would continue to be the independent owner of all the facilities in the
approximately 1.2 km2 backup area relating to the multipurpose port terminal, and additional
facilities to be developed from time to time on the balance of the land proposed to be acquired
on a freehold basis, (v) TR-2-F (being the private promoter of TR-2-FG) would have the right to
decide jointly with Gujarat Port Infrastructure Development Company Limited, the functions of
TR-2-FG, and granting of sub-concessions. As the private sector partner of TR-2-FG, TR-2-F
would be vested with first right to all future developmental activities to be undertaken by Port-A.

76.      To facilitate the segregation of the port development activities and port operator function
between TR-2-FG and TR-2-F, TR-2-FG would: (i) enter into a detailed concession agreement
with Gujarat Maritime Board for the development of Port-A; (ii) provide port infrastructure
facilities and services (e.g. jetties, wharfs, quays, a railway line, and dredging) and common
user facilities (e.g. roads, power, water); (iii) provide ship-related services such as pilotage,
berthing etc; (iv) acquire about 20 km2 of port backup land on lease from Gujarat Marketing

15
     ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loan to India for
     Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved on 18
     December 1996).
                                                                                                Appendix 5        51


Board and make it available to selected parties such as Hindustan Petroleum Corporation for
establishing port backup facilities; and (v) assume the role of port conservator.

77.     The project underwent changes in scope and facilities, resulting in an all weather direct
berthing deep-sea port capable of receiving ships up to 70,000 dead weight tonnage, and
featuring (i) a T-shaped multipurpose jetty 381 meters [m] long comprising a western berth
(216.5 m long) and an eastern berth (164.5 m long); (ii) facilities for berthing of ships at front
and rear faces of the two berths, providing effective berthing length of 815 m, capable of
handling both general and liquid cargos (with one berth dedicated for liquid cargo only); and (iii)
backup facilities, comprising (a) closed godowns (45,570 m2); (b) open storage space (217,000
m2); (c) chemical terminal (assorted tank capacity 100,000 kilo-liters [kl]); (d) petroleum, oil, and
lubricant storage tanks (120,000 kl); and (e) storage tanks for edible oils (45,000 kl). The liquid
petroleum gas storage originally planned was shelved in view of storage capacities being
planed at near by refinery complexes.

78.    The above changes increased the project cost to Rs3.900 billion, which was apportioned
between TR-2-F (Rs1.94 billion) and TR-2-FG (Rs1.96 billion). The revised project cost was
funded as shown in Table A5.16.

                         Table A5.16: Revised Financing Plan (Rs million)


                                                                    As per Revised Plan
            Item                        As per Original Plan        TR-2-F      TR-2-FG             Total

            Equity Share Capital              1,370.0                 648.0           662.0         1,310.0

            Debt
              IFCI - PSIF                     1,000.0                   0           1,000.0         1,000.0
              IFCI ­ FX loan                    500.0                 500.0             0             500.0
              Exim Bank of India                500.0                 200.0           300.0           500.0
            Loans from Commercial                  0                  590.0             0             590.0
            Banks and others
                    Total                     3,370.0               1,938.0         1,962.0         3,900.0

           BG-5 = a family-owned diversified business group with core activities in trading and retailing, FX =
           foreign exchange, GPIDCL = Gujarat Port Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited, IFCI =
           Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited, PSIF = Private Sector Infrastructure Facility, Rs =
           rupees.
           Source: IFCI's internal documents.

79.      In April 2000, IFCI requested that ADB transfer the subloan from TR-2-F to TR-2-FG.
ADB agreed through its letter of 10 October 2000. At about the same time TR-2-FG further
expanded the scope of the project by undertaking the following expenditures: (i) construction of
a railway link between Port A and Town-A, (ii) construction of a quay, and (iii) additional
expenditures on shared services and oil terminals for Indian Oil Company Limited etc. As a
result, the cost escalated further to Rs7.61 billion (Table A5.17).
52     Appendix 5



                         Table A5.17: Final Financing Plan (Rs million)

                       Particulars                                 Amount
                       Equity
                         BG-5                                      1,188.0
                         GPIDCL                                      150.0
                         Others (FIs and others)                      62.0
                       Equity Premium                                420.0
                       Internal Generations                          719.7a

                        Total Loans (including PSIF)                 5,069.9
                                  Total                              7,609.6
                      BG-5 = a family-owned diversified business group with core
                      activities in trading and retailing, FIs = financial institutions,
                      GPIDCL = Gujarat Port Infrastructure Development Corporation
                      Limited, IFCI = Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited,
                      PSIF = Private Sector Infrastructure Facility, Rs = rupees.
                      a
                        Land development charges from oil companies for setting up of
                        single buoy mooring and crude oil tankage.
                      Source: Various IFCI internal documents.

       2.      Details of Subloan

               a.      Approval and Disbursement
80.     ADB approved a loan of $12.970 million equivalent to Rs500 million on 27 March 1998.
Following this, IFCI requested ADB on 6 July 1998 to increase the ADB subloan by an
additional Rs500 million. ADB approved an increase of $12.50 million (equivalent to Rs500
million) increasing the aggregate sanction to $25.07 million (equivalent to Rs1 billion) which was
within the cap of 30% of the project cost. Out of the total approved amount, IFCI drew an
aggregate loan of $23.56 million (equivalent to Rs970 million) in a number of tranches between
April 1998 and March 2000. The subloan was repayable in 40 quarterly installments to be made
from 15 July 2002 to 15 April 2012, with an interest rate of 16.22%.

               b.      Repayment Performance
81.     TR-2-FG began commercial operations in October 2001 and made a small profit of Rs35
million during the first 6 months. Its operations were not as projected due to (i) unforeseen
external events, such as riots in Gujarat; (ii) delays in realization of receivables due from Indian
Railways, because the Railway Operational Agreement was not executed; and (iii) delays in
disbursement of loans for funding of the expansion programs, which prompted the diversion of
internally generated funds to project expansion and diversification. Moreover, TR-2-F assumed
a number of projects, including the expanded ongoing port project, simultaneously, and thus
faced a liquidity problem. It consequently defaulted, both in its principal installment and interest
payment to IFCI and other lenders.

82.      In 2002, TR-2-FG finalized the sale of its stake in affiliated C-1 (a container company of
BG-5) to MN-1 (a multi-national company specializing in cargo handling services and port
management throughout Europe, the United States, South America, Asia, Africa, and Australia).
As part of this deal, TR-2-FG transferred the expenditure of Rs3.12 billion incurred on the quay
to C-1. Utilizing the cash proceeds from this transaction, TR-2-FG prepaid the subloan and
overdue interest accrued in 2003. The relatively high interest rate of the subloan and the IFCI's
tight liquidity situation were the underlying factors for the prepayment.
                                                                                             Appendix 5   53


B.     Operational Performance
83.     Figure A5.1 shows the cargo handled by Port A since it commenced operation (including
partial operational years before it started commercial operations in October 2002). Over the
years, Port A has emerged as India's largest private sector port and one of the fastest growing.
The port has grown today to handle almost 10 times the cargo it did at inception in 1998. During
FY2006 (up to 16 March 2006), it has handled 7.8 mt of cargo, and is expected to finish the year
(ending 31 March) with 8 mt. The share of dry cargo handled at the port in FY2005 was around
85%. During the current year the share of dry cargo over the entire year would be about 80%.


                           Figure A5.1: Cargo Handled (1999­2006)




Note: 2005-06 figures are estimates. According to TR-2-FG, up to 16 March it had already handled 7.8 mt
of cargo, is expected to handle around 8 mt for the FY ending 31 March, higher than that projected.
Source: TR-2-FG's Website.

84.    According to IFCI's internal report, prepared in 2002 at the time of acceptance of
prepayment of the subloan, Port A was expected to handle 9.80 mt of cargo in FY2006 and
11.83 mt of cargo in FY2011. Though the operational performance is still below projections, it
shows healthy growth in the last 2 years. The number of vessels calling on the port has
increased over the years: 375 vessels called during FY2005, and the number is expected to
reach 400 in FY2006. Considering the overall favorable economic environment in India in
general, and the import­export cargo that would be generated by the large projects being
planned at the site adjacent to Port A (including a 4,000 MW ultra mega power project being
planned by the Government through private sector participation), traffic at Port A in the coming
year is expected to be well within the projections. On this basis, the OEM assessed this
subproject as effective.
54     Appendix 5




                           Figure A5.2: Cargo Handled-Vessel Wise




               Source: TR-2-FG's Website.



                       Figure A5.3: Cargo Handled-By Export and Import




                    Source: TR-2-FG's Website.

85.     In the past the share of import cargo was between 50% and 80% (Figure A5.3). During
the FY2005 the import cargo constituted 70% of the total cargo and is expected to be around
75% during the current year. The main dry cargo commodities that are imported at Port-A
include coal (40% of imported dry cargo), di ammonium phosphate, (28%) and muriate of
potash (18%). The imported liquid cargo commodities include vegetable oil (41% of imported
liquid cargo), degummed soya bean oil, sunflower oil, and cotton seed oil (17%), high speed fuel
oil and fuel oil (9%) and methanol (9%). The dry cargo exported commodities consist of clinkers
(33% of exported dry cargo), steel pipes (19%) and bentonite (18%). The liquid cargo that is
                                                                                               Appendix 5   55


exported from Port A includes refined soya bean oil (51%), caustic soda lye (28%) and ethyl
alcohol (16%).

C.      Financial Analysis

86.     TR-2-FG did not share its financial statements with the OEM. TR-2-F is not a listed
company, and information could therefore not be gathered through secondary sources. IFCI
shared the internal document it prepared (in October 2003) while examining TR-2-FG's proposal
to merge with TR-2-F, which provided a summary of financial results for the 15-month period
ending 31 December 2002 (Table A5.18) and the financial position as of end March 2003 (Table
A5.19).

                    Table A5.18: Summary of Financial Highlights (Rs million)

               Particulars                               Period ending         Period ending
                                                          31 Dec 2003          31 March 2003
                                                          (15 months)            (3 months)
               Income from Operations                         535.17              143.50
               Profit Before Income Tax                       327.91                77.00
               Interest                                       256.61                92.80
               Depreciation and Write Offs                     97.88                39.90
               Operating Profit/Loss                          (26.58)              (55.70)
               Other Income                                    51.12                 0.00
               Profit Before Tax                               24.54               (55.70)
               Tax                                              0.03                 0.00
               Profit After Tax                                24.51               (55.70)
               Cash Accruals                                  122.39               (15.80)
               ( ) = negative, Rs = rupees.
               Source: IFCI.

                              Table A5.19: Financial Position (Rs million)

     Particulars                              As of 30 Sep 2001    As of 31 Dec     As of 31 March 2003
                                                                       2002
     Share Capital                                1,396.04            1,400.00          1,400.00
     Reserves (including Share                      420.00              444.50            421.30
     Premium)
     Deferred Amount on Infrastructure               0.00                 672.30          666.30
     Usage from Indian Oil Corporation
     and Guru Govind Sigh Refinery
     Limited
     Misc. Expenses Not written off                  4.72                   3.45            3.20
     Net Worth                                    1811.32                2513.35         2484.40
     Fixed Assets (including Capital in           4889.05                5195.94         7885.90
     Progress)
     Port Infrastructure Development               526.25                2718.15            0.00
     Current Assets                                183.19                 236.48          506.90
     Secured Loans                                3580.99                4965.18         5254.90
     Current Liabilities                           206.91                 672.04          686.00
     Debt Equity Ratio                               1.98                   1.98            2.11
     Current Ratio                                   0.89                   0.35            0.74
     Fixed Asset Coverage Ratio                      1.51                   1.59            1.50
     Rs = rupees.
     Source: IFCI.

87.    The key findings regarding TR-2-F's financial performance, based on Tables A5.18 and
A5.19 are as follows. During the 15-month period ending 31 March 2002, TR-2-F's profit before
56     Appendix 5



income and tax stood at Rs327.91 million, but operations resulted in an operating loss of
Rs26.58 million. However, TR-2-F made a profit after tax of Rs24.51 million due to other income
of Rs51.12 million (the IFCI document did detail the other income). Second, the debt equity
ratio, as of end FY2003, was 1.98, indicating that the project was not excessively leveraged,
considering that infrastructure projects of such size in India could leverage to a DER of over 2.3.

88.     Subsequent to prepayment of the subloan under the PSIF, TR-2-FG approached lenders
with a proposal to merge TR-2-F into TR-2-FG. Upon the consent of lenders, the respective
Boards of TR-2-FG and TR-2-F approved the merger in mid 2003. The rationale provided for the
then proposed merger were: economies of scale, avoidance of duplication of work, achievement
of cost effectiveness, optimization of resources, and achievement of synergy of operations
resulting in improved returns on investment. The merger was also expected to provide better
single-point customer service. The effective date of merger was 1 April 2003. The requisite legal
formalities have since been completed and the High Court of Gujarat has given approval for the
merger during FY2006. The financial projections that were provided in the document prepared
for obtaining lenders' approval for the merger are provided in Table A5.20.

                         Table A5.20: Future Working Results (Rs million)

        Item                         FY2004           FY2005          FY2006          FY2010         FY2014

       Income                           2,180             3,227          4,336           7,644         10,065
       Expenses                           918              1221          1,532           2,110          2,620
       Revenue Amortization
       Income                             262               262            262               0              0
       PBIT                             1,000             1,744          2,542           5,534          7,445
       Financial Charges                  446               459            472             222              4
       Depreciation                       353               372            375             382            383
       PBT                                201               913          1,695           4,930          7,058
       Tax                                  15                70           130             378            542
       PAT                                186               843          1,565           4,552          6,516
       PAT = Profit After Tax, PBIT = Profit Before Interest and Tax, PBT = Profit Before Tax, Rs = rupees.
       Source: IFCI.

89.     The financial projections in Table A5.20 could not be strictly compared with the financial
projections provided in the appraisal document submitted to ADB along with PSIF application.
The project subsequently underwent several changes, resulting in revisions in capital
expenditure, implementation and expenditure schedule, contributors to the revenue stream, etc.
The OEM sent a detailed questionnaire to IFCI with a request to obtain the required operational
and financial information from TR-2-F, or provide it from its records. Unfortunately there was no
response; consequently, comments cannot be made on the FIRR.

90.      A limited analysis of the above projections shows that the profit before tax to sales ratio
will improve from 28% in FY2005 to about 70% in FY2014. During the same period profit before
tax to sales ratio will improve from 26% to about 64%. This takes into account the impacts
associated with development of one of India's largest special economic zones adjacent to Port
A. Moreover, the OEM considered that Port A will not be (i) constrained by the policy and
institutional environment; and (ii) exposed to significant environment, social, technological and
natural resources risks. On this basis, the OEM assessed that the outcome of this subproject is
mostly likely to sustain.
                                                                                                    Appendix 5       57


D.         Economic Analysis

91.     According to IFCI's appraisal report the port project was expected to play an important
role in the economic development of Gujarat in particular, and of the country in general. It was
expected to result in economic savings, by reducing congestion at Kandla (the only major port in
Gujarat). The average turnaround time for ships calling on Port A, compared to Kandla, is
considerably shorter. This can translate in savings of both cost and time. Excluding the crude oil
and petroleum, oil, and lubricant products handled at Kandla, the two ports handle similar
amounts of cargo (8 mt at Port A, and 9 mt at Kandla port. However, Port A has 4 berths as
compared with 18 berths at Kandla. Port A brings significant efficiencies that result in
considerable economic benefits, due to reduced congestion and fuel cost savings. Other key
factors contributing to better performance of Port A, as compared to Kandla port, are (i) higher
draft at Port A; (ii) increased mechanization; (iii) better productivity; and (iv) Port A offers all
services, including custom clearances, under one roof, resulting in time savings improved
service. Based on these observations, the OEM assessed this subproject as efficient.

92.    IFCI did not include an EIRR for the subloan application documents submitted to ADB.
Due to data constraints the OEM could not independently compute the EIRR.

E.         Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

93.        The socioeconomic impact of Port A project can be summarized as follows:

           (i)      The port is presently contributing to direct employment of around 2,500 people
                    (skilled and unskilled) and indirect employment of around 2,000 people.
           (ii)     During the construction stage the project provided employment to around 2,000
                    people for 3 years.
           (iii)    The population of the village next to Port A has increased from around 8,000 in
                    year 2001 to around 40,000 in the year 2006, largely due to the project's
                    increased economic activities.
           (iv)     The port has facilitated the implementation of other projects, such as BG-5's
                    edible oil refinery 5, a pipe plant, and a coking coal plant.
           (v)      BG-5 is developing one of the country's largest special economic zones next to
                    Port A.
           (vi)     Taking advantage of the existing port, the Government has identified the location
                    next to Port A for establishment of a 4000 MW ultra mega power plant.
           (vii)    TR-2-FG established residential colonies for more than 500 employee families.
           (viii)   TR-2-FG constructed a private school in collaboration with a reputable education
                    society that operates schools throughout India.16
           (ix)     TR-2-FG has entered into an agreement with one of the most reputable hospital
                    chains in India to establish a full-fledged 40 bed hospital in TR-2-FG's township,
                    the facilities of which will benefit the local population.

94.      Regarding environmental aspects, a brief discussion with TR-2-FG officials revealed
that: (i) TR-2-FG generally addressed environmental issues; (ii) a yearly audit of environmental
related compliance is carried out, and for the last 3 years TR-2-FG was ISO 9000 compliant in
these respects; (iii) TR-2-FG was working to provide adequate greenery; and (iv) a sprinkler

16
     It has 650 students and offers classes up to 12th standard (pre-university level). The school is open to children of
     non-employees of TR-2-FG.
58       Appendix 5



system is installed in open storage yards to reduce the amount of dust going in to the
atmosphere. The OEM did find any specific adverse environmental impacts, nor did the port
result in any relocation or rehabilitation issues.

                        VIII.     TE-1-C (Fixed and Mobile Telephone Service)

A.       Background

         1.       Company and Project

95.     TE-1-C, a subsidiary of LT-1 (a local manufacturer of telecommunication and cable
television equipment), was incorporated on 24 April 1995. The Department of
Telecommunications issued a license to TE-1-C in March 1998 to provide basic
telecommunication services in the State of Rajasthan under the fixed-license regime.17
Subsequently TE-1-C migrated to a revenue sharing regime. It had made capital and other
expenditures of over Rs1.5 billion (funded entirely by equity) before it launched commercial
operation (in June 2000) as one of the first private region-based, fixed-telephone service
providers in India. In November 2003, TE-1-C migrated to the united license regime,18 under
which it can provide basic as well as mobile telephony service in Rajasthan. However, TE-1-C is
currently not offering fully mobile, code division multiple access (CDMA) -based services, due to
interconnection problems with Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL), as well as issues related
to spectrum availability and regulatory clearance; it hopes to start offering these services in
2006. As of end October 2005, four fixed-service providers operate in Rajasthan, of which TE-1-
C (with 194,001 subscribers) is the second largest.19

96.      At appraisal, TE-1-C's peak funding requirement during FY2000-FY2005, or the total
subproject cost, was estimated at Rs9.62 billion. This included the capital expenditure of Rs8.36
billion for the supply of imported and domestic equipment, handsets, billing and customer
software, construction of backbone and access, maintenance of the entire network, and
buildings and other infrastructure. On this basis, TE-1-C requested financial assistance of
Rs4.84 billion from ICICI. Table A5.21 indicates the project cost and the financing plan at
appraisal in 2000. The actual project cost was largely as per plan.




17
   In the fixed-line arena, incumbent publicly owned Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Mahanagar
   Telephone Nigam Limited have dominated the Indian market (in terms of the number of subscribers) with their total
   market share of over 85% (as of August 2005), followed by six private sector operators. Of the six private
   operators, TE-2-C and one other are restricted to a single licensed area (i.e., Rajasthan and Panjab, respectively),
   while the remaining four operate in multiple licensed areas.
18
   By August 2005, the subscriber base of private operators (including fixed and mobile lines) was around 54 million,
   which corresponded to more than 50% of the nationwide market share. This reflected the rapid increase in the
   number of mobile phone subscribers (from 1.2 million in end FY1999, to 6.5 million in end FY2002, and 52.17
   million in end FY2005); mobile phone subscriptions have been promoted significantly by private operators.
19
   In Rajasthan, like most other states, BSNL is the largest fixed-line operator, offering 2 million telephones.
                                                                                                    Appendix 5      59


            Table A5.21: Project Cost at Appraisal and Proposed Financing (Rs million)

        Sources of Funds              FY2000       FY2001     FY2002      FY2003    FY2004     FY2005       Total
        Opening Cash balance                          54.5         50          50         50        50      254.5
        Equity Funding                1,521.1        613.7     1,009.4      761.3      528.5     403.5    4,837.5
        Debt drawdown                              2,134.8     1,009.4      761.3      528.5     403.5    4,837.5
        Cash Losses                               (397.90) (448.90) (198.80)          196.70    540.20   (308.70)
        Deposits (Subs & NIU)              4.6       165.5       230.6      258.4      301.4     107.1    1,067.6
        Total                         1,525.7      2,570.6     1,850.5    1,632.2    1,605.1   1,504.3   10,688.4
        Project Funding               1,466.6      2,748.5     2,018.8    1,522.6    1,057.1     806.9    9,620.5
        Requirement
        ( ) = negative, FY = fiscal year, NIU = network interface unit, Subs = subscribers.
        Source: ICICI appraisal documents.

           2.       Details of Subloan

                    b.       Approval and Disbursement

97.    ADB approved ICICI's request to extend the subloan of $9.62 million equivalent to TE-1-
C on 6 December 2000.

98.     Of the sanctioned subloan amount of $9.62 million, ICICI disbursed $8.92 million
equivalent. The subloan was repayable by 2005 and the interest rate was fixed at the prime
lending rate +1%, which was equivalent to 14%. This rate was maintained throughout the loan
tenure.

                    b.       Repayment Performance

99.  TE-1-C prepaid the subloan in May 2004 without prepayment charges. Interest
payments by TE-1-C before prepayment were regular.

B.         Operational and Financial Performance

100. As of February 2006, TE-1-C is operational in 123 cities and 4,000 villages covering
nearly 60% of the addressable population in the state of Rajasthan. With over 4,000 km of fiber
network and 100,000 copper access points, TE-1-C currently serves over 220,000 active voice
and data customers. TE-1-C is offering wireline, code division multiple access (CDMA)-based
mobility, CDMA-based fixed services, and CorDECT20-based wireless in local-loop services to
its customers (the proportion of customers utilizing various services is shown in Figure A5.4).




20
      CoreDECT is a wireless local loop standard developed in India based on the digital enhanced cordless technology
     (DECT).
60       Appendix 5



                      Figure A5.4: Customer Base Profile ­ Technology Wise




                  Source: TE-1-C.

101. Table A5.26 indicates that the number of subscribers as of end FY2005 was about 20%
lower than projected at appraisal. Nevertheless, the OEM assessed this subproject as effective
as it remained the second largest fixed phone operator in Rajasthan, while competing against
larger operators with nationwide coverage in fixed and mobile phone services.

102. TE-1-C explained that delays in receiving interconnection from the incumbent affected
the subproject outcome. TE-1-C was forced to lay its own optic fiber backbone, as BSNL
declined to share its infrastructure.21 TE-1-C's business model has changed significantly since
appraisal, because of changing market conditions; falling mobile phone tariffs and changes in
interconnection pricing regime have adversely impacted TE-1-C.22

103. The OEM observed that TE-1-C's technical innovations and improvements in economic
efficiency include the:

         (i)      lowest cost per line for universal access services operations in the country;

         (ii)     a billing system that was developed in-house, contributing to reduced capital
                  expenditures;




21
   One component of BSNL revenues is rental of leased lines; TE-1-C would have plausibly assumed that it could
   develop capacity through leases. It is the responsibility of the regulator to regulate BSNL's discriminatory practices
   through corrective action.
22
   The business model changed because of changing market conditions. TE-1-C took a fixed-service license, and
   planned to rollout a fixed network. Due to severe competition in mobile services, however, mobile tariffs became
   comparatively very low over the last few years, and much of the anticipated demand for TE-1-C's services shifted
   to mobile services. In addition, fixed operators were allowed to use wireless in local-loop technology for faster
   rollout. One of the fixed operators used wireless in local-loop to roll out limited mobile services, leading to
   subscriber expectations of similar services from all fixed operators. The licensor subsequently allowed fixed
   operators to convert their license to a unified license, through which they could provide any kind of service (fixed or
   mobile).
                                                                                                     Appendix 5       61


            (iii)    value-added services, including caller ring back tunes, 32-party conferencing,
                     video on-demand, a unified messaging platform, game shows, and occasion-
                     based contests;

            (iv)     the first introduction of pre-paid services on a fixed network by a fixed-service
                     provider; and

            (v)      benchmarking by the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of India quality
                     report, with respect to four out of six service parameters: (a) time to connection
                     (first), (b) meantime to repair (first), (c) customer complaint closure (first), and (d)
                     customer request closure (first).

                       Table A5.22: Summary Analysis of Operational Performance

                        As of 31 March 2002 per ICICI PCR,               As of 31 March 2005 per data provided by
                                     May 2002                                      TE-1-C to ADB mission
Item                 Projected at   Actual       Reasons For         Projected at    Actual    Reasons For Deviation
                      Appraisal                    Deviation           Appraisal
Number of                  61,648    27,150 Delay in rollout              273,011 220,000 About 20% lower than
subscribers                                   mainly because of                                projections mainly due
                                              non-availability of                              to remaining
                                              interconnection                                  interconnection issues
                                              point from BSNL                                  with BSNL
Revenues                     692.4    351.4 Lower revenues                   2,464     1,342 Lower revenues due
(Rs million)                                  due to lower                                     lower subscribers and
                                              subscribers                                      reaching out to less
                                                                                               paying subscribers than
                                                                                               projected
  ADB = Asian Development Bank, BSNL = Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited, ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment
  Corporation of India Limited, PCR = project completion report, Rs = rupees.
  Source: ICICI's PSIF completion report.

 104. Table A5.23 indicates that the decline in tariffs and lower-than-expected number of
 subscribers resulted in financial losses in FY2004 and FY2005. In response, TE-1-C sold its
 equities in MP-123 in FY2005.




 23
      MP-1 was promoted by the TE-2-C with a foreign partner. TE-2-C made a substantial profit (Rs629 million) on the
      sale of its 67.5% stake in MP-1, which it disclosed as an exceptional item in its profit and loss account in FY2005.
      The OEM was informed that the cash generated from the MP-1 sale was utilized to reduce TE-2-C's debt burden
      from about Rs4.7 billion to Rs3.1 billion, thus reducing company's interest costs.
62     Appendix 5


                     Table A5.23: Summary Income Statement (Rs million)

                    Item                                        FY2004         FY2005
                    Net Revenues                                    951          1,225
                    Network Operating Cost                         (501)          (590)
                    Other Costs                                    (321)          (364)
                    Operating Earnings before Interest,
                    Depreciation and                                129            271
                    Amortization(Operating EBITDA)
                    Other Income                                     4             11
                    Earnings before Interest,
                    Depreciation Amortization and Tax               133            282
                    (EBITDA)
                    Dep. and Amortization                          (577)          (706)
                    Earnings before Interest (EBIT) and
                                                                   (444)          (424)
                    Tax
                    Finance Cost                                   (500)          (422)
                    Earnings before Tax (EBT)                      (944)         (846)a
                    ( ) = negative, Rs = rupees.
                    a
                       In FY2005, the results represented above exclude an additional
                       income on sale of investment (accrued on account of its investment
                       in MP-1, which specializes the mobile telephone business) of Rs629
                       million.
                    Source: TE-1-C.

105. No information was provided by ICICI Bank/TE-1-C to enable the OEM to recalculate the
FIRR. According to PSIF-related documents provided by ICICI, the projected FIRR for TE-1-C
was 16.77%. As cash accruals are much lower than expected, on a similar project cost and
interest burden, it is expected that the project FIRR would be lower than projected. EIRR was
not computed in ICICI's appraisal report, nor in the application submitted to ADB for PSIF loan
approval.

106. Considering both the technical innovations demonstrated by TE-1-C and its weak
financial performance, the OEM assessed this subproject as partly efficient. To assess the
sustainability, further study of the market conditions in Rajasthan, as well as the business
prospect of the fully mobile CDMA services that TE-1-C will be offering, would be necessary.

C.     Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

107. As per its February 2006, TE-1-C's subscriber base of 220,000 corresponded to a
teledensity of 0.3% in the state of Rajasthan, which has a total teledensity (mobile teledensity +
fixed teledensity) of about 10% compared with the national figure of 12%.

108. No documented environmental and social impact analysis was done by ICICI during
appraisal. Based on available information, the OEM did not find any specific adverse
environmental impact from this subproject.

109. According to TE-1-C's annual report, the Company has taken various social initiatives. It
operates a full-fledged school program, inviting students from different institutions and providing
technology training. To allow free flow of information to school children and to offer convenience
to patients and visitors at a hospital, the Company has connect-a-school and connect-a-hospital
programs, wherein it installs and operates free phones at various schools and hospitals. To
                                                                                   Appendix 5   63


increase the availability of telecom facilities to the general public, the company has installed
coin collection boxes and information kiosks at various bus stands and airports in Rajasthan.

110. As an element of corporate social responsibility, TE-1-C provides 200 mobile public call
office rickshaws run by handicapped people, using CDMA-based fixed wireless terminals. Of the
200 terminals, about 40% are deployed in Jaipur, and the rest are in other areas of the TE-1-C
network. Such a facility provides employment to the handicapped but also improves the
availability of telecom services.

                           IX.       TE-2-C (Mobile Telephone Service)

A.     Background

       1.     Company and Project

111. TE-2-C was incorporated in May 1995 as a joint venture between BG-6 (a local family-
owned business group with a core activity in manufacturing of tractors) and HK-1 (a Hong Kong,
China-based joint venture company specializing in telecommunication businesses) to provide
global system for mobile communication (GSM) technology in three areas: Haryana, Uttar
Pradesh West and Kerala. BG-6 held 51% of TE-2-C's equity, while HK-1 held the remaining
49%. TE-2-C started commercial operations in December 1996. The financing requirements of
telecommunication projects in India have typically been calculated on the basis of "peak
negative cash flow". On this basis, during appraisal in 2001 TE-2-C and ICICI estimated the
company's funds requirements to be Rs13.62 billion, up to the period ending FY2002. Of that
sum, Rs3.66 billion was to be financed with equity capital and the rest with loans (Tables A5.24
and A5.25). Rs7.87 billion of the Rs13.62 billion was capital expenditure, including the cost of
land and buildings, switches, intelligent network, optic fiber and network equipments.

                               Table A5.24: Project Cost (Rs million)

            Fund Requirement                Up to FY2000    FY2001    FY2002      Total
            Capital Expenditure                     5,487     1,040      1,345    7,872
            License Fee                             3,319       220        506    4,045
            Cash Loss (profit)                      2,497       329    (1,749)    1,077
            Foreign Exchange Losses                   364       174        216      754
            Pre-op Expenditure                        184         0          0      184
            Working Capital                         (770)       308        147    (315)
                  Total                            11,081     2,071        465   13,617
            ( ) = negative, FY = fiscal year.
            Source: ICICI appraisal report.
64     Appendix 5



                              Table A5.25: Financing Plan (Rs million)

             Means of Financing              Up to FY2000    FY2001    FY2002     Total
             Equity Capital                          3,100       560        0     3,660
             Promoter Loan                             900         0        0       900
             Rupee Loan                              3,690     1,310      250     5,250
             Foreign Currency Loan                   2,437     1,155      215     3,807
             Vendor Credit Loan                        954     (954)        0         0
                   Total                            11,081     2,071      465    13,617
             ( ) = negative, FY = fiscal year.
             Source: ICICI appraisal report.

112. Given the massive rollout requirements, resulting from India's low teledensity, the
telecommunication industry requires continuous, sizeable capital infusions to increase
penetration and geographical coverage. BG-6 was able to meet these funding requirements
through its agribusiness, until three successive monsoon failures severely impacted the tractor
industry. The entry of new companies, including well-financed multinationals, exacerbated the
problem. In response, in 2001 BG-6 pursued scale benefits by bidding for four more cellular
circles (Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh East and Punjab). The licenses were
obtained in a separate legal entity (TE-2-CS), with 100% ownership by BG-6.

113. The business environment changed soon thereafter, and government licensing policy
was altered to allow CDMA technology-based mobile telephony, and introduction of a unified
access service licensing regime. These changes, coupled with aggressive rollout and subscriber
acquisition efforts by a larger CDMA-based mobile operator, mounted a formidable challenge to
existing GSM-based cellular operators. The various operators committed very substantial funds
(for network expansion and sales and marketing expenses) to sustain and increase their market
share in the very competitive mobile industry. Coupled with competition-driven tariff declines,
this led to significant financial constraints for the smaller, regional players. Combined with a lack
of support from its joint venture partner and the financial crunch in BG-6's core businesses, BG-
6 failed to operationalize any of its new acquisitions.

114. BG-6 consequently explored options to exit from the telecommunication business and
sold its newly acquired Punjab license to another GSM-based mobile operator. T-1 (another
GMS mobile operator) bought 100% of TE-2-C (with holding rights to the three additional
circles) for an enterprise value of around Rs11.25 billion, including Rs2.75 billion in cash to TE-
2-C shareholders and acquisition of Rs8.5 billion of existing company debt. Both of the principal
shareholders (BG-6 and JV-1) disposed of their respective equity holdings in TE-2-C to T-1 by
share purchase agreement dated 15 January 2004.

115. At the time, TE-2-C, was the market leader in Uttar Pradesh West, with a subscriber
base of around 365,000. In Kerala and Haryana, it was the second-largest operator with a
subscriber base of around 340,000 and 365,000, respectively. The revenues for TE-2-C for the
year ended 31 March 2004 were about Rs4.500 billion, with earnings before interest, tax
depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) margin of around 35%. However, as of 31 December
2003, driven by past accumulated losses of Rs9.536 billion, it had a negative net asset value of
Rs (-) 4.277 billion.

116. At the time of the deal, T-1 was a GSM operator in five circles (Maharashtra, Gujarat,
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Delhi). T-1's subscriber base was around 2.2 million on
                                                                                 Appendix 5     65


31 December 2003, making it the fourth largest GSM operator in India. After the merger with
TE-2-C, its subscriber base increased to over 3 million, but it continued to be the fourth largest.

117. The total revenues of T-1 for the year ended 31 March 2004 were estimated to be over
Rs13.000 billion, with an EBITDA margin of around 30%. At 31 March 2004, T-1 had a net asset
value of about Rs8.500 billion, including accumulated losses of over Rs20.000 billion. T-1
undertook a leveraged buy out, with the entire acquisition funded out of a short-term bridge loan
of Rs2.750 billion (used to pay off the TE-2-C shareholders). In addition, T-1 took on TE-2-C's
books, including its debt of over Rs8.000 billion.

       2.      Details of Subloan

               a.     Approval and Disbursement

118. ADB approved ICICI's extending the subloan of $31.83 million equivalent in July 2001.
Earlier, ADB had advised ICICI that TR-3-C (a port subproject under the PSIF), which had
previously been approved by ADB, was ineligible for ADB financing because state-owned
companies owned a majority of the shares. ICICI was consequently requested to substitute a
$32.7 million disbursement for TR-3-C. As a standby arrangement, ICICI submitted TE-2-C as a
proposed replacement for TR-3-C in May 2001. In November 2002, ADB approved an increase
in the subloan to TE-2-C by $30.32 million. TE-2-C fulfilled the telecommunications sectoral
criteria under the PSIF: the project, by virtue of its licensed areas of operation, should be
located in a non-metropolitan area and in the states of Uttar Pradesh West, Haryana and
Kerala. Of the sanctioned subloan amount of $66.81 million, ICICI disbursed the entire amount
in rupees to TE-2-C. Based on its projected cash flow generation report, ICICI fixed the
repayment schedule over 3.75, years with an initial moratorium of 4.25 years. The subloan
amount was to be covered by issue of NCDs, with a 14.5% interest rate maintained throughout
the loan tenure.

               b.     Repayment Performance

119. On acquisition by T-1, TE-2-C prepaid the subloan in June 2004. The OEM could not
verify TE-2-C's repayment and interest payment performance prior to the prepayment.

B.     Operational and Financial Performance

120. Figure A5.5 shows the constant increase in TE-2-C's subscribers in the three states
during 2000-2004. Figure A5.6 shows the significant reduction in market share, from the middle
of 2002. This indicates the rapid increase in demand for mobile telephone service and the
inability of TE-2-C to undertake network expansion to meet the demand.
66         Appendix 5




                                                FigureSubscriber take-up
                                                       A5.5: Subscriber   in EMCL
                                                                        Take-Up of TE-2-C

                                        1,400,000

                   Subscriber Numbers   1,200,000
                                        1,000,000                                                                                                                               U.P.(W)
                                         800,000                                                                                                                                Haryana
                                         600,000                                                                                                                                Kerala
                                         400,000                                                                                                                                Total
                                         200,000
                                                -
                                                    Dec-00




                                                                               Dec-01




                                                                                                           Dec '02




                                                                                                                                         Dec '03




                                                                                                                                                                       Dec'04
                                                             Apr-01

                                                                      Aug-01


                                                                                        Apr-02
                                                                                                 Aug '02



                                                                                                                     Apr '03
                                                                                                                               Aug '03




                                                                                                                                                             Aug '04
                                                                                                                                                   Apr '04
                                   Source: Cellular Operators Association of India.



                                                         FigureMarket        of EMCL
                                                                      Share Share
                                                                A5.6: Market      of TE-2-C

                                        100%
                                         90%
                   Market Share in %




                                         80%
                                         70%                                                                                                                                    U.P.(W)
                                         60%                                                                                                                                    Haryana
                                         50%
                                         40%                                                                                                                                    Kerala
                                         30%                                                                                                                                    Total
                                         20%
                                         10%
                                          0%
                                         Ap 2




                                         Ap 3




                                                 4
                                         Ap 0




                                         Ap 1



                                         D 2




                                         D 3




                                          D 4
                                         Au 3




                                         Au 4
                                         D 1
                                         Au 1




                                         Au 2


                                               '0




                                               '0




                                               '0
                                              -0




                                              -0



                                              '0




                                              '0




                                              '0
                                               0




                                               0
                                               0
                                               0




                                               0
                                            g-




                                            r'




                                            r'



                                           ec
                                            r-




                                            r-
                                           ec




                                           ec




                                           ec




                                           ec
                                            g




                                            g




                                            g
                                         D




                 Source: Cellular Operators Association of India.

121. Table A5.26 indicates that the subproject met appraisal projections for the number of
subscribers, as of end FY2004. In this regard, this subproject can be assessed as effective.
However, its revenue was lower than projected because of the decline in tariffs, reflecting the
fierce competition in the market, and resulting in financial losses during FY2000-FY2004 (Table
A5.27). Competing operators in the Indian market compensated for the lower revenue per user
by expanding their networks and taking on more subscribers. TE-2-C was not able to
adequately expand, nor to increase subscriber uptake, and was therefore unable to spread its
costs, part of which were fixed, to a larger revenue base. This resulted in a lower-than-projected
margin. Based on this observation, the OEM assessed this subproject as inefficient.24 Evidently,
TE-2-C could not sustain the outcome of this subproject, resulting in acquisition by T-1.


24
     EIRR was not computed in either ICICI's appraisal report or the application submitted to ADB for subloan approval
                                                                                             Appendix 5        67



                    Table A5.26: Summary Analysis of Operating Performance

                     As of 31 March 2002 per ICICI PCR,         As of 31 March 2004 per data provided by
                                  May 2002                                ICICI to ADB mission
     Item           Projected    Actual       Reasons for       Projected    Actual        Reasons for
                        at                      Deviation           at                        Deviation
                    Appraisal                                   Appraisal
     Number of        448,378 500,805 Higher cellular             993,936 1,000,000 No significant
     subscribers                            uptake                                      deviation
     Revenues       4,516.625    2,915.6 Lower average             10,213        4,393 Lower average
     (Rs million)                           revenue per                                 revenue per user
                                            user, due mainly                            due to significant
                                            to higher-than-                             sharp drop in
                                            expected                                    tariff.
                                            proportion of
                                            prepaid
                                            subscribers
    ADB = Asian Development Bank, ICICI = Industrial Credit     and Investment Corporation of India Limited,
    PCR = project completion report, Rs = rupees.
    Source: ICICI Bank.

                     Table A5.27: Summary of Financial Highlights (Rs million)

                                             FY2000        FY2001       FY2002         FY2003        FY2004

Income                                          1,464.8      1,977.2       3,512.4       4,213.6        4,399.1
  Operating income                              1,119.3      1,892.7         2,990       4,025.1        4,209.1
  Other income                                       2.4          6.1         41.5            7.1          35.7
  Change in stocks                                 (8.3)        (1.1)         (1.1)         (0.8)          (0.5)
  Non-recurring income                            351.4         79.5           482         182.2          154.8
Expenditure                                     1,256.9      1,869.5       1,871.8       5,680.9        2,784.5
  Operating expenses                              182.8        418.9           441       1,269.9        1,480.9
  Purchase of finished goods                       75.9         28.8          75.2            0.3            0.2
  Energy (power and fuel)                          41.8         54.5          78.5          92.5              96
  Salaries and wages                                155        206.9         272.6         310.3          349.6
  Indirect taxes                                     2.5          2.1           2.2         20.6             4.5
  Other expenses                                  795.2      1,156.4         999.5         924.5          853.3
  Less: expenses capitalized                           0            0             0             0              0
  Non-recurring expenses                             3.7          1.9           2.8      3,062.8               0

 Profits / losses
 Profit Before Depreciation, Interest
 and Tax                                           207.9       107.7       1,640.6      (1,467.3)        1,614.6
 Financial charges                               1,008.6     1,322.3       1,285.3        1,101.5          984.5
 Profit Before Depreciation and Tax              (800.7)   (1,214.6)         355.3      (2,568.8)          630.1
 Depreciation                                      551.6       729.6       1,096.2        1,234.1        1,681.2
 Profit Before Tax                             (1,352.3)   (1,944.2)       (740.9)      (3,802.9)      (1,051.1)
 Tax provision                                         0           0             0              0              0
 Profit After Tax                              (1,352.3)   (1,944.2)       (740.9)      (3,802.9)      (1,051.1)
( ) = negative, FY = fiscal year, Rs = rupees.
Source: Center for Monitoring Indian Economy.
68         Appendix 5


C.         Socioeconomic and Environmental Aspects

122. Based on an industry study,25 it is estimated that the project would be providing direct
employment to about 1,700 people and indirect and support employment to about 36,000
people.

123. No documented environmental and social impact analysis was done by ICICI during
appraisal. Based on the information available, the OEM did not discern any specific adverse
environmental impact from this subproject.




25
     Source: www.gsm.org; "Economic Benefits of Mobile Services in India", A Case Study for GSM Association.
                                                                                                       Appendix 6       69


                             OVERVIEW OF SUBPROJECT PERFORMANCE

Item                                       Relevancea Effectivenessb              Efficiencyc        Sustainabilityd

P-1-CF (Thermal Power Plant)                 Relevant          Effective        Highly Efficient           Likely

P-2-CF (Hydro Power Plant)                   Relevant          Effective           Efficient               Likely

P-3-C (Thermal Power Plant)                  Relevant          Effective        Highly Efficient           Likely

P-4-F (Thermal Power Plant)                  Relevant          Effective           Efficient               Likely

P-5-F (Hydro Power Plant)                    Relevant          Effective        Highly Efficient       Most Likely

TR-1-C (Bypass Road)                         Relevant      Information Not Information Not           Information Not
                                                               Available       Available                 Available

TR-2-F (Port)                                Relevant          Effective           Efficient           Most Likely

TE-1-C (Fixed and Mobile                     Relevant          Effective        Partly Efficient     Information Not
Telephone Service)                                                                                      Sufficiently
                                                                                                         Available

TE-2-C (Mobile Telephone Service)            Relevant          Effective           Inefficient     Not Applicable Due
                                                                                                     to the Merger
a
  Measured by the compliance with the subproject criteria of the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility.
b
  Measured by the achievement of the targeted production or incomes.
c
  Measured by the economic internal rate of returns or other relevant data.
d
  Measured by the likelihood that human, institutional, financial, and other resources are sufficient to maintain
  the outcome over its economic life.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
70          Appendix 7



                         CORPORATE DEBT MARKET DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA1

1.      From FY1986, public sector undertakings have been issuing bonds, which are
subscribed mainly by institutional investors, including banks. There has been limited interest in
the market by retail investors. Recent interest rate declines have encouraged the corporate
sector to utilize the bond market, rather than rely on the banking system for loans. Issuance of
corporate bonds has risen sharply during the last decade, although a small decline in the
amounts raised through bonds was recorded in fiscal year (FY) 2004. Even in the present
buoyant equity market, 68% of the resources raised (in FY2004 and FY2005) were through
bonds placements; this figure reached 83% to 91% in the preceding 7 years (Table A7.1). Most
issues are now held in dematerialized form in the depository.

                           Table A7.1: Resources Raised in the Financial Market

                                                                                                             Share (%)
                                                                                   Share (%) of Private          of
                                    Debt Issues (Rs million)                           Placement in           Debt in
                  Public                                           Resource                      Total         Total
                  Equity                                          Mobilization     Total      Resource       Resource
                  Issues       Public      Private        Total   (Rs million)     Debt      Mobilization   Mobilization
     Year       (Rs million)   Issues   Placements*       (3+4)      (2+5)       (4/5*100)    (4/6*100)      (5/6*100)
      1              2            3           4             5          6             7             8             9

    FY1996        88,820       29,400     100,350       129,750     218,570       77.34         45.91          59.36
    FY1997        46,710       70,150     183,910       254,060     300,770       72.39         61.15          84.47
    FY1998        11,320       19,290     309,830       329,120     340,440       94.14         91.01          96.67
    FY1999         5,040       74,070     387,480       461,550     466,590       83.95         83.05          98.92
    FY2000        29,750       46,980     550,730       597,710     627,460       92.14         87.77          95.26
    FY2001        24,790       41,390     524,560       565,950     590,740       92.69         88.80          95.80
    FY2002        10,820       53,410     454,270       507,680     518,500       89.48         87.61          97.91
    FY2003        10,390       46,930     484,240       531,170     541,560       91.16         89.42          98.08
    FY2004       178,210       43,240     484,280       527,520     705,730       91.80         68.62          74.75
    FY2005       214,320       40,950     553,840       594,790     809,110       93.12         68.45          73.51

FY = fiscal year, Rs = rupees.
Source: Report on High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and Securitization (December 2005).

2.     Corporate bonds can be issued through private placements or public issues. Major
issuance is currently through private placement, due to the obvious advantages of finer pricing,
lower cost of issue, a shorter time frame and minimal regulatory approvals. Public sector
undertakings, banks and other financial institutions have issued more than 80% of the privately
placed corporate bonds. Issuance of bonds by the corporate sector for manufacturing and
services has remained low, equaling around 9% of the total mobilization in FY2005, down from
14% in FY2000.




1
    This section summarizes the Report on High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and Securitization,
    issued     in   December     2005.    ( http://finmin.nic.in/downloads/reports/Report-Expert.pdf#search=
    'High%20Level%20Expert%20Committee%20on%20Corporate%20Bonds%20and%20Securitization').
                                                                                                 Appendix 7       71


3.      Regulations make the bond market available only to the top-rated companies, keeping
private sector mobilization through bonds low.2 Almost all (97%) of the total privately placed
debt issued in FY2005 was credit rated, suggesting that credit rating is effectively a prerequisite
for bond market access. The ease with which funds can be raised in overseas markets is also a
contributing factor. Moreover, investors in corporate debt instruments are excessively safety
conscious, with almost no demand for papers rated below AA or its equivalent by rating
companies (Table A7.2).

                Table A7.2: Corporate Bonds ­ Outstanding Issues (as of 25 August 2005)
                                              (Rs million)

                                                            Issue
                                    Number      Market       Size                        Market
                                      of        Share        (Rs         Market       Capitalization     Market
            Rating Class            Issues       (%)        million)    Share (%)      (Rs million)     Share (%)

            AAA/MAAA                     955      61.61      926,090         69.81           938,720         69.68
            AA+/LAA+/MAA+                320      20.65      196,050         14.78           198,210         14.71
            AA/LAA/MAA                   175      11.29      132,480          9.99           136,920         10.16
            AA-/LA-                       31       2.00       12,720          0.96            13,220          0.98
            A+/LA+                        16       1.03       15,450          1.16            15,590          1.16
            A/LA/MA                       16       1.03       15,120          1.14            15,290          1.13
            A-                            12       0.77       10,630          0.80            10,650          0.79
            BBB+                          11       0.71        8,330          0.63             8,770          0.65
            BBB/LBBB                       8       0.52        7,220          0.54             7,250          0.54
            B                              6       0.39        2,570          0.19             2,570          0.19
            Grand                      1,550     100.00    1,326,660        100.00         1,347,190        100.00
            Rating Not Available          82                  99,060                          99,160

          Rs = rupees.
          Source: Report on High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and Securitization (December 2005).

4.      Privately placed bonds generally lack liquidity in the secondary market, as many
investors hold these bonds to maturity. In addition, the secondary market in corporate debt
papers suffers from chronic illiquidity. Very little trading of corporate debt papers occurred
during the last 2 years, accounting for about 3% of the total debt traded in the market (Table
A7.3). The low level of corporate bond activity results from the limited number of players that
dominate the market, and inadequate disclosures about securities issued mainly through private
placement. There was very little or no retail interest in corporate debt, due to the institutional
structure of the market.




2
    The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued instructions to all the banks and primary dealers that their investments in
    unlisted corporate bonds should not exceed 10% of their investment portfolio of non-statutory liquidity ratio
    securities. At one point banks were not allowed to lend at rates lower than the prime lending rate (PLR) of
    respective banks. Banks intending to extend loans to their borrowers with high credit ratings, at rates lower than
    their respective PLRs, camouflaged these as investments in privately placed bonds, because RBI's interest rate
    directive did not apply to lending by way of investments in bonds. After RBI removed the restriction on sub-PLR
    lending, banks were no longer tempted to resort to investment in bonds merely to lend below the PLR.
72   Appendix 7



                    Table A7.3: Secondary Market Activity in Debt Securities


                          Corporate Debt     Market     Government       Market          Total
                            (Rs million)     Share       Securities     Share (%)      (Rs million)
        Year                                  (%)        (Rs Million)

        FY2004                419,770          2.60      15,751,330       97.40        16,171,100
        FY2005                379,690          3.24      11,342,220       96.76        11,721,910

        FY = fiscal year, Rs = rupees.
        Source: NSE Factbook 2005, CCIL Factbook 2005. Quoted in Report on High Level Expert Committee
        on Corporate Bonds and Securitization (December 2005).
    MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
    REPORT FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY IN INDIA
                         (Loans 1480/1481-IND)



       On 29 November 2006, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department,
received the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       A.     Overall Comments

       1.       Management finds that the OED report is well written and covers major
       relevant aspects of the loan projects. We take note that the overall rating of Loan
       1480-IND is successful and that of Loan 1481-IND is partly successful and that
       there is no specific follow-up action identified for ADB or the Borrowers. We
       appreciate the key issues and lessons that the OED report identified and will
       utilize them in our future relevant projects.

       B.     Specific Comments

       2.       The report suggests that the modality of the Private Sector Infrastructure
       Facility (PSIF) was not fully appropriate in achieving its secondary market
       objective of corporate debt market development and using a program loan might
       have been more appropriate (para. 35). However, we would like to point out that
       ADB did provide a program loan on capital market development, Loan 1408-IND:
       Capital Market Development Program (approved on 28 November 1995) that
       included debt market components right before the PSIF was conceived. This
       program was rated successful. The PSIF was designed to complement the
       program. Furthermore, when it was clear that while a primary market was active,
       a liquid and deep secondary debt market was not developing in spite of earlier
       efforts, ADB provided technical assistance to India (TA 3473-IND: Development
       of a Secondary Debt Market, approved in July 2000). Subsequently, a follow-up
       program on capital market development focusing on long-term debt market
       development was included under the country assistance program. Due to political
       economy considerations, this was, however, not pursued at the time at the
       request of the Indian Government.

       3.       Furthermore, the promissory notes issued by sub-borrowers were
       securitized under the PSIF to allow the participating financial institutions (PFIs)
       the flexibility to float these securities in the Indian capital market to help develop
       the debt market in securities. This instrument was chosen because the timing for
       issuance of these securities could not be determined precisely due to the fact
       that the point of commercialization of the subprojects nor the conditions
       prevailing in the capital market could not be determined in advance, but a credit
       rating was needed for the securities to be issued in the market. Consequently, a
       corporate bond was not possible for sub-borrowers to issue as suggested in the
       report (para. 35), at the time when the loan was contracted. Credit rating
       agencies in India were consulted regarding what instrument would be appropriate
       to utilize under the project.
4.       It may be important to clarify why subloans under the PSIF were
denominated in Indian rupees instead of US dollars (para. 82). The purpose for
the rupee conversion of foreign exchange loans from ADB by the PFIs to the
subloan borrowers was to insulate the subloan borrowers from foreign exchange
risk. In the past, under development financial institution (DFI) loans, the foreign
exchange risk was invariably passed on to subloan borrowers by PFIs,
sometimes with disastrous consequences as subloan borrowers were not in a
position to hedge themselves. Consequently, under the PSIF, the onus of the
responsibility to hedge the foreign exchange risk was passed on to the PFIs who
were better able to cover themselves. There is no currency mismatch as the
subloan borrower simply purchases foreign exchange (about equal to the inflow
from ADB's loan in foreign exchange), with the proceeds of its rupee loan to
finance its importations, that were also readily available in the market due to the
large inflows that India was experiencing after it opened its current account and
the improving currency reserves of the country, while keeping its liabilities in
Indian rupees. The PFIs, on the other hand, hedged their positions by either
entering into a commercial foreign exchange swap or switching the foreign
exchange to finance exporters. Under the Innovation and Efficiency Initiative
(IEI), ADB does the swap or raises local currency through a local bond issue
itself.

5.       On para. 85, quote "5Had the floating interest rate lending been more
actively used, there might have been less instances of prepayment under the
PSIF." unquote. It should be noted that the prepayments occurred mainly
because interest rates for Indian rupees declined rapidly in the domestic market
following the economic slowdown in India. The reverse could have equally
happened under a different economic scenario. Borrowers opt for fixed rates for
long-term loans to avoid the interest rate risk. Consequently, the downside of
unhedging their positions is exposing themselves to possible losses from interest
rate fluctuations. Moreover, the choice between the floating and fixed rates of
interest was at the option of the subloan borrower. Nonetheless, if the point is for
India to have used the floating rate system more extensively in practice at the
time, then the point is well taken. This reflects more critically the broader lesson
for India to have allowed the introduction of hedging mechanisms and of more
innovative instruments to be used in practice in parallel, in order to help mitigate
market risks at a time when it was undergoing financial markets' liberalization.
The introduction of options and futures (derivative instruments) and deregulation
of the insurance industry were policy components of ADB's Capital Market
Development Program in India and the subject of continuing dialogue with the
Government. The phenomenal growth of the options and futures market and
liberalization of the insurance industry as well as pension and provident funds in
India are proofs that India has heeded these lessons well.
