          ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
        Operations Evaluation Department




PROGRAM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORT


                                   IN


                                INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response.
Performance Evaluation Report




Program Number: PPE: IND: 29458
Loan Number: 1506-IND
July 2007




India: Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management
Program




Operations Evaluation Department
                     CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                        (as of 11 June 2007)

             Currency Unit      ­      Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                   Re1.00       =      $0.016
                    $1.00       =      Rs61.61

                             ABBREVIATIONS

ADB      ­     Asian Development Bank
ADTA     ­     advisory technical assistance
APL      ­     Agrocel Pesticides Limited
BIFR     ­     Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
BOO      ­     build-own-operate
BOT      ­     build-operate-transfer
CIP      ­     core investment program
DMF      ­     design and monitoring framework
FRA      ­     Fiscal Responsibility Act
FY       ­     fiscal year
GAIC     ­     Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation
GCEL     ­     Gujarat Communication and Electronic Limited
GDDC     ­     Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation
GDP      ­     gross domestic product
GEB      ­     Gujarat Electricity Board
GERC     ­     Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission
GFDC     ­     Gujarat Fisheries Development Corporation
GHB      ­     Gujarat Housing Board
GIDB     ­     Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board
GIDC     ­     Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation
GIF      ­     Gujarat Infrastructure Facility
GIIC     ­     Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation
GMB      ­     Gujarat Maritime Board
GMDC     ­     Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation
GPDC     ­     Gujarat Port Development Company
GPSDP    ­     Gujarat Power Sector Development Program
GPSRMP   ­     Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program
GSCB     ­     Gujarat Slum Clearance Board
GSCC     ­     Gujarat State Construction Corporation
GSEC     ­     Gujarat State Export Corporation
GSFC     ­     Gujarat State Finance Commission
GSG      ­     Gujarat state government
GSTC     ­     Gujarat State Textile Corporation
GTCL     ­     Gujarat Tractor Corporation Limited
ICICI    ­     Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited
MTFP     ­     medium-term fiscal plan
MTFPF    ­     medium-term fiscal policy framework
MVT      ­     motor vehicle tax
NSDP     ­     net state domestic product
OED      ­     Operations Evaluation Department
OEM      ­     Operations Evaluation Mission
PCR      ­     program completion report
      PIA             ­    poverty impact assessment
      PPER            ­    program performance evaluation report
      PPP             ­    public-private partnership
      PSRP            ­    public sector restructuring program
      RRP             ­    report and recommendation of the President
      SAL             ­    structural adjustment loan
      SDP             ­    state domestic product
      SFC             ­    state financial corporations
      SOE             ­    state-owned enterprise
      SPFRC           ­    State Public Finance Reform Committee
      SRF             ­    State Renewal Fund
      SSN             ­    social safety net
      TA              ­    technical assistance
      TCGL            ­    Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited
      TCR             ­    technical assistance completion report
      TFC             ­    Twelfth Finance Dommission
      TPER            ­    technical assistance performance evaluation report
      UNDP            ­    United Nations Development Programme
      VAT             ­    value-added tax
      VRS             ­    voluntary retirement scheme

                                              NOTES

      (i)     The fiscal year (FY) of India and its government agencies begins on 1 April and
              ends 31 March. FY before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal
              year begins, e.g., FY1996 begins on 1 April 1996.

      (ii)    In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                            Key Words
asian development bank, development effectiveness, indian finances financial reforms, indian
public enterprises reforms, indian state owned enterprises reforms, lessons, madhya pradesh
finances financial reforms, operations evaluations departments, policy evaluations, public
resources management, social safety nets, technical assistance



Director General      B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director              R. K. Leonard, Director, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED

Team leader           P. M. Robertson, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 1,
                      OED
Team members          M. O. Nuestro, Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
                      B. Q. Cafirma, Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation Division 1,
                      OED

                          Operations Evaluation Department, PE-703
                                        CONTENTS
                                                                                       Page
BASIC DATA                                                                                 iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                          v
I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                        1
       A.   Evaluation Purpose and Process                                                 1
       B.   Expected Results                                                               2
II.    DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION                                                           3
       A.   Formulation                                                                    3
       B.   Rationale                                                                      4
       C.   Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                                    5
       D.   Scheduling and Design Changes                                                  6
       E.   Results                                                                        6
       F.   Consultants                                                                   12
       G.   Loan Covenants                                                                13
       H.   Policy Framework                                                              14
III.   PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT                                                             15
       A.   Overall Assessment                                                            15
       B.   Relevance                                                                     15
       C.   Effectiveness                                                                 16
       D.   Efficiency                                                                    17
       E.   Sustainability                                                                17
IV.    OTHER ASSESSMENTS                                                                  18
       A.   Impact                                                                        18
       B.   Asian Development Bank Performance                                            21
       C.   Borrower Performance                                                          21
       D.   Technical Assistance                                                          22
V.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                                             23
       A.   Issues                                                                        23
       B.   Lessons                                                                       26
       C.   Follow-Up Actions                                                             27
APPENDIXES
1.   Analysis of Program and Policy Frameworks of the Gujarat Public Sector          28
     Resource Management Program
2.   Status of Program Compliance with Tranche Release Conditions and Covenants      41
3.   Overview of the Political Economy of Fiscal Reform in Gujarat                   66
4.   State-Owned Enterprise Reform in Gujarat                                        72
5.   Fiscal Consequences of Multilateral Adjustment Lending to States in India       89
6.   Technical Assistance for Restructuring State-Owned Enterprises of Gujarat      108
7.   Technical Assistance for Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment 114
     Corporation
8.   Technical Assistance for Institutional Strengthening of Gujarat Infrastructure 120
     Development Board.
 Attachment:   Management Response

 The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
 conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this
 report. Dr. Govinda Rao and Hari Sridhar were the consultants. To the knowledge of OED
 management, the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report had no conflict of
 interest.
                                                BASIC DATA

                  Loan 1506-IND: Gujarat Public Resource Management Program

Program Preparation/Institution Building
                                                                      No. of
                                                                     Person-        Amount        Approval
TA No.                       TA Name                     Type        Months         ($'000)         Date
2530         Capacity Building of Public Sector         ADTA                          100        06 Feb 1996
             Restructuring Program
2552         Restructuring State-Owned                  ADTA            34            600         02 Apr 1996
             Enterprises of Gujarat
2579         Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat            ADTA            24            500        30 May1996
             Industrial Investment Corporation
2668         Support for Gujarat's Reform of Public     ADTA           75a            600b        23 Oct 1996
             Finances
2716         Institutional Strengthening of Gujarat     ADTA            32            850        18 Dec 1996
             Infrastructure Development Board

                                                                    As per ADB
Key Program Data ($ million)                                      Loan Documents                  Actual
Total Program Cost                                                     250.0                      250.0
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization                                            250.0                      250.0

Key Dates                                                              Expected                   Actual
Reconnaissance                                                                                11­25 Mar 1996
Appraisal                                                                                     17­25 Jun 1996
Loan Negotiations                                                                             14­18 Nov 1996
Board Approval                                                                                   18 Dec 1996
Loan Agreement                                                                                   18 Dec 1996
Loan Effectiveness                                                      Dec 1996                 20 Dec 1996
First Tranche Release                                                   Dec 1996                    Dec 1996
Incentive Subtranche of the Second Tranche Release                     June 1997                     Jul 1999
Final Subtranche of the Second Tranche Release                          Dec 1998                    Dec 2000
Program Completion                                                      Dec 1998                 31 Dec 2000
Loan Closing                                                            Dec 1998                 31 Dec 2000
Months (effectiveness to completion)                                      24.0                     48.0

Borrower: India

Executing Agency: Finance Department of the Gujarat state government

Type of Mission                                                   No. of Missions        No. of Person-Days
Reconnaissance                                                            1                      74
Appraisal                                                                 1                      90
Review                                                                    9                     155
Consultation/Assessment                                                   3                      51
Program Completion                                                        1                      18
Operations Evaluation                                                     1                      40




a
    Of the 75 person-months, the Asian Development Bank financed 48 person-months of national consultants and 3
    person-months of international consultants. The Government of Gujarat financed 24 person-months of national.
b
    The amount pertains to the Asian Development Bank amount only.
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

         For some three and a half decades after independence, the Indian economy grew slowly,
with annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaging around 3.5%. Economic
liberalization reforms in the early 1980s stimulated growth to about 5% per year; however, the
gross fiscal deficit of the national and state governments increased almost twofold through the
1980s, to reach about 9.4% of GDP by financial year 1990. The economic reforms created a
competitive environment for domestic manufacturers and began to put pressure on the many
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) that had been proliferating in national and state commercial
and social development fields under the national Government's socialist policies. Containing the
fiscal deficits of the national and state governments became the focus of structural adjustment
reforms initiated in the 1990s. For the states, this included the need to improve the efficiency of
public expenditure, and to create an environment to encourage private sector participation in
economic growth, in particular infrastructure development.

        Concerned at its dire fiscal condition the Gujarat state government (GSG) established a
high level commission in 1992 with a broad mandate to make recommendations on reforms to
improve the state's fiscal condition. The commission's 1994 report outlined a wide range of
actions, but the state lacked the fiscal space to enact them. In the mid-1990s with national
transfers to the states decreasing, the national Government agreed to allow reform-oriented
states to negotiate loans from multilateral institutions.

        Around the same time, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) was revising its India
country strategy, and agreed for the first time to support state governments on the grounds that
state-focused programs would (i) broaden and deepen lagging state economic and
administrative reforms, (ii) accelerate infrastructure development and industrial restructuring, (iii)
maximize synergy and the multiplier effect of ADB's policy dialogue and project interventions,
and (iv) improve ADB operating efficiency. In 1994, an ADB mission visited four states--
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Punjab, and Tamil Nadu--and selected Gujarat as the first state for ADB
assistance. The 1996 India country operational strategy study outlined a state strategy to
provide support to public resource management reforms that would provide a foundation for
sector-specific loans, particularly in the power and road sectors. The strategy study focused the
scope of resource management support in three areas: fiscal consolidation, SOE reform, and
enabling of private sector participation.

        The Government agreed with ADB's choice of Gujarat, and together with GSG,
requested program loan support to implement the reform program outlined in the 1994 GSG
commission report, as the first stage of a state partnership. During 9 months in 1996, ADB and
GSG formulated the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program (GPSRMP)
including approval of four technical assistance (TA) projects to support the program loan. The
$250 million GPSRMP, funded by ordinary capital resources and including an attached TA, was
approved in December 1996 with a 2-year implementation period.

        The GPSRMP's expected impact was improved public sector mobilization and allocation,
and enhanced efficiency in promoting industrialization for the benefit of the population. The
Program's three outcomes are consistent with the scope defined in the earlier country
operational strategy study: (i) strengthened state finances and their prudent management, (ii)
reformed SOEs contributing to the state economy, and (iii) private sector participation in
infrastructure development in the state.
vi


        The Department of Finance of GSG was the Executing Agency, with a technical
secretariat established to support implementation. Two cabinet subcommittees chaired by the
chief minister were established--a policy level expenditure prioritization committee and an SOE
reform committee, along with a senior state public finance reform committee. The Gujarat
Infrastructure Development Board (GIDB) was established to promote privatization of key
infrastructure sectors.

        The program loan was disbursed in three tranches: $100 million on effectiveness, a
second tranche of $50 million, and a $100 million final tranche. Release of the second tranche
was delayed by 2 years, which subsequently affected the release of the final tranche and
program closure. The GPSRMP had a total of 104 policy actions; 42 were satisfied upon loan
effectiveness. Of the remaining 62 policy actions, 28 were tranche release conditions. The 34
covenants were sequenced with but not tied to tranche release. Three conditions were
amended to enable the release of the final tranche in December 2000, with the planned 2-year
implementation becoming 4 years.

         The GPSRMP is rated as "relevant", being consistent with both the central and state
governments' overall reform agenda, and ADB's country strategy. The program design was
heavily influenced by GSG's own diagnostics and recommendations, contributing to strong
government ownership. Despite several changes of ruling party and chief minister during the
GPSRMP, the Government's commitment to reforms remained. The GPSRMP was designed by
ADB over a relatively short design period, with the TA approved in 1996 providing little
substantive input to the design. Although the overall program logic was sound, the description in
various parts of the report and recommendation of the President was inconsistent, and
insufficient attention was given to the impact of assumptions and risks. As ADB's first
subnational program loan, few lessons can be identified. However, although the considerable
body of experience in national structural adjustment and SOE reform programs was not overtly
drawn upon, the design addressed many international lessons available at that time.

         The GPSRMP is rated as "effective", providing GSG with the impetus to implement
reforms it defined in the early 1990s. Significant exogenous shocks required ex post adjustment
of the Program's fixed nominal fiscal targets. Revenue generation marginally improved, and the
limited expenditure interventions had a limited positive effect. Overall SOE reforms to fully
privatize, merge, or close the operations of SOEs have been more effective than those to
partially privatize. Corporate governance changes have been less successful. Identifying
specific SOEs to be privatized in tranche release conditions was not effective.

        The reforms to encourage private sector participation in the state's infrastructure
development were highly successful, with Gujarat being the first state to enact a law to regulate
private sector participation. This act also gave GIDB statutory authority to develop and oversee
the state's strategic infrastructure development plans. The establishment of an independent
electricity regulatory authority and unbundling of the electricity board provided the foundations
for longer term power sector reform, supported by ADB power sector loans in 2000 and 2006.
Similarly the unbundling of the maritime board opened the door for considerable private
investment in the port sector. Over $5 billion of private capital has been invested in the power,
ports, and roads sectors since the late 1990s. A study of the counterfactual, found in the short
term that the loan did not lead to any significant improvement in the overall fiscal situation in
Gujarat. This econometric analysis needs to be balanced with the impact of the Program on the
culture of reform, including the significant private investment drawn to the state.
                                                                                                vii


       The GPSRMP is rated as "efficient". The actual GSG-financed adjustment costs were
close to the ex ante estimates. Overall TA resources were used in an efficient manner. The
respective policy and technical committees provided appropriate oversight and support.

        The Program is rated as "sustainable" with GSG continuing reforms beyond the life of
the GPSRMP. The Program provided a timely boost to Gujarat's reform agenda in the mid-
1990s, which later suffered as a result of natural disasters and communal disturbances during
2000­2002. The increased pace of private sector investment affirmed the value of establishing
key policy and legal frameworks, and well-resourced institutional mechanisms. The fiscal
consolidation efforts eventually have shown positive results, with the revenue deficit being
phased out by FY2005, and the fiscal deficit down from 8.9% in FY2001 to a more sustainable
3.5% in FY2005. This is consistent with the general trend across India's states, where
significant improvement has resulted from higher Government transfers, implementing the
Government's state debt-restructuring plan, and Gujarat's own efforts. The expectation that the
Program would be replicated in other states was achieved with the World Bank supporting
similar programs in three states and ADB following up in three other states. These experiences
assisted the national Government in revising policies and legislation affecting center­state fiscal
relations.

       Based on these assessments the GPSRMP is rated as "successful."

        The institutional, socioeconomic, environmental, and anticorruption impacts have been
varied. Overall the impact on institutions has been positive with the most significant aspect
being the work of GIDB. All but one of the ad hoc committees performed their functions
satisfactorily. GSG instituted a second phase of SOE reforms under a different institutional
arrangement, drawing respected business leaders into an advisory body. Although the
GPSRMP did not explicitly aim for fiscal space to be used to improve social sector expenditure,
the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) found that the socioeconomic impact was neutral,
with social expenditure not being sacrificed to improve the fiscal deficit. Although the Program
did not include interventions focused on the environment, the significant investment by the
private sector in infrastructure has had some negative environmental (and social) implications.
GSG has not yet approved an environment or resettlement policy to regulate these aspects of
development. Although not explicitly included in the design, a number of the GPSRMP's actions
had positive anticorruption impacts.

         The three TA projects assessed by the OEM were rated as highly successful, successful,
and unsuccessful. In each case, the original time frame was overly ambitious, given the TA
scope, and their linkage to a 2-year program loan. Key features of the TA rated highly
successful were (i) strong government commitment to the success of the institution being
strengthened, (ii) ability of staff to take advantage of high quality consultant advice, and (iii)
readiness of the private sector to take advantage of opportunities to invest in public
infrastructure if the conditions were right. The TA rated as unsuccessful was provided to an
institution that subsequent to TA approval was found to be incapable of performing the functions
for which the TA was designed to strengthen, and the consultants did not perform to the
expected level.

        A number of issues can be identified from the GPSRMP experience. First, the iterative,
long-term nature of reform provides opportunities, but also presents challenges for ADB to
adjust during implementation, and engage beyond the life of a program loan. Second, while
nominal fiscal targets provide a focus for reforms, transparent mechanisms are required to
address the impact of exogenous factors and to ensure conditions are not at variance with
viii


changing government policies. Third, SOE reform requires time, and naming specific SOEs to
be privatized as tranche release conditions holds significant risk. Fourth, a broader range of
opportunities for expenditure reform need to be pursued to complement revenue reform. Fifth,
ADB's resident missions have a significant role to ensure continuous policy dialogue within the
country in complex reform programs; and sixth, how the ADB Board monitors that its concerns
are addressed by Management during program implementation.

        Lessons include (i) public sector reforms require a long-term commitment with flexibility
to respond to their iterative nature, (ii) mechanisms to respond to the effect of exogenous
factors on conditions should be agreed during design, and (iii) public resource management
programs create opportunities to strengthen government's anticorruption efforts.

         In formulating the India country partnership strategy, the OEM recommends ADB's state
support strategy, as revised in the 2003­2006 India country strategy and program, should be
reviewed, including assessing the opportunities to support priority aspects of ongoing state
public resource management reforms and the most appropriate funding modalities to achieve
jointly agreed outcomes.



                                                           Bruce Murray
                                                           Director General
                                                           Operations Evaluation Department
                                               I.        INTRODUCTION

1.      During 1996, the India country operational strategy study 1 of the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) was revised to include, for the first time, an agreement to direct a portion of
financing to the states. The Government of India agreed with ADB's fourfold rationale that state-
focused programs would (i) broaden and deepen lagging state economic and administrative
reforms, (ii) accelerate infrastructure development and industrial restructuring, (iii) maximize
synergy and the multiplier effect of ADB's policy dialogue and project interventions, and (iv)
improve ADB operating efficiency. A strategy to support state fiscal reforms in preparation for
sector-specific loans was proposed. To this end, the ADB Board's approval of a $250 million
loan from ordinary capital resources for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management
Program 2 (GPSRMP) in December 1996 marked the beginning of a strategic shift in ADB
operations in India. This was the first program loan provided by a multilateral development bank
to a subnational government in India or any ADB developing member country.3

A.         Evaluation Purpose and Process

2.     ADB's Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) was conducted 5 years after GPSRMP
closure to assess the achievement of outcomes and impact as defined in the Report and
recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors (RRP) (footnote 2). In doing so, the
counterfactual--the effect on fiscal stability in the absence of the program--was explored. Five
technical assistance (TA) projects were provided to support the reforms; the OEM provided an
in-depth assessment and rating for the three focusing on support for public enterprise reform.4
The findings from an earlier TA performance evaluation report on fiscal management in India,
which assessed the TA supporting finance reforms, is also drawn on. 5 The OEM used four
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) human development report expenditure ratios
to assess changes in public expenditure on social development.6 In response to a Government,
soon after GPSRMP closure, to conduct an independent program assessment, ADB engaged
an Indian research institute to conduct the study. The institute's report formed the basis of an




1
    ADB. 1996. Country Operational Strategy, India. Manila. 17 April.
2
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved
    on 18 December).
3
    The World Bank, United Kingdom Department for International Development, and Japan Bank for International
    Cooperation followed ADB's lead in targeting assistance to states.
4
    The OEM assessed the following TA projects: (i) ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Restructuring State-
    Owned Enterprises of Gujarat. Manila (TA 2552-IND, for $600,000, approved on 2 April); (ii) ADB. 1996. Technical
    Assistance to India for Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation. Manila (TA 2579-IND,
    for $500,000, approved on 30 May); (iii) ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Institutional Strengthening of
    Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board. Manila (TA 2716-IND, for $930,000, approved on 18 December).
5
    ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance for Fiscal
    Management and Tax Administration in India. Manila. Available: http://www.adb.org/Documents/TPARS/IND/tpar-
    ind-2004-05.pdf. Appendix 4 of the TPAR includes an assessment of ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for
    Support for Gujarat Reform of Public Finances. Manila (TA 2668-IND, for $600,000, approved on 23 October
    1996).
6
    The (i) public expenditure ratio--the percentage of state income allocated to public expenditure, (ii) social
    allocation ratio--percentage of total expenditure allocated to social services, (iii) social priority ratio--percentage of
    social expenditure allocated to human priority concerns (education, health, water, and sanitation), and (iv) human
    expenditure ratio--percentage of state income devoted to human priority concerns (the product of the previous
    three ratios). The Gujarat Human Development Report 2004 calculates these ratios based on data from FY1980 to
    FY2001, which the OEM updated to FY2004.
2


assessment report submitted to the Government in early 2002.7 The program completion report
(PCR), prepared in December 2004,8 rated the program successful noting its contribution to the
development of fiscal prudence, tax reform, budgetary controls particularly in treasury
automation, and state-owned enterprise (SOE) reform. The PCR notes the negative impact of
exogenous factors, including national Government policy changes, market factors, and a
devastating earthquake, on achieving and sustaining fiscal reform targets. The OEM to India
was conducted during October­November 2006 with consultants experienced in public finance
and public enterprise reform in India.

B.        Expected Results

3.        The GPSRMP's impact (goal) was expected to be improved public sector resource
mobilization and allocations efficiently used to promote industrialization for the benefit of the
Gujarat population. Four indicators were identified (i) reduction in deficit and improved domestic
resource mobilization, (ii) reorientation of public expenditures to high priority productive sectors,
(iii) creation of an enabling environment to promote private investment, and (iv) higher savings
and investment raising the state domestic product (SDP) projected to grow by more than 6%
annually. The impact would be achieved through three outcomes (objectives): (i) strengthened
state finances and their prudent management, as measured by the state's fiscal deficit being
reduced to 2% of SDP by fiscal year (FY) 1999 by increasing current revenues by about 0.4% of
SDP and proportionately decreasing the current expenditure to SDP ratio annually; (ii) reformed
SOEs contributing to the state economy, measured by the adoption of the Public Sector
Restructuring Program including divestment and restructuring of 23 of Gujarat's 54 SOEs; and
(iii) private sector participation in infrastructure development in the state, as measured by the
introduction of policy, regulatory, and institutional frameworks for power, ports, and roads. The
design and monitoring framework (DMF) is detailed in Appendix 1 (Table A1.1) along with an
analysis of the DMF, policy matrix, and description of the Program in the relevant sections of the
RRP (Table A1.2).

4.      The fiscal consolidation outcome had three outputs: 9 (i) medium-term fiscal policy
framework (MTFPF) implemented with strengthened fiscal policy management, (ii) improved
revenue generation, and (iii) prioritized and rationalized expenditure. Outputs to achieve the
public enterprise reform outcome included (i) institutional mechanisms in place to implement the
Public Sector Restructuring Program, (ii) selected SOEs privatized, (iii) selected SOEs
restructured, (iv) selected SOEs closed, and (v) affected SOE employees provided a social
safety net (SSN). To create an enabling environment for private sector participation, outputs
included (i) an enabling policy and regulatory framework and institutional mechanisms; and (ii)
power, port, and road sector reforms.




7
    ADB. 2002. Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program: An Assessment. Manila. The National Council
    of Applied Economic Research was engaged to conduct the assessment, which is referred to as the postprogram
    assessment elsewhere in this report.
8
    ADB. 2004. Program Completion Report on the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program in India.
    Manila.
9
    The DMF does not contain outputs. Rather it specifies six program components and a series of activities. The OEM
    has reconstructed these outputs from the DMF, RRP, and policy matrix (Appendix 1, Table A1.3) for the purposes
    of this program evaluation report.
                                                                                                                  3


                                II.      DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A.      Formulation

5.       The 1996 the country operational strategy study for India marked a significant shift in
ADB's support to the Government's economic reform agenda by focusing on the need to (i)
address unsustainable national and state government fiscal deficits through fiscal consolidation;
(ii) reform trade and finance sectors; (iii) address infrastructure policy, and regulatory and
institutional gaps; (iv) reform (corporatize or divest) public enterprises to reduce the drain on the
budget; and (v) create a legislative and regulatory enabling environment for restructuring
industries, promoting competition, and increasing private sector participation. This translated
into a recasting of ADB's overall strategic objective to promote efficiency and higher sustainable
growth to improve employment opportunities, while reducing poverty. The national and state
governments had concurrent responsibility for fiscal and structural (including policy, legislative,
and institutional) reforms; progress in the states had been slow.

6.       In 1994 ADB undertook a mission10 to identify potential states for ADB support based on
four criteria: (i) demonstrated commitment to reform; (ii) need in terms of population and
infrastructure; (iii) satisfactory record of project and policy implementation; and (iv) financial
capacity, ability, and willingness to accept ordinary capital resource loan terms and manage
foreign exchange risks. The country operational strategy study outlined three foci of the
proposed fiscal reform strategy: (i) supporting fiscal consolidation, (ii) restructuring SOEs, and
(iii) providing an enabling policy, regulatory, and institutional environment for private sector
participation in infrastructure sector reform. As a result ADB was to lead the way in directly
supporting state fiscal adjustment and structural reforms to be complemented by support to
sectors (energy, roads, railways, ports, and telecommunications) emphasizing structural reform
and fostering public-private partnerships.

7.     Gujarat was the first state selected; a decision influenced by the fact that in 1992 the
Gujarat state government (GSG) constituted the Gujarat State Finance Commission (GSFC) to
undertake a comprehensive review of state finances and provide recommendations on how to
address its deteriorating fiscal condition. The GSFC report, released in April 1994, proposed
substantial reduction in the growth of current expenditure with better planning of executive and
investment outlays, extensive disinvestment in SOEs, and moving some government activities
to the private sector. 11 Fiscal constraints undermined the state's ability to implement these
recommendations. The state's political leadership and bureaucracy were fully committed to
taking action if resources could be found to create the necessary fiscal space. The change in
Government policy allowing states to enter into loan agreements with multilaterals, and the
change in ADB's country strategy to support state reforms created the opportunity. The
GPSRMP became the vehicle, providing international recognition of the reform process that
enabled GSG to take sometimes difficult decisions with ADB support, much needed financial
support to GSG to contribute to the adjustment costs, and technical advice on implementing
reforms.

8.      Being the first state public sector resource management loan, no subnational experience
was available to draw on in India or other developing countries to design and manage the loan,
including setting conditions and covenants, modifying them to take account of exogenous
10
   A mission by staff of the then Programs West 2 Division visited four states--Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, and
   Gujarat--and chose Gujarat. In 1996 ADB decided to expand activities to one or two more states. Madhya Pradesh
   was the second state to be chosen, followed by Kerala in 2002, and Assam in 2004.
11
   Government of Gujarat. 1994. Report of the Gujarat State Finance Commission. Gandhinagar.
4


shocks, instituting a monitoring system, and providing capacity building TA. Two factors
characterize the formulation of the GPSRMP. First, the Program was designed by ADB staff in
conjunction with GSG officials drawing largely on the GSFC recommendations,12 and second, it
was completed over a relatively short time--9 months from reconnaissance to loan agreement.

9.       The ADB Board in approving the GPSRMP recognized the potential demonstration effect
beyond Gujarat, but expressed concern with the precedent of using the program lending
modality at the subnational level, and as a precursor for future sector-specific lending. They
were concerned that reform was a gradual process requiring skillful sequencing of interrelated
aspects and some reforms would require a longer time frame than the 2-year loan, which raised
sustainability issues. However they agreed to the precedent of a three-tranche approach. The
importance of providing information to the public and closely monitoring the multiplicity of
actions and conditionals was emphasized given the risks, including whether the necessary
political will and technical skills existed to reform public finances, and restructure half of
Gujarat's SOEs while ensuring monopolies were not created after privatization. The inclusion of
an SSN mechanism was a positive element to mitigate risks posed for those adversely affected.
However, the Board questioned the effectiveness of the proposed management by committee
arrangements.

B.         Rationale

10.      The rationale for the GPSRMP was sound and well timed to assist GSG implement its
own reform program. After three and a half decades of low gross domestic product (GDP)
growth at 3.5% per year, the Indian economy accelerated to over 5% in the latter half of the
1980s. While the initial impetus to growth acceleration came from economic liberalization, this is
mainly attributed to an expansionist fiscal stance of the national Government, partly contributed
to by a hike in public sector wages in FY1987. The gross fiscal deficit of the national and state
governments steadily increased from 5.9% of GDP in FY1982 to 9.4% in FY1990, and
outstanding liabilities relative to GDP rose from 46.4% in FY1980 to 61.4% in FY1990. However,
this fiscal expansion-led growth was inherently unsustainable, with the fiscal imbalance spilling
over into balance of payments, combined with the sharp increase in oil prices caused by the
Gulf crisis, triggering an economic crisis.

11.     The stabilization and structural adjustment reforms initiated in 1991 required
containment of fiscal deficits by the national and state governments. For the states, in addition
to containing deficits, reforms had to address the issue of enhancing allocation and technical
efficiency in public spending and creating an enabling environment for private sector
participation to accelerate economic growth. Economic liberalization required creation of a
competitive environment for domestic manufacturers. The hardening central finances reduced
resource transfers to states; one mitigation measure adopted was to allow reform-oriented
states to negotiate loans from multilateral institutions. Given that fiscal reform was an inherent
part of the loan negotiations, allowing the states to borrow from multilateral institutions could
achieve the objectives of (i) improving their finances, augmenting outlay on social and physical
infrastructure; (ii) restructuring public enterprises; and (iii) creating an enabling environment for
private sector functioning. GSG's weak fiscal position in the mid-1990s had eroded the
effectiveness and efficiency of public service provision and public investment, preventing GSG
from realistically financing infrastructure that would foster the sort of economic activities that
would allow the state to realize its potential growth. To mitigate the effects of these two factors,

12
     Although one small-scale and three advisory TA projects were approved in 1996, prior to loan approval, they did
     not provide substantial input to the loan design.
                                                                                                                5


GSG decided to open all key infrastructure sectors to private sector participation. The key
elements of the consequently adopted operating strategy were to (i) reduce the state's fiscal
deficit, (ii) reform and restructure public sector enterprises to improve their operating efficiency,
and (iii) support reforms in key infrastructure sectors to attract private investment.

12.     ADB's choice of Gujarat as the first state to work with was appropriate. Gujarat was a
progressive and reform-oriented state, known for its market-oriented culture, presence of
significant private entrepreneurship, and political leadership with a tradition of good
administration and governance. The state had a proactive reform agenda with the GSFC report
waiting to be implemented. By adopting many of the GSFC recommendations as policy actions
(either conditions or covenants), GSG had complete ownership of GPSRMP-supported reforms.
This strategy also helped the general public accept the reforms. Thus, even with several
changes of state government and chief minister,13 GPSRMP-supported reforms never appeared
to be in danger as all parties were equally committed to their implementation.

C.      Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

13.     The adjustment costs resulting from reforms were estimated at about $740 million,
spread over the 2 years of implementation. These included $302 million in revenue foregone
due to tax rationalization and reforms, $413 million in SOE debt settlements, and about $130
million for liabilities and payment to retrenched SOE employees under the voluntary retirement
scheme (VRS) funded by the State Renewal Fund. The balance was for budgetary support to
operationalize the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board (GIDB), and finance project
development and feasibility studies for key infrastructure sectors. At $250 million, the program
loan provided 40% of the estimated adjustment costs. The adjustment costs were expected to
be offset by revenue gains resulting from enhanced tax compliance resulting from lower tax
rates and a wider tax base, reduced subsidies for SOEs, and proceeds from SOE divestment
including sales of assets. The 2002 postprogram review found that actual adjustment costs
appeared to be consistent with and remarkably close to the design estimates (footnote 7, p. 47).
The national Government transferred the loan funds to GSG on a 70:30 loan:grant ratio, with the
loan carrying 11.8% interest and 15 years maturity. The Government assumed the foreign
exchange risk with the transfers treated as additional to annual center­state fiscal transfers.

14.      Overall, implementation arrangements were satisfactory. GSG's Finance Department,
the Executing Agency provided leadership in all aspects of the reform effort. Several new
committees and institutions were established to supervise and monitor program implementation
including (i) a policy level expenditure prioritization committee (chaired by the chief minister) to
review and approve the core investment plan prioritizing social and physical infrastructure; (ii)
GIDB (also chaired by the chief minister) to promote privatization of key infrastructure sectors;
(iii) State Public Finance Reform Committee (SPFRC) 14 to provide advice on fiscal reforms,
solicit private sector views, and create public awareness of tax reforms; (iv) three working
groups to support the SPFRC on tax reform, expenditure management and control, and
computerization and training; (v) a cabinet subcommittee on SOE reform (chaired by the chief
minister with ministers of finance and industry as members) responsible to review and approve
details of modality, scope of divestment, pricing, and structuring of SOEs; and (vi) a technical
secretariat within the Finance Department to service the SOE reform committee.
13
   Between 1995 and 2001 the ruling party changed four times, and the chief minister changed nine times, including
   two periods of central Government-imposed Governor's rule (in 1996 and 1997­1998). Since 2001 both the ruling
   party and chief minister have been unchanged.
14
   Although a Government resolution was promulgated on 28 November 1996 to establish the SPFRC it wasn't
   implemented until September 1998, with its first meeting held in January 1999.
6




D.      Scheduling and Design Changes

15.      The Program was designed to be implemented during 2 years, from December 1996 to
December 1998, with the loan disbursed through three tranches; the first tranche of $100 million
being released on loan effectiveness, 20 December 1996. Each release was triggered by
compliance with specified policy conditions. Although a number of covenants followed in
sequence with certain conditions, their attainment was not bound to the respective tranche
release. The $50 million incentive subtranche of the second tranche was due to be released in
June 1997, however a combination of (i) the impact of the national Government's salary revision
for civil servants negatively affecting the fiscal deficit, (ii) adverse market reaction to SOE
reforms depressing bid offers and delaying the attainment of divestment conditions, and (iii)
changes in GSG delayed the release by 2 years to July 1999. The $100 million final subtranche
of the second tranche, program completion, and loan closing dates were then rescheduled to
December 1999. However, this too would be delayed for another 12 months.

16.      In a report15 submitted to ADB in December 1999, GSG presented the case that "the
program loan should be treated as successfully completed as on 31 December 1999," with 3
months extension to March 2000 to close the Program and release the final tranche. ADB did
not concur with this assessment, believing 12 months would be required to meet the conditions
necessary to release the final tranche. In January 2000, the first of four missions from ADB
headquarters in the year, 16 proposed a set of minimum policy actions required for release of the
final tranche: (i) initiation of the phasing out of power tariff subsidies and determination of
appropriate tariff by the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC), increase in
irrigation rates as a means of restoring the state's fiscal balance, and preparation of a medium-
term fiscal consolidation program; and (ii) fulfillment of policy actions not met under the incentive
tranche but postponed to the second tranche as approved by the ADB Board, including
restructuring of Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation (GIIC). GSG maintained its position
that sufficient progress had been achieved to release the final tranche, and that further delay
would only increase costs with little meaningful benefit.17 Although GSG took actions to meet
sufficient compliance, mission reports and correspondence throughout 2000 reflect its
frustration with ADB's apparent lack of flexibility in interpreting conditions within a broader
reform context. Thus, the 2-year anticipated implementation became 4 years. Design changes
were not affected during implementation, but the four final tranche conditions were amended to
enable its release and program closure.

E.      Results

17.    The Program's achievements are described for the three outcomes following the OEM's
reconstruction of the DMF outputs (para. 4). A detailed analysis of the status of conditions and
covenants at the time of the OEM is provided in Appendix 2.




15
   Finance Department, Government of Gujarat. 1999. Gujarat Public Sector Resources Management Program Loan
   Self Assessment Report. Gandhinagar.
16
   Significant effort was expended by all parties--GOG, ADB (headquarters and resident mission), and the national
   Government during the year to ensure that sufficient compliance was achieved to justify release of the final
   tranche.
17
   GOG strongly urged ADB to fund the proposed Gujarat infrastructure facility, and expressed their displeasure of
   ADB's decision not to provide funding to the March 2000 mission.
                                                                                                                 7


        1.       Strengthened Public Finances and their Prudent Management

18.     This outcome was to be achieved by implementing an MTFPF, improving revenue
generation, and prioritizing expenditure. GSG was expected to reduce the fiscal deficit to 3.5%
of SDP in FY1997 and to 2.7% in FY1998,18 by raising revenues annually by about 0.5% SDP
and proportionately reducing the expenditure to SDP ratio. However, exogenous factors
resulted in neither nominal target being attained. Consequently, adjustments were made to
account for these exogenous factors so that the actual fiscal deficit in FY1998 of 4.2% of SDP
was adjusted to 2.8%, and the FY1999 actual fiscal deficit of 7.3% adjusted to 2.5%. By FY2005
the actual fiscal deficit had been contained at 3.5% of SDP, and the revenue deficit reduced to
0.2% of SDP. (Appendix 3 provides an overview of the political economy of fiscal reform in India
including an analysis of the state's fiscal performance over time).

19.      MTFPF Implemented with Strengthened Fiscal Policy Management. The MTFPF
was formulated in FY1997 and thereafter its progress was assessed with projections revised in
line with base-year data. The SPFRC prepared a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan in
December 2000 for adoption starting FY2002. However, the MTFPF was not linked to the
budget and did not provide a hard budget constraint in a program budgeting sense. The MTFPF
was submitted to the Cabinet for adoption starting FY2002. A draft memorandum of
understanding between GSG and the national Government as per Fiscal Responsibility Act
requirements included an MTFPF based on this plan. The SPFRC was established along with
three working groups on expenditure management and control, tax reforms, and
computerization and training. Reform proposals for value-added tax (VAT), property tax,
octroi,19and improvements in expenditure management and control were submitted to the state
in October 1998. Further studies were undertaken on more strategic management of public
resources and improved containment of the fiscal deficit. A fiscal consolidation plan was
submitted to the state Cabinet. This was used to prepare the draft memorandum of
understanding between GSG and the national Government for the state to avail of the states'
fiscal reforms facility, approved by the Government in 2004.

20.      Revenue Generation Improved. To facilitate VAT introduction, the sales tax rate
structure was consolidated to six categories with four special rates, the turnover tax was merged
with the sales tax, the number of items reduced from 63 to 24, and assessment systems were
simplified by introducing a single-tier system. However, the VAT system was not launched until
1 April 2006 conforming to the structure agreed by the empowered committee of state finance
ministers. During this short time, the VAT has already significantly improved revenue
productivity, with the first 5 months of collections showing a growth of more than 30% over the
corresponding period in the previous year. The stamp duty and professional tax rate schedules
were adjusted with rates for some items reduced or converted to ad valorem rates, and
automatic reckoning mechanisms for valuation of immovable properties were updated. The rate
schedules of tax on goods, passengers, and motor vehicles (motor vehicle tax) changed in
accordance with program conditions leading to a single rate of 4%. GSG further restructured the
motor vehicle tax structure and rates to mobilize tax revenue. Tax rates for omnibuses were
increased in FY2001, stamp duty exemptions for tractors used for agriculture purposes were
withdrawn in FY2003, and sleeper bus coaches were subjected to motor vehicle tax starting in
FY2004. The focus on key municipal taxes included reforming property tax and abolishing octroi
in all local bodies except in municipal corporations due to inability to find a viable alternative.
18
   The tranche condition for FY1999 was at variance with the DMF indicator, which stated 2% of SDP and increasing
   current revenues to 0.4% of SDP in FY1999.
19
   Octroi taxes are levied on goods crossing (entering or leaving) municipal authority boundaries, and date back to
   Roman times.
8


GSG established the Directorate of Taxation. The Sales Tax Department, operation and the
budget divisions of the Finance Department, and Office of Directorate of Accounts and
Treasuries were fully computerized and interconnected.

21.     Increasing user charges to improve cost recovery focused on increasing (an
effectiveness condition), and later revising (a final tranche condition) power tariffs to maintain a
3% rate of return on the fixed assets of Gujarat Electricity Board (GEB), and increasing irrigation
charges by 50%. The latter, a final tranche condition, was met with higher irrigation charges
starting February 2001.20 Further, the OEM was informed that GSG is considering establishing a
water regulatory authority once irrigation water from the Narmada Dam is fully flowing.

22.     The political sensitivity of increasing power tariffs constrained action on the GEB
condition and became the subject of intense discussion between GSG and ADB throughout
2000,21 eventually resulting in an amendment to enable the release of the final tranche. The
GSG self-assessment report (footnote 16) recognized the problem created by power sector
subsidies. In FY1998 they accounted for 1.5% of SDP, and the delay in restructuring the power
sector was a contributing factor to a higher than expected fiscal deficit. The report restated
GSG's commitment to reform the sector, but stated that reducing subsidies "has to be a gradual
and smooth process so as not to create social upheaval and bitter public perception. [Both
bureaucrats and politicians were aware of the need to contain subsidies, but] it will probably
take some more time before the target of eliminating subsidies is fully achieved" (footnote 16. p.
20). The report proposed that ADB review this condition as GERC was considering a tariff
increase, and concluded with a proposal to defer the objectives of power sector reform and
reduction in subsidies to the power sector restructuring loan, which was then being negotiated
with ADB. ADB did not agree. The effectiveness condition had not been met, and the proposal
to do away with the condition completely would be extremely problematic for both the GPSRMP
and the proposed power sector loan, particularly as a number of ADB Board members had
commented on the importance of power sector reform at the time of GPSRMP approval. A
resolution was found (para. 16), with GSG taking a decision to cap power sector subsidies at
Rs11,000 million in the FY2000 state budget. After 6 months of public hearings, GERC
increased electricity tariffs including a substantial upward revision of agriculture tariffs in
October 2000, after completion of local government elections. But even then the revisions did
not enable GEB to attain 3% returns on fixed assets.

23.     Expenditure Prioritized and Rationalized. This was supposed to be achieved with the
introduction of an annual rolling core investment plan, which was to insulate expenditures with
high social rate of return and therefore considered as priority from ad hoc expenditure cuts.
However, the core investment plan was not implemented seriously and largely remained a
paper exercise. The GPSRMP also required increasing the ratio of capital expenditure to net
SDP (NSDP) from 2.1% in FY1996 to 2.6% in FY1998. This was met with capital expenditure
rising to 3.2% of NSDP in FY1999 and was 3.1% in FY2000. The expenditure continues to be
adequately protected with capital expenditure estimated at 3.4% of NSDP in FY2005.

        2.       Reformed SOEs Contribute to the State Economy

24.     This outcome was to be achieved by establishing the required institutional mechanisms
to implement the reform plan, privatizing, restructuring, or closing selected SOEs, and providing
20
   Irrigation charge increases were by crop, with rice increasing by 300%, sugarcane by 250%, and other crops by
   200%.
21
   In the 4 August 2000 Project Implementation Review Meeting between ADB and the national Government's
   Department of Economic Affairs, this was the only issue recorded as requiring action by the department.
                                                                                                                9


an SSN for affected employees. Appendix 4 details SOE reform achievements of which merger
and full privatization were the most successful. Although the complexities of SOE closure were
not fully appreciated, operating closure was attained. The SSN was limited to provision of
severance payment to all affected employees.

25.       Institutional Mechanisms in Place to Implement the Public Sector Restructuring
Program. Two bodies were established to implement and monitor SOE reforms. A policy level
cabinet subcommittee chaired by the chief minister with the ministers of finance and industries
and the chief secretary was mandated to review and approve the (i) extent of shareholding to be
divested in enterprises identified for divestment, (ii) acceptance of a successful bidder's offer,
(iii) price at which shares would be offered to the public, (iv) restructuring plans to be adopted
for enterprises, and (v) enterprises to be closed. A technical secretariat for privatization headed
by a full time ex-chief secretary with four technical staff was established with logistic and
technical support from Gujarat State Investment Company, the apex holding company for all
GSG equity investments in SOEs. The secretariat, which was administratively responsible to the
Finance Department, was mandated to advise the department and line ministries with
administrative control of SOEs, develop proposals for SOE reforms, prepare valuations of SOEs,
and provide negotiation and contracting support during the privatization process. External
consultants with specialized SOE reform and privatization skills were engaged to support the
secretariat.

26.      Selected SOEs Privatized. This involved two approaches (i) fully privatize three SOEs
(Gujarat Tractors Corporation Limited (GTCL), Gujarat Communication and Electronics Limited
(GCEL), and Gujarat State Export Corporation Limited (GSEC); and (ii) divest 51% of GSG's
shareholding in two SOEs, GIIC and Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation Limited (GMDC).
A 60% equity stake in GTCL was transferred to Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. The remaining
GSG stake in GTCL, to be transferred to Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. in line with the sale-and-
shareholder agreements, has not yet been transferred. In September 2004, the company was
referred to the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, which declared GTCL a "sick"
company, its net worth having been completely eroded due to accumulated losses. After two
failed attempts to privatize GCEL, GSG decided to close it with all but 16 employees opting for
VRS and retrenched by December 2000.22 GCEL's operations were suspended from February
2001 and an official liquidator was appointed in February 2002, with the process of disposal of
fixed assets of the company in progress. Secured creditors including banks and financial
institutions have initiated legal steps to recover their dues. These have yet to be settled. With a
57% equity stake in GSEC, GSG successfully tendered for a strategic partner. After protracted
negotiations, including offering a third of GSEC's employees a VRS package to make the deal
more attractive, GSG transferred management control by offloading its entire equity stake in
February 2004.

27.    GSG, which held 100% equity stake in GIIC and GMDC, proposed to divest
management control by initially offering 26% to the public by mid-1997, and an additional 25%
by June 1998. Both these enterprises were expected to concurrently seek technical
collaboration with private sector companies with relevant expertise and experience, while
implementing organizational restructuring to improve their performance. While national laws
precluded GSG divesting management control in an SOE in the mineral subsector, it did
succeed in divesting a 26% stake in GMDC through a public offer of shares in October 1997.
However, it has not been able to offload any of its shareholding in GIIC.

22
     However, 11 of the 16 remaining employees approached the courts for alternative employment with some of these
     cases still pending at the time of the OEM.
10




28.     Selected SOEs Restructured. The three approaches included (i) partially divest
between 26% and 74% of GSG's stake and restructure GSFC, Gujarat Industrial Development
Corporation (GIDC), and Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation Limited (GAIC); (ii) merge
selected SOEs; and (iii) lease selected services of one SOE. While GSG succeeded in reducing
its stake in GSFC to 49.9% following a public offering, it has been unable to offload its
shareholding in GIDC and GAIC. Given the strategic nature of GIDC operations in ensuring
industrial development in the state, GSG decided not to proceed with divestment. The
unbundling of GIDC operations was delayed because of employee resistance coupled with
limited interest shown by private sector investors in operating industrial estates. GSG decided
not to divest GAIC as it implements GSG's agriculture sector subsidy programs, which have a
social and development objective. Restructuring measures were implemented with all
manufacturing units being closed with GAIC retaining only its fertilizer distribution activities. All
202 employees belonging to the closed units received VRS.

29.     The merger of Gujarat Industries Marketing Corporation Ltd. and Gujarat Leather
Industries Corporation Ltd., which were both involved in marketing leather and footwear goods
produced by rural artisans, was effective by January 2001. The merger of Gujarat State
Handloom Development Corporation Ltd. with Gujarat State Handicrafts Development
Corporation Ltd. to form Gujarat State Handloom and Handicrafts Development Corporation Ltd.
to develop the handicraft and handloom sector by providing marketing support to the artisans
and weavers was effective in FY2002; 68 employees received VRS as part of the restructuring
process. The proposal to restructure Gujarat Slum Clearance Board (GSCB) by transferring its
functions of constructing low-income housing, including assets and liabilities to Gujarat Housing
Board, and slum clearance activities to nongovernment organizations and local bodies was
refined. Given GSCB's huge bad loan portfolio due to nonrecovery of loans from its low-cost
houses, the decision to transfer GSCB's assets and liabilities to Gujarat Housing Board could
not be implemented. However, all GSCB operations have been discontinued and its employees
redeployed to an independent cell of Gujarat Housing Board responsible for recovering GSCB
overdue loans. These redeployed employees have been appointed on contract; their current
remuneration is 50% of that received as GSCB employees. The amount recovered by the cell
will be deposited in an escrow account after meeting the administrative expenses of the cell,
and will be used to settle the outstanding GSG loans received by GSCB. Local bodies have
taken on slum clearance activities. Nongovernment organizations have been less active than
planned. GSG's proposal to sell or lease a number of assets of Tourism Corporation of Gujarat
Ltd. could not be concluded due to litigation arising from inadequate drafting of the lease
agreements. The report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for FY2004 resulted in a
decision to close all unviable Tourism Corporation of Gujarat units with 52 employees being
offered VRS. GSG provided Rs9.5 million as subsidies to the corporation during FY2004.

30.      Selected SOEs Closed. Although closure was not defined in the design, it was inferred
that at least operating closure would be achieved and steps toward financial closure would be
initiated. Gujarat State Textile Corporation Ltd. mills have been closed; however around Rs6.34
billion of GSG investments in equity and loans remained blocked in the corporation as of
FY2004. Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation Ltd. was closed with the plant and machinery
disposed of, but its land has not yet been finally transferred to GSG. Around Rs1.1 billion of
GSG investments in equity and loans remained blocked in the corporation as of FY2004.
Gujarat Fisheries Development Corporation Ltd. was closed with all assets and liabilities
transferred to Gujarat Fisheries Corporation Association. All employees were given VRS and
subsequently redeployed in Gujarat Fisheries Corporation Association. About Rs40 million of
GSG investment in equity and loans were blocked in Gujarat Fisheries Development
                                                                                                                 11


Corporation as of FY2004. Gujarat State Construction Corporation Ltd. was closed with all but
14 employees given VRS. Around Rs110 million of GSG investments in terms of equity and
loans given remained blocked in the corporation as of FY2004. In all cases the unblocking of
GSG investments will only be possible after each SOE's liabilities and dues are settled. This
was still unresolved at the time of the OEM.

31.     Affected SOE Employees Provided an SSN. The SSN program was not implemented
as GSG believed that the VRS package for displaced employees was designed to ensure that
the returns from the investment of VRS compensation would protect the entire remuneration
being earned by the employees prior to their retrenchment. However, the OEM learned that the
VRS compensation together with the earnings from alternative employment in the informal
sector is estimated to have protected around 65% of the earnings of displaced employees.23

         3.       Private Sector Participation in Infrastructure Development

32.     This outcome would be achieved by creating the policy and regulatory framework for
private sector participation in key infrastructure sectors along with the necessary institutional
mechanisms to facilitate participation; and by initiating key reforms in power, ports, and road
sectors. The private sector responded positively to the policy and regulatory developments
under the Program and the specific reforms in the three targeted sectors prepared the
foundation for further ADB financing.

33.     Policy and Regulatory Framework, and Institutional Mechanisms. GIDB was
established under the GPSRMP in June 1995 as a nodal agency for infrastructure development
in the state to formulate policy, identify and evaluate priority infrastructure projects including
conducting feasibility studies, attract private investment, and coordinate with concerned
government departments. GIDB was chaired by the chief minister, with ministers of relevant
infrastructure and industrial development departments as members. In 1998, GIDB launched a
development strategy for the state entitled Vision 2010 outlining more than 380 priority
infrastructure and industrial development projects totaling Rs1,170 billion. In 1999, GIDB was
given statutory status with the passing of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act,
formalizing its mandate as the preeminent infrastructure development agency in the state,
establishing a legal framework for private sector participation in infrastructure development, and
outlining the competitive bidding processes for various modalities including build-operate-
transfer.24 In 2004, GIDB reviewed Vision 2010 and produced the Blueprint for Infrastructure in
Gujarat 2020 where "Gujarat shall enter into an exciting era of accelerated economic growth
and cohesive social development creating benchmarks for the rest of the country." 25 The
document outlines a 5-year schedule of projects across eight sectors requiring total investment
of Rs1,700 billion of which 85% are in the energy, water and irrigation, and transport sectors.
GSG's projected funding is Rs368 billion, with the national Government providing Rs5.5 billion
(mostly in railways) and private sector Rs583 billion, leaving a funding gap of Rs693 billion.

34.    Power, Port, and Road Sector Reforms. GERC was established in November 1998,
created as an autonomous commission to regulate the power sector including setting tariffs.
However the political implications of increasing power tariffs constrained action until late 2000
when the state budget included a decision to cap power sector subsidies and substantially
23
   Discussions with SSN experts associated with the closure of GSTC and similar programs in other states.
24
   Gujarat was the first state to provide a legal framework for modalities such as build-own-operate-transfer, build-
   own-operate-maintain, build-lease-maintain-transfer, and rehabilitate-own-transfer. The act established procedures
   for international competitive bidding and direct negotiation with limited competition.
25
   Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board. 2004. Blueprint for Infrastructure in Gujarat 2020. Gandhinagar.
12


increase agriculture tariffs. However, this delay undermined the aim of improving the financial
viability of GEB, including the condition that GEB make 3% returns on its fixed assets. This
condition was subject to intense discussion between GSG and ADB throughout 2000, and was
eventually amended to enable the release of the final tranche of the GSPRMP. The
promulgation of the Gujarat Electricity Industry Reorganization and Regulation Act in October
2000 led to initial steps in restructuring GEB with the creation of two power distribution circles.
Power sector investment planning was addressed through the GIDB Vision 2010 and the
updated Blueprint for Infrastructure in Gujarat 2020. Since the late 1990s, 10 independent
power producers have entered the sector with a total investment of $2.85 billion, increasing
generation capacity by approximately 3,000 megawatts. The power sector reforms were
politically sensitive and directly affected rich and poor rural constituents, as evidenced by the
substantial time for the autonomous GERC to increase tariffs. However, once done and with the
encouragement to private sector participation through legal and regulatory changes under the
GPSRMP, additional support was provided by both the national Government and ADB to
continue reforms in the sector.26

35.      With more than 1,600 kilometers of coastline providing 30% of India's minor and
intermediate ports, a significant volume of goods pass through Gujarat's 13 main ports, all but
one being managed by Gujarat Maritime Board.27 The GPSRMP conditions and covenants to
increase port changes, develop an appropriate regulatory framework for public-private port
development, restructure Gujarat Maritime Board, and establish an independent port services
development corporation to handle dredging and related port services were achieved. Revised
port charges enabled GSG to repay a loan from 1982 Gujarat Maritime Board capital assets.
The regulatory changes along with the Infrastructure Development Act attracted more than $2
billion in private investment in port infrastructure including development of four greenfield sites
with associated transport (rail and road), power, and industrial development.

36.      The 1996 state roads policy emphasized the need for private sector investment. A
private sector cell was established in the Roads and Bridges Department to process road
projects. A positive response resulted in seven major roads and bridges being constructed with
a total investment of about $250 million by 2002.

F.      Consultants

37.     For the TA projects attached to the GPSRMP loan as well as the stand-alone TA,
consultants were engaged in accordance with the Guidelines on the Use of Consultants by
Asian Development Bank and Its Borrowers (2006, as amended from time to time). The TA,
Support for Gujarat Reform of Public Finances28 encountered problems with the selection of
consultants. Only two domestic firms expressed interest, and the selected firm was found to be
largely inadequate, with changes in the team and production of poor quality outputs (footnote 5).

26
   On 13 December 2000 at the same ADB Board meeting that approved the release of the final tranche of the
   GPSRMP, the Board approved a $200 million project loan, and a $150 million program loan supporting power
   sector reform in Gujarat. ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a
   Proposed Loan to India for the Gujarat Power Sector Development Project. Manila (Loan 1804-IND, for $200,000,
   approved on 13 December). ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors
   on a Proposed Loan to India for the Gujarat Power Sector Development Program. Manila (Loan 1803-IND, for
   $150,000, approved on 13 December). GEB also received an incentive grant of Rs5,360 million under the national
   Government's Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Program scheme.
27
   The largest port at Kandla is administered by the national Government's Ministry of Shipping and Ports. Gujarat
   Maritime Board administers the other commercial ports along with 40 minor fishing ports.
28
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Support for Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances. Manila (TA 2668-
   IND, for $600,000, approved on 23 October).
                                                                                                                 13


In July 1996 an international firm was selected for the TA to restructure SOEs; 29 it fielded
consultants in November 1996. Their performance was generally satisfactory showing a high
degree of professionalism, working well with senior government officials, and producing high
quality reports with recommendations generally well accepted by GSG (Appendix 6). An
international firm was selected for the TA to enhance the capacity of GIIC; 30 it fielded
consultants in February 1997. Although GSG rated their performance generally satisfactory,
ADB rated their performance lower (Appendix 7).31 An international firm was selected for the TA
to provide institutional strengthening for GIDB in May 1997; 32 it fielded consultants in June 1997.
Both GSG and ADB found the performance of consultants as generally satisfactory, building a
very productive working relationship and producing high quality outputs. However, numerous
contract variations were required and the team leader was replaced, delaying project
implementation by 17 months (Appendix 8).

G.       Loan Covenants

38.    The Program was scheduled to be implemented over 2 years, from December 1996 to
December 1998, with the loan disbursed through three tranches to be released on compliance
with specified policy conditions. The GPSRMP had a total of 104 policy actions, of which 42
were satisfied to trigger the release of the first tranche of $100 million upon loan effectiveness
as of 20 December 1996. Of the remaining 62 policy actions, 28 were conditions for tranche
releases--11 for the incentive tranche of the second tranche and 17 for the final tranche of the
second tranche; and 34 were covenants, sequenced with but not linked to tranche conditions--
seven with the incentive tranche and 27 with the final tranche (Appendix 2 includes an
assessment of the status of loan covenants).

39.     The specificity of some tranche conditions and covenants created difficulties, particularly
when external factors or political expediency conspired to hinder their achievement. For
example, detailing the divestment strategy for specific SOEs as tranche conditions undermined
GSG's negotiating position and contributed to delay in achieving conditions. In approving the
incentive tranche the ADB Board acknowledged GSG's efforts, and deferred the achievement of
the two outstanding SOE reform incentive tranche conditions to the final tranche.33

40.     The final tranche progress report noted that further progress on the two deferred
conditions had not been achieved and proposed to waive the condition relating to divestment of
GSEC, however just prior to the Board meeting GSG informed ADB that agreement had been
reached on the sale price for more than 30% of GSG's equity in GSEC and the proposed waiver
was withdrawn. The Board did approve two amendments: (i) the condition to fully privatize
29
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Restructuring State-Owned Enterprises of Gujarat. Manila (TA 2552-
   IND, for $600,000, approved on 2 April).
30
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation.
   Manila (TA 2579-IND, for $500,000, approved on 30 May).
31
   This was due to the consultant's initial draft manuals creating considerable confusion about some terms and
   conditions of a proposed ADB investment loan facility, when ADB had not committed to make any loans, nor had it
   identified potential terms and conditions at that time.
32
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development
   Board. Manila (TA 2716-IND, for $930,000, approved on 18 December).
33
   Board members who either abstained or voted against approval raised at least two commonly held key concerns.
   First, the request for approval of tranche release (July 1999) coincided with the sanctions imposed on the
   Government of India (and Pakistan) for nuclear tests by the Group of 7 and other nations. Some argued that the
   tranche represented new lending and therefore was subject to sanction. The second was the fact that the Board
   was being requested to approve a tranche release when 2 of 11 conditions had not been met. This was reported to
   be a common occurrence with fast-disbursing policy-based lending with members arguing that approval to waiver
   or defer brings ADB's credibility into question.
14


GCEL was amended to seek approval of the closure of GCEL, and (ii) the condition to reduce
GSG's shareholding in GIIC to not more than 49% was amended to GSG "will undertake the
operational and financial restructuring of GIIC prior to privatization."

41.     Finally the political implications of taking actions necessary to increase power tariffs to
meet the relevant tranche condition were deemed to be too difficult at the time and arguments
were made that tariff setting had been depoliticized through the establishment of an
independent electricity regulation commission under the Program. GSG despite its best efforts
has not able to meet this condition. Consequently the condition to revise power tariffs to
maintain a 3% rate of return on GEB's fixed assets was amended to "establish a process to
enhance the level of costs recovery in the power sector." Immediately following the Board's
discussion and approval of the final tranche release, it discussed and approved the first sector
loan to Gujarat, a $350 million power sector loan and associated TA that included actions to
address GEB's financial viability and build on the regulatory initiatives under the GPSRMP.34
These amendments led one ADB Board member to ask if ADB has mechanisms to monitor and
implement the amended conditions after program closure, then the amendments are to ensure
the release of a $100 million tranche rather than to meet program objectives.

H.       Policy Framework

42.     An important unforeseen exogenous policy change that adversely affected Gujarat's
finances was the sharp increase in public sector wages following implementation of the Fifth
Pay Commission's recommendations in FY1997. Indeed, in FY1998 the finances of all state
governments sharply deteriorated following these pay increases. Stagnant tax revenues and a
decline in national Government transfers relative to the SDP aggravated the situation. This was
compounded by increasing deficits and debt, and rising interest rates, contributing to a sharp
deterioration in the fiscal health of the state requiring the deficit target to be revised. After
GPSRMP closure, following the recommendation of the Eleventh Finance Commission, the
Ministry of Finance designed a medium-term fiscal reform program requiring the states to
reduce the ratio of revenue deficits to their total revenues by 5 percentage points every year to
gain eligibility for receiving a portion of grants. Because of problems in the design of this
performance-linked grants program, 35 the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) recommended
replacing it with an incentive-based debt-restructuring program. To be eligible to qualify, the
states are required to pass a fiscal responsibility act entitling them to restructure and
consolidate market loans and loans from the national Government at a substantially reduced
interest rate. A state could also avail of the benefits of waiver of loan repayment due for the next
5 years beginning FY2005 directly linked to the reduction of its revenue deficit.




34
   ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loans and
   Technical Assistance Grants to India for the Gujarat Power Sector Development Program. Manila (Loans
   1803/1804-IND, for $350 million and three TA projects totaling $1.1 million, approved on 13 December).
35
   Rao. M. G. 2004. Linking Central Transfers to Fiscal Performance of States. Economic and Political Weekly 1 May:
   1820­1825. Rao argues that the size of incentive-linked transfers is too small to influence state fiscal performance,
   multiple schemes segment the incentive, and the scheme design is faulty as it fails to address the causes of
   deteriorating state fiscal performance.
                                                                                                                      15


                                  III.      PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT

A.       Overall Assessment

43.    The OEM rates the GPSRMP overall as successful. 36 By closure, the Program's
outcomes had by and large been achieved. The GPSRMP provided the stimulus to reform,
enabling Gujarat by 2006 to achieve the fiscal deficit targets set by the TFC for FY2008, with an
expected substantial revenue surplus from FY2006. SOE reforms were beginning to show
dividends and private sector investors were responding positively to opportunities created by
legal and regulatory changes in key infrastructure sectors. The Program's financial and human
resources had been efficiently utilized and many of the reform measures were being sustained.
The expectation that the Program would be replicated in other states was also achieved.37 The
OEM overall rating matches that of the PCR.

B.       Relevance

44.     The GPSRMP is rated as relevant (footnote 36). The GPSRMP supported the national
Government's overall economic reform agenda with the states, and was consistent with the
Ninth Five-Year Plan (1995­2000), other national policies, and agreement for multilateral
funding agencies such as ADB to provide support directly to state governments. The Program
built on the recommendations of GSG's own analysis of solutions for its fiscal condition as
embodied in the 1994 GSFC report. This resulted in strong state ownership of the reform
program supported by the GPSRMP; ownership that was to survive three changes of ruling
party and nine changes of chief minister from 1995 to 2001. The Program was consistent with
ADB's institutional development objectives of supporting economic growth and the India country
strategy, in particular on reducing infrastructure constraints by supporting the development of an
effective policy, regulatory, and institutional environment, and improving infrastructure
availability and quality of service.

45.     The GPSRMP was designed over a very short period, and the overall program logic was
sound with respect to the three components--fiscal reform, SOE reform, and creation of an
enabling environment--but the logical framework was not well constructed. Little documentary
evidence is available on consideration of alternative fiscal policy options, particularly on the
expenditure side (for example, addressing subsidies, state pension liabilities, or instituting
expenditure performance measurement and reporting systems). A 2-year time frame was overly
ambitious given the scope of the reform process, in particular the time required to effectively
implement SOE restructuring and closure. As this was the first state policy-based loan
supporting fiscal reform, India had little experience to draw on. However, considerable
international experience with SOE reform38 was available internationally, but was not referred to
in the design. Despite that, a range of SOE reform options were assessed and implemented,

36
   Overall performance is based on four criteria, relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
   was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: irrelevant (0), less relevant (1), relevant (2), and highly
   relevant (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with highly successful > 2.7,
   successful 2.7 < S < 1.6, partly successful 1.6 < PS < 0.8, and unsuccessful< 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines for
   Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
37
   As outlined in Appendix 5, the World Bank supported reforms in Uttar Pradesh (2000), Karnataka (2001), and
   Andhra Pradesh (2002). ADB supported programs in Madhya Pradesh (1999), Kerala (2003), and Assam (2004).
   Revisions to the eleventh and twelfth finance commission awards and the Fiscal Responsibility Act drew on
   GPSRMP experiences.
38
   For example, the 1989 issue of World Development 17 (5) was entitled Privatization and included eight articles on
   public enterprise reform focusing primarily on issues relating to privatization in the developing world. Although the
   experiences being discussed were for national SOEs, many of the lessons were equally applicable to state SOEs.
16


consistent with some of the key lessons from that experience. Institutional limitations were
recognized, and the TA39 that proposed to build capacity was relevant.

C.       Effectiveness

46.     The GPSRMP is rated as effective.40 The nominal fiscal deficit targets were negatively
affected by exogenous political economy and natural disaster factors--pay commission awards,
decreased national Government transfers, an earthquake, and communal disturbances. After
adjustments for these factors, the deficit figures were achieved. However, as recognized by
ADB staff in their presentation to the ADB Board for the final tranche release, perhaps
specifying targets in this manner was not wise. It was not the only measure for achievement of
the outcome of strengthening the state's public finances and their prudent management, but it
received the most attention. The effect of reforms is not merely direct and immediate, but may
strengthen over time and these estimates do not capture the indirect and long-term effects. In
Gujarat, the reform process helped the state to gear up to the requirements of the national
Government's fiscal adjustment plan, based on the recommendations of the eleventh and
twelfth finance commissions. Compared to the situation immediately after the earthquake and
communal disturbances in 2001 and 2002, the situation of both revenue collections and
expenditures improved so that compared to the situation before the pay revision in FY1997, in
FY2005 the ratio of revenue to NSDP was higher by 0.7 points and the expenditure ratio lower
by 0.9 points.

47.      GSG largely succeeded in implementing SOE reform, particularly for the enterprises
identified for full divestment and merger. With regard to SOEs identified for closure, operating
closure was achieved, with financial and legal closure awaiting completion of the liquidation
process. This is to be expected given the time required. GSG was relatively less successful in
carrying out reforms of enterprises identified for partial divestment, in part because the naming
of SOEs in tranche release conditions made GSG's negotiations for a reasonable price difficult
when investors knew that the pressure of time was on their side. A broad political consensus
remains on the need for SOE reforms to more effectively utilize resources and make the public
sector more responsive. Phase II of SOE reforms continues with an independent expert
committee making recommendations to GSG.

48.     Promulgation of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act, formalizing GIDB's
mandate as the preeminent infrastructure development agency in the state, and establishing a
legal framework for private sector participation in infrastructure development, was a significant
achievement in creating an enabling environment. Developing port, road, and power policies;
establishing an electricity regulatory authority; and unbundling Gujarat Maritime Board all led to
increased investment in their respective sectors.

49.     In a study of the counterfactual, the econometric analysis of structural adjustment loans
on individual states, after controlling for other exogenous factors, found in the short term the
loans did not lead to any significant improvement in the overall fiscal situation in any of the six
states receiving them (Appendix 5).41 The study notes the response to fiscal stress is influenced

39
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring. Manila (TA 2530-
   IND, for $100,000, approved on 6 February).
40
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: ineffective (0), less effective (1), effective (2), and highly
   effective (3).
41
   The states of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Kerala--ADB, and Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh--
   World Bank, were compared with the balance of the 15 major states in India, which did not receive such state
   multilateral loan support.
                                                                                                                             17


by the structure of incentives faced by states and political economy factors. The analysis of
revenue and fiscal deficits shows significant interstate variations with the fiscal deficit
consistently deteriorating when off-budget deficits due to power sector losses are correctly
included. However, the study did not find a significant relationship between the amount of
development expenditure and the size of state revenue or fiscal deficits. In Gujarat, an attempt
at expenditure compression was not significant. Tax performance did not show any significant
improvement, and the reforms did not result in enhancing nontax revenues from user charges
and returns from state enterprises. However, as the period of analysis for the study was limited,
the results could change over the medium term when the reform measures impact fully on the
state's revenues and expenditures.

D.       Efficiency

50.     The Program is rated as efficient.42 The loan was provided to help GSG finance the
adjustment costs of reform--lost tax revenue, SOE reform liabilities, cost of VRS and SSN for
retrenched employees, and budget support for GIDB--estimated to be $740 million. Although
GSG and the national Government requested $300 million, ADB agreed to $250 million. The
actual adjustment costs were covered by GSG, and were close to the ex ante estimates
(footnote 7, p. 49). Tax revenues began to increase in FY2000, even though the VAT was not
implemented until 2006. SOE reform saved GSG more than $110 million in SOE employee
wages. However, some $173 million in outstanding GSG investments in equity and loans
remain blocked in the four SOEs undergoing closure. More than 22,000 employees received
VRS costing around $116 million with VRS valued at between Rs100,000 and Rs590,000 per
employee ($2,272­$13,409). Contrary to GPSRMP design, the SSN to retrain and counsel
retrenched employees did not proceed as GSG considered the VRS package sufficient to
enable employees to adopt alternative employment. With one TA rated as highly successful
(footnote 32), two as successful (footnotes 29 and 39), one as partly successful (footnote 28),
and one as unsuccessful (footnote 30), overall these resources were efficiently used (paras. 67­
71). In terms of process efficiency, the Finance Department and respective policy and technical
committees provided appropriate oversight.

E.       Sustainability

51.     The Program is rated as sustainable.43 Gujarat stands out among Indian states for its
strong reform attitude. All political parties in the state are agreed on the broad thrust of reforms,
and the national Government continues to maintain a policy environment encouraging state
fiscal responsibility. Gujarat historically had a greater promarket orientation that other states,
and many of the reform initiatives under the Program were formulated by the state,
underpinning commitment for their continuation. The cyclone, earthquake, and communal
disturbances through FY2000­2002 distracted the state from the reform process. However,
from FY2003 the reform process was put back on track. In FY2001, Gujarat, at 7% of NSDP,
had the highest revenue deficit and, at 8.9% of NSDP had the highest fiscal deficit among the
states. By FY2005, the revenue deficit was phased out, and fiscal deficit was reduced to 3.5% in
conformity with the target recommended by the SPFRC. The finances of all states in India have
shown significant improvement with more than 57% of improvement due to higher transfers and
implementation of the TFC debt-restructuring plan, and 43% due to states' own efforts. In
Gujarat the situation is similar with more than 50% of the improvement due to higher central
42
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: inefficient (0), less efficient (1), efficient (2), and highly efficient
   (3).
43
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: unlikely sustainable (0), less likely sustainable (1), sustainable
   (2), and most likely sustainable (3).
18


transfers and debt-restructuring benefits contributing another 11%. Thus, almost two thirds of
the improvement in the state finances since FY2003 was due to TFC recommendations, and
only one third improvement was due to the state's own effort. Capacity building to introduce the
VAT is likely to significantly enhance revenue productivity of the tax system. The effort will be
particularly rewarding if the state takes up the challenge of building a systematic management
information system from the VAT returns. Although this improvement took place after GPSRMP
completion, the Program gave a boost to a reform culture, which has been sustained.

52.    All political parties in Gujarat agree that state enterprises should exist only in cases of
market failure ensuring that adequate safeguards against state failure are in place, and that
state ownership is not a substitute for regulation. GSG has initiated a second phase of SOE
reform under the guidance of a body of independent experts. The responsibility to provide an
SSN, at least in terms of adequate severance pay to start a new livelihood, has been
successfully handed over to the SOEs, and the confidence their adherence to this system
creates to those potentially affected is expected to assist in furthering these reforms.

53.     The third component of reform--creation of an enabling environment for the participation
of the private sector in infrastructure provision--has gone beyond that envisaged in the Program.
GIDB has worked with zeal to create an enabling environment. With limited follow-on assistance
from the World Bank, the capacity of GIDB to develop legal, regulatory, and implementation
frameworks was strengthened. The progress in attracting private capital across a range of
sectors including water supply, gas transmission and distribution, information technology, power,
ports, and roads has been impressive (paras. 32­34).

                                IV.      OTHER ASSESSMENTS

A.     Impact

       1.       Impact on Institutions

54.     The Program helped to create institutional capacity to undertake fiscal reforms. For
example, the SPFRC was established in 1996 to advise the Finance Department on fiscal
reform implementation. In addition to its interim recommendations in October 1998 on matters
relating to introduction of the VAT, property tax, and octroi, the SPFRC deliberated on prudent
expenditure management and strengthening the control process. It submitted its final report in
December 2000, reworking the sustainable level of the fiscal deficit to 3% of GSDP or 3.5% of
NSDP. To achieve the task by FY2005, the SPFRC developed the medium-term fiscal
framework, which is updated annually. Thus the medium-term fiscal plan was initiated in Gujarat
much before other states, but limited progress has been made in introducing the medium-term
fiscal plan at the department level. The Finance Department faces a challenge to turn this
exercise from a mechanical and revenue and fiscal deficit reduction focus, to one of output-
focused performance budgeting effectively prioritizing expenditures. This is linked to building
capacity in budget formulation, implementation, monitoring and control systems, and institutions;
and strengthening treasury management. The Program had a positive impact on Finance
Department capacity to manage tax reforms, particularly for SOE restructuring, and preparing
for the recent introduction of the VAT.

55.     In November 1998, GSG appointed a senior review committee for employment
restructuring. The committee undertook the review of all departments, boards, corporations, and
grants-in-aid institutions to identify surplus and redundant positions. The review of the actual
implementation showed that only about 50% of the positions identified as surplus were
                                                                                                                 19


abolished. Similarly, another committee appointed in 1999 to identify schemes that have
outlived their utility submitted its report in March 2000; the SPFRC endorsed its
recommendations. However, little progress has been made in abolishing such schemes.

56.     A cabinet subcommittee to restructure SOEs chaired by the chief minister and assisted
by an independent secretariat was established along with the State Renewal Fund and VRS to
provide an SSN for employees in SOEs undergoing privatization. These have helped create
policy and institutional frameworks for public sector restructuring. In the second phase of SOE
restructuring, the subcommittee is assisted by an independent expert committee chaired by a
respected entrepreneur that recommends restructuring options for the remaining 30 SOEs in the
state.

57.     GIDB continues to play an important role in maintaining an enabling environment for
private sector participation in infrastructure development, providing strategic advice as well as
effectively forging public-private partnerships in infrastructure projects. Gujarat continues to lead
other Indian states in this area and GIDB has played an important role in this. In the power
sector, the establishment of an autonomous regulating authority, GERC, was a significant step
in a long and politically fraught reform process, which by the mid-2000s was beginning to show
positive results.

           2.       Socioeconomic Impact

58.     Poverty reduction was not an explicit objective of the Program. However, successful
fiscal consolidation measures were expected to generate fiscal space for improved allocation for
social services. While the fiscal deficit projections were not met during the program period,
social services expenditure was not sacrificed to meet deficit shortfalls (Appendix 3 includes an
assessment of the impact of fiscal reforms on key human development ratios). The incidence of
poverty in Gujarat is lower than the national average with the percentage of Gujarat's population
living below the poverty line reduced during the 1990s from 22% to 13% in rural areas, and 28%
to 16% in urban areas. 44 Approximately 4.2 million rural and 1.5 million urban poor are
estimated to have moved above the poverty line during the same period. The high economic
growth and relatively strong employment figures have contributed to the relatively low incidence
of poverty in the state. Migration is a major coping strategy of people living in environmentally
degraded regions with poor nonfarm employment opportunities. With Gujarat's growth strategy,
it has become a magnet for migration from tribal regions, poor agricultural and fishing areas, as
well as small urban centers. This migration seems to enable migrant households to survive in
the lean season, which has helped reduce the incidence of poverty in the state.

59.    The GPSRMP-supported fiscal management reform explicitly focused on the
compression of fiscal deficits and ignored the reprioritization of expenditures to achieve human
development goals. Although separate program components dealt with tax and expenditure
reforms, and to some extent capital expenditures, the Program did not have any provision to
protect spending on social sectors when expenditure compression had to be made. Social
expenditures are easy to reduce when expenditure compression as a part of fiscal adjustment is
implemented.

60.     The public expenditure ratio, measuring the percentage of state income that goes into
public expenditure, increased over the long term with a marked increase during FY1996­2000

44
     Datta. K. L. and S. Sharma. 2000. Level of Living in India. Planning Commission. New Delhi. GOG's Blueprint for
     Infrastructure in Gujarat 2020 cites a state-wide figure of 14% living below the poverty line in 2003.
20


from 19.6% to 33%, although the FY2000 and FY2001 figures were boosted by the response to
the early 2001 earthquake. Since FY1999, this figure has been maintained around the UNDP
norm of 25%. The social sector ratio measuring the percentage of total expenditure allocated to
social services is marginally higher in FY2004 than in FY1991, but has remained between 5 and
8 points below the UNDP norm of 40%. However, it showed slight upward movement during the
first 3 years of the Program and of course in FY2000 and FY2001. Of some concern though is
the trend of the social priority ratio, which measures the percentage of social expenditure
devoted to human priority concerns (education, health, water, and sanitation). Although well
above the UNDP norm of 50% since FY1991, being around the mid-70% range until FY1996, it
fluctuated through the program period dropping 10% over 4 years as a result of a succession of
natural disasters, and a further 18% in FY2001 as a result of the large-scale communal
disturbances in early 2002, before settling at around 60% after FY2002. The human
development ratio, the product of these three ratios, measuring the percentage of state income
devoted to human priority concerns, has shown long-term improvement with a rapid rise during
the program period.

61.      The socioeconomic impact of SOE reforms was mitigated by VRS measures, in
particular the provision of severance pay to retrenched employees. Although included in the
design, activities such as retraining and counseling were not implemented. All employees were
left to their own devices to deal with the experience of being retrenched and finding alternative
employment. The financial effect of the closure of a number of SOEs on the people and small
business owners living and working close to these SOEs was not addressed. Again although
planned in the Program, a study was not undertaken to assess the socioeconomic impact of
SOE reforms on employees.

62.     As part of the preparation of policy-based program loans, ADB introduced a poverty
impact assessment (PIA) tool in 1995 to assess the direct short- and long-term impact of policy
measures on the poor in terms of demand for labor, net public transfers, and prices of and
access to goods and services. The PIA identifies a series of assumptions and associated
mitigation measures in defining potential impact. The GPSRMP was one of the first loans to
include a PIA as a supplementary appendix. Its PIA was constructed as a final step in the
formulation process, rather than as a design tool linked directly to the DMF. The PIA notes that
with the exception of SOE divestment, and revision of power and water tariffs, most policy
actions will have a neutral short-term effect on the poor, with all having positive medium- to
long-term effects. The State Renewal Fund-funded SSN will mitigate the negative divestment
effects. The PIA argues that the Program's targeting of increased outlays for social and
economic services will contribute to poverty reduction by providing a basis for sustained
economic growth and development. The GSPRMP focused on economic growth in productive
sectors; improvement of public resource allocations to social sectors was not mentioned as an
indicator in the DMF (para. 58). At best, the allocation to social services was not cut as a result
of reform measures (para. 59 and Appendix 5).

       3.      Impact on the Environment

63.     The Program, categorized as environmental category B, had no direct environmental
impact. While this is strictly correct, as a result of successfully creating an enabling environment
for public-private partnerships in developing the state's infrastructure and industrial base, a
number of large projects have been implemented. Today Gujarat does not have an environment
or a resettlement policy to govern these aspects of the state's development.
                                                                                                                  21


         4.        Impact on Anticorruption

64.     In the late 1990s, the profile of the impact of corruption on the public sector was rising as
evidenced by the reaction in the development community to formulate policy positions and
provide assistance to developing member countries directly supporting anticorruption initiatives.
ADB's governance policy, 45 approved in 1995, recognized that corruption needed to be
addressed through a governance framework. ADB's anticorruption policy was not approved until
1998. 46 Although the GPSRMP did not specifically identify how policy actions might support
GSG's anticorruption endeavors, in retrospect the Program included a number of measures that
would contribute to reducing the incidence of corrupt practice by government officials. Some
examples include (i) implementing a range of measures to simplify the taxation system and
computerize its administration; (ii) upgrading budget policy formulation, planning, management,
and control systems; and computerizing the various revenue, expenditure, treasury, and debt
accounts; (iii) introducing contentious measures to raise electricity tariffs, and creating an
independent regulatory authority to address subsidy abuse; and (iv) closing loss-making SOEs
and improving corporate governance aspects of those remaining in operation.

B.       Asian Development Bank Performance

65.     ADB's performance is rated as satisfactory.47 After the commendable effort from ADB
staff and GSG counterparts to design the Program, without the assistance of preparatory TA,
ADB's monitoring through headquarter missions was variable over the first 3 years of
implementation. The first review mission fielded after loan approval in December 1996 was in
May 1997, followed by a second in September 1997, a third in September 1998, and another in
March 1999. This was a time of political change in the state, and the role of India Resident
Mission staff in monitoring throughout the Program was essential. However, in 2000 the
intensity of ADB monitoring missions increased significantly to reach agreement on what
constituted sufficient compliance for the final tranche release. This was partly in response to
GSG's assessment of progress in a report submitted to ADB in December 1999 with a request
to extend the loan closing date by 3 months to March 2000. GSG proposed that the necessary
conditions had been satisfied, and where this was not the case proposed amendments to
conditions to avoid the significant additional costs full compliance would entail. Agreement was
eventually reached that the loan closing date would be extended to 31 December 2000 with a
minimum set of conditions to meet ADB Board requirements. During this period ADB Board
members undertook a mission to India, including a visit to Gujarat, during which Board members
emphasized the importance of meeting agreed conditions. Once conditions were met,
disbursements were made in a timely fashion.

C.       Borrower Performance

66.     The performance of GSG, including the Finance Department as Executing Agency, was
rated as satisfactory (footnote 47). The Finance Department met loan administration
requirements. The various institutional mechanisms were established and performed their
functions, although the delay in establishing the SPFRC was considerable. The decision for
GIDB, rather than its administrative department, to be the Executing Agency for TA to
strengthen GIDB (footnote 34), was unusual. Government officials were proactive, supportive of
the program reforms, and available for discussion, including with the OEM some 5 years after

45
   ADB. 1995. Governance: Sound Development Management. Manila.
46
   ADB. 1998. Anticorruption Policy. Manila.
47
   Based on a four-point scale of unsatisfactory, less than satisfactory, satisfactory, or highly satisfactory.
22


program closure. In late 1999, GSG submitted a detailed progress report outlining the reform
achievements. After program completion, at the national Government's request, ADB conducted
an independent review of the GPSRMP in 2001 to provide lessons for other states (footnote 7).
This was a sound initiative, and reportedly informed reform options being considered by the
Government at the time.

D.         Technical Assistance

67.     ADB provided $2.73 million for four stand-alone TA projects and an attached TA to the
loan designed to build institutional capacity to implement the reforms. All four stand-alone TA
projects were approved in 1996 in relatively quick succession prior to loan approval. After the
first small-scale TA, the following three were advisory rather than project preparatory, providing
limited input to the program design. The OEM conducted in-depth analysis of the three TA
projects supporting SOE reform (Appendixes 6, 7, and 8), and an earlier TA performance
evaluation report analyzed the TA supporting finance reforms (footnote 5). This section includes
a summary of the five TA projects approved to support the GPSRMP drawing on these
assessments.

68.     Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring (footnote 39). This small-scale TA
was to develop the capacity of GSG officials in designing and implementing the SOE reforms
exposing policy makers, implementers, and other concerned groups to institutional frameworks
for privatization. Two senior officials attended a 10-day course on options, techniques, and
financing of privatization, at the Asian Center for Development Studies in Malaysia; and another
attended a 1-month course on privatization and regulatory reforms at Harvard University. A 3-
day workshop on SOE restructuring and privatization for 40 mid-level officials was conducted by
the Indian Institute of Management in Gujarat. This small-scale TA was rated as successful in
exposing key officials to issues pertaining to SOE reforms. While most officials were involved in
the reform process during the Program, they have since been transferred or left government
service.

69.    Restructuring of State-Owned Enterprises of Gujarat (footnote 29). This TA was to
strengthen the Technical Secretariat responsible for managing SOE reforms. The OEM rates
the TA overall as successful. It was consistent with the GSG Public Sector Restructuring
Program and ADB's India country strategy. A successful mix of experienced international and
national consultants and the use of appropriate training methods enabled GSG to implement
SOE reforms. Manuals and training materials prepared under the TA continue to be updated
and used in the subsequent phases of SOE reform (Appendix 6).

70.    Capacity Enhancement of the Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation (footnote
30). The TA aimed to enhance GIIC's capacity to develop and finance infrastructure projects in
Gujarat. Although the TCR rated the TA generally successful, 48 the OEM rated it as
unsuccessful. Ensuring that audits of SOEs' finances were up-to-date was not conducted
systematically under the Program. In the case of GIIC, this was particularly unfortunate. When
the TA was completed, GIIC was found to be in dire financial straits. As a consequence, all
lending was suspended, staffing was reduced, and the focus was on debt recovery. The TA
consultants conducted training, and prepared manuals and procedures for GIIC's prior role.
However, given the shift in focus, these were unused. Although GIIC has been able to reduce its
debt burden over the past 5 years, the GSG phase II SOE reform task force has recommended
the corporation be closed. No action had been taken at the time of the OEM (Appendix 7).

48
     This is the equivalent of "successful" on the current 4-point scale.
                                                                                                     23




71.      Support of Gujarat Public Finance Reforms (footnote 28). The TA aimed to build
institutional capacity of the Finance Department; improve budget policy, planning, management,
and control systems; and modernize and computerize the tax and expenditure divisions. The TA,
rated generally successful in the TCR, delivered important inputs to GSG's effort to reform
revenue and expenditure management. The TCR indicates that the TA reports and workshops
provided important inputs to Gujarat's public finance reform process, although they came late,
due to implementation delays and lack of government support--the 2.5-year delay in
operationalizing the SPFRC meant the TA consultants did not have an appropriate counterpart
to receive feedback on policy recommendations.49 The postprogram assessment (footnote 7)
indicates that the TA enhanced the technical capacity of Finance Department officers to deal
with the complexities of budget management; however it notes that ADB overlooked the large
sales tax exemptions given by GSG as an incentive to investors during the program period, the
impact of which weakened overall fiscal performance. The TA performance evaluation report
rated the TA as partly successful, recognizing it delivered a few good although not particularly
innovative outputs, but as the consultants operated in isolation from GSG, the TA failed to
significantly build capacity within the Finance Department.

72.     Capacity Building of GIDB (footnote 32). This TA was attached to the loan to build
GIDB capacity to play a strategic and nodal agency role in formulating infrastructure policies
and promote private sector participation in infrastructure development. The OEM rated the TA
as highly successful. GSG prioritized the establishment of a sound policy and regulatory
framework, and administrative mechanisms to stimulate private sector investment in public
infrastructure. The TA was consistent with ADB's India strategy and in particular the GPSRMP
outcome. GIDB was able to utilize the experience and lessons identified during the TA to put in
place a legal framework for public-private partnerships. Sector policies, procedures, and
manuals contributed to ensuring order, transparency, and equal access in developing such
partnerships. A sound mix of consultant inputs and training methods ensured outputs were put
to good use. GIDB continues to provide quality services leading infrastructure planning and
development in the state (Appendix 8).

                         V.       ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.         Issues

73.     Strategic Support to Reform. As suggested by the ADB Board, the timing and
sequencing of reforms are issues. The original 2-year time frame was extended to 4 years, and
a number of reforms continue some 10 years after the design phase. While the duration of a
specific intervention is an issue, and clearly a 2-year design frame is insufficient for such
complex reforms, a broader strategic issue relates to ADB's support for reform. After completion
of the GPSRMP, ADB did not provide any follow-up support.50 The observation of one Board
member was that the amendments to the final tranche conditions appeared to be to close the
Program rather than meet reform objectives. This raises the question of whether ADB was more
committed to the reform process or the Program that was supporting those processes. The lack
of additional TA resources to respond to changing needs during implementation or after closure
suggests that the commitment was to the latter. By the time the GPSRMP had closed, a similar
program loan had been approved in a second state, and another was in the early stages of
preparation in a third state. From a country partnership strategy perspective, ADB and the

49
     The consultants finished their fieldwork in January 1999 as the SPFRC held its first meeting.
50
     For example, the World Bank provided assistance to GIDB after conclusion of the ADB TA.
24


national and respective state governments should assess the degree to which ADB can be a
strategic partner in public resource management reform over the long term, recognizing that the
nature and scope of support will change over time.

74.      Design. The logic of three outcomes--fiscal consolidation, SOE reform, and creation of
an enabling environment for private sector participation--to contribute to the impact was sound.
However, the descriptions of the GPSRMP in the RRP text, DMF, and policy matrix were
inconsistent. 51 The RRP text states one objective, three components, and three outputs;
whereas the DMF details six component statements and no output statements, and the 57
activities are a mix of rephrased conditions and covenants. The GPSRMP was designed as
ADB introduced the DMF as a mandatory requirement. As may be expected with a policy-based
loan, the policy matrix appears to be the key design tool, with the DMF completed as a
documentation requirement. However, a policy matrix is not constructed using the DMF logic
that each level (from activities to outcomes) must contain sufficient conditions to achieve the
next level. Rather, the policy matrix defines a set of necessary, but not always sufficient, policy
actions to produce a desired reform within a policy area.52 The policy actions, many of which
become tranche conditions or covenants, were a mix of measurable outcomes, outputs, and
processes. While some of the monitoring indicators are appropriate, a number are `activities'
and some are outside the control of GSG. Generic assumptions and risks are identified, but are
not clearly distinguished to enable mitigation measures to be developed to address risks.

75.     Quantitative Fiscal Targets. In designing a fiscal reform program, should fiscal targets
with monitorable indicators be tranche conditions, or should conditions be limited to the reform
processes to achieve fiscal consolidation? This question was raised in ADB's postprogram
assessment (footnote 7) and the PCR (footnote 8). In the GSMRP, both quantitative fiscal deficit
targets and processes such as tax and expenditure reform and restructuring of public
enterprises were tranche conditions. Indeed, a case can be made for including both the nominal
outcomes and processes as conditions because the degree to which the reform processes are
implemented determines the desired outcomes. However, recognizing that such outcomes can
be influenced by a variety of factors that may be within or beyond the control of the states is
important. In the case of Gujarat for example, the target variable was the fiscal deficit and the
size of fiscal deficit can be varied by the state government by not paying out the subsidies or
other dues to state enterprises including GEB, or collecting tax revenues in advance, or
delaying contractors' payments. Furthermore, insufficient provision was made in the design to
take account of national Government policy shifts.

76.    Setting Fiscal Targets. The targeted fiscal deficit of 3.5% of SDP in FY1998 and 2.7%
in FY1999 appeared to be derived on the basis of a broad judgment rather than from the
application of any model. It is also not clear that the targeted reforms in tax, expenditure, SOE,
and other policies were sufficient conditions to enable the state to reduce its fiscal deficit to the
targeted level. The target seems to be too restrictive and setting a restrictive target could
constrain resources for public spending on investment in much-needed infrastructure. In fact,
when no control is placed on the over-revenue deficit and only the fiscal deficit target is fixed,

51
   Unfortunately based on OED evaluation findings and review of the draft RRPs for proposed programs, this issue
   remains today. For example the 2005 Panel Report to Management on the Quality-at-Entry of ADB Projects and
   Country Strategies Approved 2004­2005 recently completed by OED, which finds "the criterion of development
   objectives, evaluability and sustainability [in projects] was one of the weaker areas with only two-thirds of the
   projects assessed rated as satisfactory or better" (p. 14).
52
   For example, policy actions to achieve a reform outcome may need to be sequenced over a period longer than a
   loan's agreed duration. The policy actions to prioritize and rationalize expenditure were not sufficient to achieve this
   output.
                                                                                                  25


the constraint on infrastructure spending could be even more binding. The state could not
comply with the target mainly due to exogenous shocks, and the SPFRC reworked the target
based on its sustainability model at 3.5% for FY2005. Even the TFC's target was that the states
taken together should phase out their revenue deficits and limit the fiscal deficit to 3% of GDP
by FY2008.

77.     Conditions at Variance with Policy. When a nominal fiscal deficit target is fixed in a
condition that later is at variance with the target set by the national Government in its fiscal
restructuring plan for the states, resolution is required. When the program conditions were
designed, the Government had no set targets for the states. However, based on the
recommendation of the Eleventh Finance Commission, the Government initiated incentive-
linked grants requiring each of the major states to reduce its ratio of revenue deficit to total
revenues by 5% every year for the 5 years beginning FY1999. In Gujarat, the GPSRMP was
seen as an additional target that had to be reworked, first to adjust for the effect of natural
calamities, and later based on the recommendation of the SPFRC to conform to its sustainability
conditions.

78.      SOE Reform. The most difficult area of reforms for the Indian states is restructuring of
SOEs. GSFC had done considerable work and identified the units for privatization, restructuring,
or closure. However, the audited statement of accounts of SOEs were in arrears by an average
of 8 years, so judgments on the most appropriate reform for each SOE were made in the
absence of complete knowledge of financial status. Where closure was proposed, its meaning
was not clearly defined. Within a 2-year program time frame, the best that could be achieved
would be operating closure. Financial closure would be expected to take at least 3 years and
legal closure 5 years. Operating closure was achieved with as expected financial and legal
closure awaiting the completion of the liquidation process, which in some cases has yet to be
settled.

79.     Naming of SOEs. Identifying SOEs for privatization or partial divestment in tranche
release conditions negatively affected GSG's negotiating position with investors submitting bid
prices well below enterprise valuation in the knowledge that GSG was under pressure to come
to an agreement for ADB to release a loan tranche. The adoption of a two-stage process of
divestment with an interval of 1­2 years between each stage assumed that the second stage
would produce higher value realization. However, the risks included GSG changing its position
to divest the balance due to policy changes or the transfer of key officials, and change in the
investor's interests due to internal policies or market forces. In the cases of GTCL and GMDC,
these risks appeared to be realized, questioning the value of adopting this approach.

80.      Expenditure Reform. Where the ultimate objective of fiscal reforms is to accelerate
growth and reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, a balance between revenue and
expenditure reforms is required. For example, sales tax exemption incentives estimated to
aggregate to 50% of the fiscal deficit were overlooked, and addressing power sector subsidies,
which rose sharply during the Program, were deemed to be too politically difficult to address.
Subsidies have a significant impact on a state's fiscal condition but are politically difficult to
address. Future programs need to look carefully at subsidies during design, and formulate a
strategy including a proactive public awareness campaign. The Program's fiscal management
reform focused unduly on the compression of fiscal deficits, and paid insufficient attention to
reprioritization of expenditures to achieve human development goals. Preparing a medium-term
fiscal plan that is not linked to the budget limits the ability to affect program budgeting and exert
more control over expenditure compression interventions. The Program did not have any
provision to protect spending on social sectors when expenditure compression had to be made.
26


Social expenditures are often the first to be reduced when expenditure compression is
implemented as a part of fiscal adjustment. In Gujarat, the allocation to social priority areas
decreased from FY1999 to FY2001, with the reduction being particularly severe in FY2001,
partly due to the earthquake in January 2001, but more importantly due to large-scale
communal disturbances in February 2002. Given the systems introduced under the Program to
prioritize spending, considerable effort at restructuring expenditures is expected in the coming
years.

81.     Continuing Reform. The iterative nature of reform creates opportunities to deepen and
broaden aspects of reform including: (i) continuing the reform of stamp duties and property
taxes; (ii) finding an alternative to phasing out octroi; (iii) taking advantage of the opportunity to
extend the medium-term fiscal plan to all departments, to prioritize expenditures, and more
importantly insulate socially productive expenditures on human development and physical
infrastructure from ad hoc expenditure compression measures; and (iv) implementing
performance-based budgeting, making departments accountable for their expenditure against
measurable outcomes.

82.    ADB Board. A correlation exists between the lessons reported in the PCR, the
postprogram assessment, this OEM, and some of the issues raised by the ADB Board in
approving the GPSRMP. A review of the minutes of Board meetings discussing progress reports
does not refer to concerns raised in the meeting approving the loan. This raises the question of
how Management responds to ensuring that the Board's concerns are addressed during
implementation, and how the Board monitors that its concerns are being addressed when
progress reports are discussed.

B.     Lessons

83.      Strategic Commitment to Reform. Public sector reforms are an iterative process over
5­10 years. While the OEM rated the GPSRMP successful, the 2-year design provided
insufficient time to achieve the reform agenda, and did not adequately anticipate the complexity
of implementation or the impact of exogenous factors. This is equally applicable to SOE
reforms, where neither the technical complexity nor the time required to implement different
SOE reform options, was adequately recognized in the design. At the time of the OEM, about 10
years after the Program was designed, SOE reforms continued. Reforms require a long-term
commitment combining loan and adequate grant resources in different configurations in
response to the progress of reforms. Ideally, an indicative allocation of additional resources
should be programmed at the design stage.

84.     Quantitative Targets are important to focus reform and its inherent processes. However,
if quantitative targets must be used as loan conditions or targets in national-state reform
agreements, the assumptions and limitations of such targets, along with transparent
mechanisms to address the impact of exogenous influences, need to be clearly defined in the
design. This applies equally to process conditions focusing on developing systems and
institutional capacity, where the magnitude, sequencing, and pace to achieve the outcome may
also require renegotiation during implementation. Institutional mechanisms are required to
adequately respond to changes during implementation that materially affect loan conditions.
This may include Management having the flexibility to make adjustments to ensure achievement
of outcomes without having to revert to the ADB Board. An alternative is to focus loan conditions
at a broader level of balanced budget over the cycle and use quantitative targets as indicators
over a longer period.
                                                                                           27


85.      Exogenous Factors. Central Government policy change or natural calamities are
exogenous factors that are not highly improbable risks, but rather events that are reasonably
likely to occur in the medium term. Perhaps they should be treated more like assumptions than
risks. Irrespective, policy actions, tranche conditions, and covenants should be individually
assessed in terms of the effect exogenous factors could have on them and mitigation measures
designed accordingly. However, as the impact of natural disasters is particularly difficult to
estimate and mitigate, mechanisms to review conditions and covenants either negatively or
positively impacted by such factors need to be clearly specified in the design.

86.     Align Reform Targets. A state lending program by multilateral institutions,
constitutionally must involve the national Government, which is the Borrower, onlending to the
states. Mechanisms need to be in place to align reform targets between ADB, the state, and
central Government. This also requires flexibility within ADB for Management to make
adjustments required to achieve outcomes.

87.      Anticorruption. Public resource management programs provide an opportunity to
explicitly target revenue and expenditure reforms to support GSG's anticorruption agenda.

C.         Follow-Up Actions

88.    By the fourth quarter of 2007, in formulating the India 2007­2010 country partnership
strategy, the OEM recommends that ADB's state support strategy as revised in the 2003­2006
country strategy and program53 should be reviewed to assess opportunities to support priority
aspects of ongoing state public resource management reforms, and the most appropriate
funding modalities to achieve jointly agreed outcomes.




53
     ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program (2003­2006): India. Manila.
28        Appendix 1



ANALYSIS OF THE PROGRAM AND POLICY FRAMEWORKS OF THE GUJARAT PUBLIC
                SECTOR RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

                             Table A1.1: Design and Monitoring Framework

                                                                  Monitoring
Design Summary                Measurable Indicators               Mechanism               Assumptions or Risks
1. Goal

Improve public sector        Reduced deficit and              Finance Department         Political acceptability of fiscal
mobilization and             improved domestic resource       to prepare reports on      stringency and tax reforms
allocation, and enhance      mobilization                     the Medium-Term            being taken to mobilize
efficiency of its use to                                      Fiscal Policy              domestic resources
promote industrialization.                                    Framework (MTFPF)
                                                              and tax reforms that
                                                              will mobilize additional
                                                              resources

                             Public expenditures              Expenditure Priorities     Sector ministries/
                             reoriented to high priority      Committee will             constituencies acceptance of
                             productive sectors               monitor reorientation      the reorientation of public
                                                              of public expenditures     expenditures

                             Enabling environment             Gujarat Infrastructure     Timely operation of GIDB and
                             created that promotes private    Development Board          its ability to effectively
                             investment                       (GIDB) to coordinate       coordinate rather than
                                                              with sector ministries     encroach upon domain of
                                                              to monitor                 sector ministries
                                                              development of policy
                                                              environment

                             Increased savings and            Gujarat Bureau of          Success of the MTFPF is
                             investment to assist in          Statistics generates       contingent on stable political
                             raising the state domestic       statistics that will       and external environment to
                             product (SDP), which is likely   facilitate monitoring      allow for steady economic
                             to grow by more than 6%          trends in investment,      growth. Exogenous shocks
                             annually                         savings, fiscal            such as adverse weather and
                                                              accounts, SDP, and         national policies, which are
                                                              infrastructure             outside the ambit of the state,
                                                              indicators                 could have an adverse
                                                                                         impact on growth and fiscal
                                                                                         stability and environment for
                                                                                         the private sector.

2. Program Objectives

Restore and sustain          Gujarat's fiscal deficit to be   Finance Department         Achievement of desired
fiscal stability, and        reduced to 2.0% of SDP by        to provide budget          reduction in fiscal deficit while
improve fiscal               1999/2000 through increase       documents and              undertaking key structural
capabilities and             in current revenues by about     undertake regular          reforms of taxes and other
management.                  0.4% of SDP and a                monitoring of the          areas that entail high
                             proportionate decrease in        MTFPF to indicate          adjustment costs that have to
                             current expenditure/SDP          compliance with the        be financed by the budget
                             ratio annually                   associated policy
                                                              simulations
                                                                                                      Appendix 1           29


                                                                     Monitoring
Design Summary                  Measurable Indicators                Mechanism              Assumptions or Risks
Reduce the size of the         Public Sector Restructuring       The Technical             No political and labor
public sector in               Program (PSRP) adopted,           Secretariat for           resistance of SOE reforms
commercial activities,         which includes privatization      Privatization to          and timely development of
and introduce more             or divestment and                 oversee and advise        capabilities across concerned
competition and                restructuring of 23 of the 54     on implementation of      agencies to implement SOE
efficiency in state-owned      SOEs                              the PSRP and provide      reforms
enterprises (SOEs).                                              progress report on
                                                                 SOE reforms               Conductive capital market
                                                                 cabinet subcommittee      conditions to allow for
                                                                 to approve reform         success of the SOE public
                                                                 recommendations           issues at the scheduled
                                                                                           timetable

Create a conductive            Sector policy, and regulatory     Each sector               Development and resolution
environment to augment         and institutional framework       ministry/parastatal       of national outstanding issues
private sector                 introduced for three key          involved in               of the private sector policy
participation in critical      infrastructure subsectors,        development of            framework that supports
infrastructure projects.       including power, ports, and       power, roads and          evolution and direction of the
                               roads                             bridges, and ports to     state policy
                                                                 provide the respective
                                                                 sector policies and       Appropriate and timely
                                                                 proposals to the Asian    capacity building at sector
                                                                 Development Bank          ministries and parastatals to
                                                                 (ADB), Finance            allow for the development
                                                                 Department , and          and implementation of
                                                                 GIDB                      policies


3. Program
   Components

To achieve desired             Finance Department to             Finance Department        Weakness in fiscal
reduction in fiscal deficit,   introduce tax reform              to provide finance bill   management and delays in
agree to                       proposals and tariffs for         with details on new       strengthening of expenditure
                               power and irrigation, agreed      tax measures and          and tax wings
(i) reform state and           upon with ADB in 1997/98          notification for tariff
municipal taxes,               budget, on expenditure side,      revisions, while          Revenue growth could be
                               Finance Department to adopt       Expenditure Wing to       adversely affected by the loss
(ii) enhance cost              stringent controls on current     provide CIP report        of revenue stemming from
recovery, and                  expenditures to raise capital                               tax reforms, and lower than
                               expenditures to 2.6% of SDP                                 envisaged industrial growth
(iii) reorient public          and protect these outlays by
expenditures.                  introducing a core
                               investment program (CIP)

Develop capabilities for       Finance Department will           Working groups on         Difficulties in maneuvering
improving fiscal               strengthen budgetary policy       tax, expenditure, and     expenditures in the short
discipline and                 simulation capabilities, and      computerization of the    term because of pressures to
management:                    expenditure monitoring. A         Finance Department        implement the National
                               directorate of taxation will be   will provide reports on   Commission Pay award and
(i) budget formulation         established by consolidating      strengthening of          other exogenous factors
and implementation,            tax wings under it. In            budgetary practices
                               addition, a state public          and development of        Sector ministries to resist
(ii) restructuring taxes,      finance reform committee          in-house capabilities     reorientation of the
and                            (SPFRC) is set up to support                                development outlays and
                               the Finance Department to                                   their lack of ability to prioritize
(iii) implementation of        advise on and implement                                     development program
public expenditure             various components of public
30       Appendix 1



                                                                  Monitoring
Design Summary               Measurable Indicators                Mechanism             Assumptions or Risks
reforms.                    finance reforms

Undertake a substantial     Reforms of SOEs to include        The Technical,           Political resistance to selling
reform of SOEs, with the    privatization of 7 SOEs,          Secretariat, with        SOEs
objective of opening        partial divestment/               support of Price
these corporations to       restructuring of 3 SOEs,          Waterhouse               SOE management and labor
enhanced competition        merger of 6 SOEs, and             (International           resistance
and improved corporate      closure of 4 SOEs. The            Privatization group)
governance with better      companies targeted for            will provide a           Inability to sell the SOE within
accountability.             reform include strategic          progress report on the   the stipulated time frame
                            companies involved in             implementation of        because of weak trends in
                            diverse activities such as        SOE reforms.             capital market
                            product/mineral
                            development, industrial                                    Uncertainty regarding
                            development, and financial                                 response of buyers to the
                            institutions.                                              price at which the
                                                                                       government may be
                                                                                       interested in selling

                                                                                       Lack of public sector
                                                                                       capability to undertake
                                                                                       restructuring and privatization
                                                                                       of SOEs

Focus on development of     Introduction of sector policies   Government of            Effective implementation of
key infrastructure          and development of legal          Gujarat (GOG) to         policy and regulatory
sectors:                    regulatory guidelines and         announce power,          frameworks
                            procedures to introduce           roads, and ports
(i )power,                  equal opportunities for           sector policies and
                            infrastructure projects           introduce legal and
(ii) ports, and                                               regulatory guidelines
                                                              by specific sector
(iii) roads.                                                  ministries

                            Address pricing issues            Upward adjustment in     Public acceptability of the
                                                              tariffs of these         increase in power tariffs, port
                                                              services                 charges, and tolls on roads

Develop regulatory and      Introduction of appropriate       BOO/BOT policy           Timely and effective adoption
institutional mechanisms    build-own-operate (BOO)/          framework and action     and development of
for private sector          build-own-transfer (BOT)          plan for regulatory      capacities for implementing
participation.              arrangements;                     framework                BOO/BOT associated
                            subcontracting, privatization,                             regulatory framework
                            and joint ventures; and
                            regulatory framework/bodies
                            for these sectors

Initiate restructuring of   Initial steps to restructure      Finance Department       Acceptability of the
two key public utilities,   GEB involve transfer of GEB       to coordinate with       unbundling GMB and GEB by
Gujarat Maritime Board      generation to new entity          these agencies to        its staff and timely
(GMB), which handles        while improving GEB's             provide adequate         operationalization of the new
development and             distribution centers and          reports to ADB on        companies to provide
provision of port and       developing an autonomous          restructuring of GEB     continuity to development of
associated services and     or separate regulatory            and GMB, and status      services concerned
Gujarat Electricity Board   authority. GMB is also to         of new companies
(GEB), which oversees       restructure itself by             created                  Resistance of both
power.                      separating the port                                        management and labor of
                            development and dredging                                   GEB and GMB to unbundling
                            functions from regulatory                                  of these parastatals
                                                                                                 Appendix 1         31


                                                                  Monitoring
Design Summary               Measurable Indicators                Mechanism              Assumptions or Risks
                            functions.



4. Activities

Adopt and implement         Fiscal deficit to be reduced to   Finance Department        Reduction of fiscal deficit is
adherence to the MTFPF      3.5% of SDP in 1997/98 and        to submit annual and      attainable if no adverse
for 1997/98 to              to 2.7% by 1998/99, on the        year-end reviews to       exogenous developments
1999/2000.                  basis of the average              ADB of the MTFPF          such as natural disasters and
                            increase in current               along the lines agreed    need to implement the
                            revenue/SDP ratio annually        upon. In addition,        National Pay Commission
                            of about 0.4 and a                GOG to provide            award
                            proportionate reduction in        annual budget
                            current expenditures/SDP          documents and other
                            ratio                             related tables to allow
                                                              staff to assess and
                                                              monitor the budget
Implement sales tax         Sales tax rates reduced from      Tax policy division of    Minimum resistance from the
reforms.                    23% to 7% and the                 Finance Department        business communities with
                            prohibited list from the          to provide new sales      regard to the sales tax
                            current 63 to 20 items to         tax rates schedule        reforms and the eventual
                            increase items eligible for       and amended Sales         move toward the VAT, which,
                            sales tax, adopt a single-tier    Tax Act                   will include withdrawal of
                            system to simplify tax                                      industrial concessions and
                            assessment, and merge             Consultants of ADB        exemptions under sales tax
                            turnover tax with the sales       technical assistance      reforms
                            tax                               (TA) to finalize and
                                                              discuss action plan of
                                                              the VAT

                            Sales tax administration          Training of staff of      Inadequacy of funds to train
                            upgraded and modernized           sales tax                 the required number of staff
                            staff trained in administration   administration (both
                            of value-added tax (VAT),         local and
                            and public information            international) to
                            campaign introduced               develop familiarity
                                                              with the VAT and its
                                                              implementation

Reform other state taxes:

(i) stamp duty,             (i) Rate schedule rationalized    ADB will be provided      Introduction of more stringent
                            and valuation system for          with new rate             valuation system for property
                            stamp duty strengthened           schedule and              tax and stamp duty, and
                                                              amended legislation       proper enforcement of tax
                                                              for this taxes            administration
(ii) profession tax,        (ii) Rationalization of tax
                            abolished by developing a
                            new rate structure that
                            exempts low-income groups
                            while raising income from
                            higher income groups
(iii) tax on goods and      (iii) Rate schedule simplified
passengers, and             and consolidated

(iv) motor vehicle tax.     (iv) Shift from the weight-
                            based to a composite ad
                            valorem tax
32      Appendix 1



                                                                  Monitoring
Design Summary                Measurable Indicators               Mechanism              Assumptions or Risks
Reform key municipal         Review of property of tax and    Reports on property       Municipalities resist adoption
taxes.                       octroi, GOG to hold              tax and octroi reforms    of more stringent assessment
                             consultations with local         to be provided by         of properties and local
                             governments, which will          ADB, and adoption of      governments' opposition of
                             adopt feasible                   agreed upon               withdrawal of octroi
                             recommendations of these         recommendation
                             studies

Improve cost recovery.       Power tariffs and irrigation
                             charges increased
                                                              ADB will be provided      Capabilities of sector
Rationalize and prioritize   CIP introduced in 1997/98        with CIP, and EPC         ministries to develop sector
public expenditures.         budget in the context of the     will regularly monitor    CIPs, and their timely
                             Ninth Five-Year Plan             the implementation of     integration into an overall CIP
                                                              CIP and other public
                             Capital expenditures             expenditures
                             increased from 2.1% of SDP
                             in 1996/97 to 2.6% in
                             1998/99
Upgrade fiscal policy and                                     SPFRC to submit a         Resistance of bureaucracy to
management                   The SPFRC is set up              progress report on        adopt better fiscal
capabilities.                                                 public finance reforms    management and
                                                              as submitted by the       computerization
                             Budget policy formulation,       SPFRC
                             planning, management, and
                             control systems, and
                             expenditure administration
                             upgraded and computerized

Develop reform plan for      State Cabinet's approval for     Technical Secretariat,    Political and labor union
SOEs and associated          divestment and restructuring     with assistance from      resistance against the
institutional mechanism.     of 23 SOEs, and setting up       the Price Warehouse       privatization and restructuring
                             of a technical secretariat and   consultants, to report    of SOEs
                             Cabinet.                         progress on SOE
                                                              reforms
                             Subcommittee to approve                                    Appropriate management
                             reforms for SOEs                                           and administrative
                                                                                        capabilities to undertake
                                                                                        reforms of SOEs
Privatize SOEs by selling    Sale of Gujarat                  Technical Secretariat
them to a strategic          Communications and               to provide bidding        Availability/interest of suitable
partner with                 Electronic Ltd. and Gujarat      document,                 strategic partners that bid
management control.          Tractor Corporation Ltd., two    prequalification status   inline with authorities'
                             of Gujarat Agro Industries                                 expectations
                             Corporation Ltd. (GAIC)
                             subsidiaries, and Gujarat
                             State Electricity Company
                             Limited (GSECL).

                             51% divestment of Gujarat
                             Industrial Investment
                             Corporation and Gujarat
                             Mineral Development
                             Corporation.

Partially divest of SOEs.    (i) 51% investment of Gujarat    Technical Secretariat
                             State Financial Corporation      provides status report
                                                              on transfer of these
                             (ii) 49% divestment of GAIC      SOEs to strategic
                                                                                                Appendix 1             33


                                                                Monitoring
Design Summary              Measurable Indicators               Mechanism              Assumptions or Risks
                                                            partner
                           (iii) 26% divestment of
                           Gujarat Industrial               SOEs' regular reports     Bearish capital market
                           Development Corporation          to Technical              conditions in India.
                           (GIDC)                           Secretariat on
                                                            progress made

Merge SOEs.                Gujarat State Leather            Company Law Board         (i) Timely acceptability of
                           Industry Development             to approve merger         central Government and
                           Corporation with Gujarat         proposals of these        states to amended State
                           Rural Industries Marketing       SOEs, and Technical       Financial Corporation Act,
                           Corporation, and Gujarat         Secretariat to provide    1951
                           State Handicraft Corporation     ADB with report on
                           with Gujarat Handloom            the final execution of    (ii) Divestment of GIDC
                           Corporation                      merger                    depends on its
                                                                                      corporatization and
Restructure SOEs.          Gujarat Housing Board and        Technical Secretariat     satisfactory resolution of its
                           Gujarat Slum Clearance           to provide a final        land acquisition powers
                           Board                            report on restructuring
                                                            of these SOEs.            Synergies from merger and
                                                                                      adequate settlement of labor
                           Lease or sell 30 properties of   Tourism Corporation       and debt in the process of
                           the Tourism Corporation of       of Gujarat Ltd to         merger
                           Gujarat Ltd.                     provide a report to
                                                            Technical Secretariat

Close SOEs.                Board for Industrial and         BIFR notification and     Adequate settlement of
                           Financial Reconstruction         settlement and dues       losses of Gujarat Slum
                           (BIFR) approval for the          of workers and            Clearance Board and its role
                           closure of 11 mills of Gujarat   auditor's report          in development of low-
                           State Textile Corporation        submitted to ADB          income housing
                                                            along with plan with
                                                            closure of these          Political and labor
                                                            SOEs and BIFR             acceptability of closure of
                                                            approval for such         SOEs
                                                            closure if required

Develop a social safety    State Renewal Fund (SRF)         Notification for its      Availability of budgetary
net mechanism.             set up.                          budgetary                 resources
                                                            operationalization and
                                                            allocation for SRF

Develop a regulatory and   ADB and GOG agree on             Department of             Timely and effective
institutional mechanism    roles and functions of GIDB.     industries follow-up      operationalization of GIDB
for key infrastructure                                      and progress report       and development of its
sectors.                   GIDB operating with              on GIDB, and ADB          capacities to play a strategic
                           adequate staffing and            TA helps develop          and advisory role in
                           budgetary allocation for         capacities of GIDB        infrastructure development
                           project development and          upon which sector         without encroaching on
                           feasibility studies for key      ministries can draw       domain of ministries
                           infrastructure sectors. GIDB
                           expertise developed in the
                           above areas to build
                           capacities of sector
                           ministries

Reform power sector.       Power sector policy              Energy Department         Effective implementation of
                           introduced and a letter of       report to ADB on          power sector policy
                           intent encourages private        progress of power
34     Appendix 1



                                                             Monitoring
Design Summary          Measurable Indicators                Mechanism            Assumptions or Risks
                       sector participation in the       sector reforms
                       field of power generation,
                       transmission, and
                       distribution, and restructuring
                       of GEB
                                                                                 Public and industry
                       Power tariffs raised to           GEB to provide          resistance to increased
                       achieve at least 3% rate of       notification for the    power tariffs
                       return on GEB's fixed assets      new tariff schedule

                       Power System Master Plan          ADB will assist and     Adequate capabilities to
                       for Gujarat developed             oversee the             assist in developing the CIP
                                                         development of this
                                                         plan
                                                                                 Effective management of
                       GSECL created and about           Notification provided   GSECL and its success in
                       135 megawatts transferred         to ADB for GSECL.       mobilizing resources to
                       from GEB to GSECL                                         expand generation capacity

                       Restructuring of power            ADB will assist and
                       sector legislation and            oversee the
                       regulation reviewed               development of a
                                                         regulatory framework

                       A time-bound action plan for                              Timely approvals of state and
                       development of a regulatory                               central sector ministries and
                       framework for the power                                   legislation for setting up this
                       sector developed in                                       regulatory board
                       consultation with ADB

                       GEB to convert, on a pilot        ADB TA provided to
                       basis, two of its distribution    support reforms of
                       districts/circles into            these distribution
                       independent profit centers        centers

Reform ports sector.   Port development policy           GMB report on
                       introduced                        progress on port
                                                         sector reforms
                       Tenders floated and awarded
                       to 15 port locations to
                       privatize incomplete works of
                       wharf/jetty, and install
                       modern mechanical handling
                       equipment in the existing
                       wharves/jetties for private
                       investment

                       A policy and regulatory           GMB has engaged         Lack of familiarity of GMB to
                       framework for private sector      Credit Rating           promote and regulate private
                       development of ports and          Information Services    ports
                       associated facilities             in India, Ltd. To
                       announced                         develop BOT policy
                                                         framework and assist
                                                         in regulatory
                                                         framework

                       GMB restructured to make it       GMB report on the       Resistance of both
                       more efficient and provide a      process of its          management and labor of
                       better public/private interface   restructuring           GMB to change, in particular,
                                                                                           Appendix 1            35


                                                             Monitoring
Design Summary             Measurable Indicators             Mechanism            Assumptions or Risks
                          in the port sector                                     privatization of the ports if
                                                                                 this is accompanied by
                                                                                 permission to sponsors to
                                                                                 recruit new labor
                          New Gujarat Port               GMB report to ADB
                          Development Company            on operationalization   Success of these new
                          (GPDC) developed to handle     of GPDC                 companies will be dependent
                          the construction of                                    on provision of managerial,
                          intermediate ports and to                              administrative, and financial
                          assist GMB in marketing,                               autonomy to adopt
                          shipping, and project                                  commercial practices
                          financing

                          Port service development
                          corporation set up to handle
                          dredging and other related
                          port services

                          Ports sector CIP               Finance Department      Adequate capabilities in
                                                         will integrate this     sector ministry and GMB to
                                                         sector CIP in overall   formulate CIP
                          State road sector policy       state CIP
                          announced

Reform the road sector.   Bombay motor vehicle tax       Roads and Building
                          introduced                     Department (R&BD)
                                                         prepared this policy
                                                         and is soliciting
                                                         private sector
                                                         comments

                                                         R&BD to provide
                                                         notification of these
                                                         new tolls

                          Tolls levied on at least two
                          designated state roads and
                          bridges project under
                          construction

                          Roads sector CIP               Finance Department      Adequate capabilities in
                                                         to integrate roads      R&BD to formulate sector
                          Private sector projects cell   sector CIP in the       CIP
                          established within R&BD and    overall state CIP
                          plan approved for mobilizing
                          staff needed to manage the                             Lack of national consensus
                          processing of BOT state                                for BOT framework
                          roads projects scheduled for
                          award of concession                                    Lack of experience of R&BD
                          contracts during 1996­1998                             in handling and processing
                                                                                 BOT and projects of their
                          List of at least six state                             financing
                          bridge and road projects
                          targeted for processing on a                           Lack of agreement with
                          BOT basis approved                                     sponsors on the terms and
                                                                                 conditions of BOT projects
                                                         R&BD to provide
                                                         GIDB with a report on
                                                         experience gained
36   Appendix 1



                                                       Monitoring
Design Summary     Measurable Indicators               Mechanism             Assumptions or Risks
                                                   from negotiations of at
                                                   least two private
                                                   sector roads/bridges
                  R&BD submits to GIDB             projects targeted for
                  recommendations for              processing on a BOT
                  changes, if any, to policy and   basis during 1997-
                  regulatory frameworks for        1998
                  roads development by the
                  public and private sector        GIDB to play an
                                                   important role in
                                                   finalizing the policy a
                                                   regulatory framework
                                                   for road development
                                                   in private sector
Table A1.2: Comparison of the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program Structure in the Policy Framework,
                               Logical Framework, Policy Matrix, and Loan Agreement

       Policy Framework                                 Logical Framework                             Policy Matrix        Loan Agreement
      (RRP Section IV.C.2)                               (RRP Appendix 4)                          (RRP Appendix 3)          (Schedule 5)

                                           Goal/Objectives                Components
The objective is to assist GOG in      The goal is to improve
augmenting domestic resource           public sector resource
mobilization, improving allocation     mobilization and
and efficiency of the public sector,   allocation, and enhance
and reducing GOG's role in             efficiency of its use to
commercial activities while            promote industrialization
promoting market-oriented              through three objectives:
policies to enhance private sector
participation in the commercial
and infrastructure sectors. This
objective will be achieved by the
following:
1. Strengthen the state's public       1. Restore and sustain      1. To achieve desired           I. Strengthen the    A. Strengthen state
finances and their prudent             fiscal stability, and       reduction in fiscal deficit,    state's public       public finances and their
management.                            improve fiscal              agree to                        finances and their   prudent management.
                                       capabilities and            (i) undertake state and         prudent
                                       management.                 municipal tax reforms,          management.
                                                                   (ii) enhance cost recovery,
                                                                   and
                                                                   (iii) reorient public
                                                                   expenditures.
                                                                   2. Develop capabilities for
                                                                   improving fiscal discipline
                                                                   and management for
                                                                   (i) budget formulation and




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 1
                                                                   implementation,
                                                                   (ii) restructuring taxes, and
                                                                   (iii) implementation of
                                                                   public expenditure reforms.




                                                                                                                                                    37
                                                                                                                                                    38
        Policy Framework                                 Logical Framework                            Policy Matrix          Loan Agreement
      (RRP Section IV.C.2)                                (RRP Appendix 4)                         (RRP Appendix 3)            (Schedule 5)




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 1
                                            Goal/Objectives                Components
2. Privatize or divest and              2. Reduce the size of the   3. Undertake substantial       II. Launch public      B. Reform SOEs.
restructure SOEs to reduce the          public sector in            reform of SOEs, with the       sector restructuring
financial burden they impose on         commercial activities,      objective of opening these     program to
the budget and economy, while           and introduce more          corporations to enhanced       privatize or divest
allowing the private sector to take     competition and             competition and improved       and restructure the
the lead in commercial activities.      efficiency in SOEs.         corporate governance with      SOEs with the
                                                                    better accountability.         objective of
                                                                                                   maximizing
                                                                                                   efficiency and
                                                                                                   reducing GOG's
                                                                                                   role in commercial
                                                                                                   activities.
3. Enable private sector                3. Create a conducive       4. Focus on development        III. Evolve an         C. Evolve an enabling
participation by strengthening the      environment to augment      of key infrastructure          enabling               environment for private
policy, regulatory, and institutional   private sector              sectors: power, ports, and     environment for        sector involvement in
frameworks in critical                  participation in critical   roads.                         private sector         infrastructure sectors.
infrastructure sectors.                 infrastructure projects.                                   involvement in
                                                                                                   infrastructure
                                                                                                   sectors.
                                                                    5. Develop regulatory and
                                                                    institutional mechanisms
                                                                    for private sector
                                                                    participation.
                                                                    6. Initiate restructuring of
                                                                    two key public utilities,
                                                                    Gujarat Maritime Board
                                                                    and Gujarat Electricity
                                                                    Board, which handle
                                                                    development and provision
                                                                    of port and associated
                                                                    services and power.
          Program Framework (RRP Appendix 1)                                                 Policy Matrix (RRP Appendix 3)

                        Components                                        Objectives                                 Policy Areas
1. To achieve desired reduction in fiscal deficit, agree to      I. Strengthen the state's      I.1. Formulate and implement the medium-term fiscal
undertake                                                        public finances and their      policy framework.
(i) state and municipal tax reforms,                             prudent management.            I. 2. Raise user charges to improve cost recovery.
(ii) enhanced cost recovery; and                                                                I.3. Prioritize and rationalize expenditure.
(iii) reoriented public expenditures.                                                           I.4. Develop fiscal policy management capabilities
2. Develop capabilities for improving fiscal discipline and                                     and strengthen tax administration.
management:
(i) budget formulation and implementation,
(ii) restructuring taxes, and
(iii) implementation of public expenditure reforms.
3. Undertake a substantial reform of SOEs with the               II. Launch public sector       II. 1. Develop SOE reform plan and associated
objective of opening these corporations to enhanced              restructuring program to       institutional mechanism.
competition and improved corporate governance with               privatize or divest and        II. 2. Privatize and transfer controlling interest of
better accountability.                                           restructure the SOEs with      three SOEs: GCEL, GTCL, and GSEC.
                                                                 the objective of maximizing    II. 3. Privatize two SOEs: GIIC and GMDC by
                                                                 efficiency and reducing        offering 51% of GOG's shareholding.
                                                                 GOG's role in commercial       II. 4. Partially divest and restructure three SOEs:
                                                                 activities.                    GSFC, GIDC, GAIC.
                                                                                                II. 5 Merge SOEs and lease selected services of one
                                                                                                SOE.
                                                                                                II.6. Close SOE.
                                                                                                II.7. Develop social safety net for restructuring of
                                                                                                SOEs.
4. Focus on development of key infrastructure sectors:           III. Evolve and enabling       III.1. Develop overall supportive policy and
power, ports, and roads.                                         environment for private        regulatory and institutional mechanism for key
5. Develop regulatory and institutional mechanisms for           sector involvement in          infrastructure sectors
private sector participation.                                    infrastructure sectors         III. 2. Take initial steps to start power sector reforms
6. Initiate restructuring of two key public utilities, Gujarat                                  III. 3. Develop policy and regulatory framework for
Maritime Board and Gujarat Electricity Board, which                                             promoting private sector development of ports




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
handle development and provision of port and                                                    III. 4. Road sector reforms to attract private
associated services and power, respectively                                                     investment in road infrastructure

GAIC = Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation, GCEL = Gujarat Communication and Electric Limited, GIDC = Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation,
GMDC = Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation, GOG = Government of Gujarat, GSEC = Gujarat State Export Corporation, GSFC = Gujarat State Finance
Corporation, GTCL = Gujarat Tractor Corporation Limited, RRP = report and recommendation of the President, SOE = state-owned enterprise.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




                                                                                                                                                           39
40      Appendix 1



     Table A1.3: Reconstruction of the Design and Monitoring Framework of the Gujarat
                      Public Sector Resource Management Program

                Impact/Outcomes                                                  Outputs
Impact. Improved public sector resource
mobilization and allocations efficiently
promoting industrialization

Outcome 1. The state's public finances and               1.1 Medium-term fiscal policy framework
their prudent management strengthened                    implemented with strengthening of fiscal
                                                         policy management
                                                         1.2 Improved revenue generation
                                                         1.3 Prioritized and rationalized expenditure

Outcome 2. Reformed state-owned                          2.1 Institutional mechanisms in place to
enterprises (SOEs) contributing to the state             implement the public sector restructuring
economy                                                  program
                                                         2.2 Selected SOEs privatized
                                                         2.3 Selected SOEs restructured
                                                         2.4 Selected SOEs closed
                                                         2.5 Affected SOE employees provided a
                                                         social safety net

Outcome 3. Private sector participating in               3.1 An enabling policy and regulatory
infrastructure development in the state                  framework and institutional mechanisms in
                                                         place
                                                         3.2 Key power, port, and road sector reforms
                                                         initiated

Note:   The reconstruction was completed by the Operations Evaluation Mission.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
             STATUS OF PROGRAM COMPLIANCE WITH TRANCHE RELEASE CONDITIONS AND COVENANTS

                                                 Table A2.1: Tranche Release Conditions

Condition                  Status at Tranche Release                              Status at PCR                            Status at OEM

A.      Strengthening of State Public Finances and its Prudent Management
IT: 1. Reduce the      Fully met. The actual unadjusted             The fiscal deficit to NSDP deteriorated      Fiscal deficit was contained at 3.5%
fiscal deficit to      indicator was 4.2% of the NSDP.              after the 2001 earthquake. The actual        of NSDP. Similarly revenue deficit
3.5% of SDP in the     Adjusted fiscal deficit to NSDP was          unadjusted indicators were 7.3%,             was reduced to 0.2% of NSDP. The
state's budget for     2.8% after exclusion of the fiscal cost of   8.6%, and 6.1% of NSDP for FY2000,           state has already achieved the
FY1997.                unforeseen expenditures on civil             FY2001, and FY2002. GOG, however,            targets set by the Twelfth Finance
                       service wage increase resulting from         started launching the second phase of        Commission for 2008/09 for the
                       the central Government's Fifth Pay           fiscal consolidation to contain the fiscal   fiscal deficit. It is expected to
                       Commission recommendations and               deficit. GOG recently submitted a draft      generate a substantial revenue
                       natural calamities in the state.             MOU to the central Government under          surplus from 2006/07 onward.
                                                                    the states' fiscal reforms facility. The
                                                                    monitoring indicator used in the MOU
                                                                    is the revenue deficit as a percentage
                                                                    of revenue received.

FT: 1. Reduce the      The condition was amended to                 See I. A.1.
fiscal deficit to      establish a fiscal process based on a
2.7% in the            sound fiscal framework agreeable to
FY1998 state           ADB. Taking exogenous factors and
budget. This is to     slow progress in power sector reforms
be achieved by         into consideration, the fiscal deficit
raising current        would have been 2.5% of the NSDP,
revenues annually      with the mandated wage bill increase
by about 0.5% of       accounting for 2.0%, recurring natural
SDP and a              calamities for 0.2%, decreased central
proportionate          transfers for 0.4%, and high power
reduction in the       subsidies due to delay in power sector




                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 2
current expenditure    reforms for 1.6%.
to SDP ratio.

IT: 2. Introduce the   Fully met.                                   Status of (i), (iii), and (iv) remains the   The state switched to the VAT
following tax          (i) Rate structure of sales tax was          same as reported for the final tranche,      system from 1 April 2006. The
reforms including           consolidated to six categories with     which was released in December 2000.         structure of the tax conforms to that
the merger of               four special rates in 1997.             As for (ii), this has been further           agreed to by the Empowered




                                                                                                                                                         41
turnover tax with      (ii) Item numbers were reduced from          reduced and currently 16 items are on        Committee of State Finance
Condition                 Status at Tranche Release                            Status at PCR             Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                       42
the sales tax:              63 to 33 in the FY1998 budget and     the prohibited list.         Ministers. The switch to the VAT
(i) Reduce the              to 24 in the FY1999 budget.                                        has led to significant improvement
number of sales       (iii) Assessment systems were                                            in revenue productivity and the first




                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
tax rates from 23           simplified by introducing a single-                                5 months collections show more
items to about a            tier system of assessment from                                     than 30% growth over the
third thereof.              April 1998.                                                        corresponding period in the
(ii) Reduce the       (iv) Turnover tax was merged with                                        previous year.
number of items on          sales tax in April 1997.
the prohibited list
from 63 to about a
third thereof.
(iii) Introduce
simplified tax
assessment
through a single
tier system.
(iv) Merge turnover
tax with sales tax.

IT: 3. Introduce a    Fully met. The rate schedule was                                         No change.
rationalized stamp    adjusted. Rates for some items were
duty schedule         reduced or converted to ad valorem
based on ad           rates. For improvement of the valuation
valorem rates and     system, the automatic reckoning
initiate steps to     mechanisms for valuation of immovable
improve the           properties were updated in June 1998
valuation system      and again in 1999 for the purpose of
for the stamp duty.   stamp duty assessment.

IT: 4. Rationalize    Fully met. The rate schedule was                                         No change.
the profession tax.   adjusted. Rates for some items were
                      reduced or converted to ad valorem
                      rates. For improvement of the valuation
                      system, the automatic reckoning
                      mechanisms for valuation of immovable
                      properties were updated in June 1998
                      and again in 1999 for the purpose of
                      stamp duty assessment.
Condition                   Status at Tranche Release                         Status at PCR                             Status at OEM
IT: 5. Introduce a      Fully met. The rate schedules of tax on                                                No change.
new rate schedule       goods and passengers and MVT were
for tax on goods        merged on goods and passenger
and passengers          vehicles to simplify the schedule from
that reduces the        April 1997. The number of rate
number of rate          categories for goods vehicles was
categories from 15      reduced from 15 to 7.
to about a third
thereof.

IT: 6. Shift from the   Fully met. An ad valorem MVT on            GOG further restructured the MVT            No change.
weight-based MVT        private cars was introduced from           structure and rates to mobilize tax
to a composite ad       August 1998. The new rate structure        revenue. Tax rates for omnibuses were
valorem MVT.            was simplified carrying a single rate of   increased in FY2001. Sleeper bus
Also, replace the       4%.                                        coaches were subjected to MVT
existing sales tax                                                 starting in FY2004. Stamp duty
and lifetime tax on                                                exemptions for tractors used for
private cars with a                                                agriculture purposes were withdrawn
single one-time                                                    from 1 April 2003.
composite and ad
valorem tax.

FT: 2. Revise           In view of changed circumstances,          Raising the agriculture sector tariff       Power sector reform remains a
power tariffs to        the Government requested an                remains politically challenging. GOG        challenge and the finances of GEB
maintain a 3% rate      amendment of this policy condition.        informed the program completion             continue to adversely impact the
of return on GEB's                                                 review mission that it continues to be      budget. Tariffs and structures have
fixed assets by         GEB met the 3% rate of return on its       committed to raising power tariffs for      been adequate to sustain cash flow.
FY1998.                 net fixed assets with subsidies of         farmers despite political pressure. GEB     The regulator granted increases in
                        $214 million in FY1997, although           has also been implementing an               FY2000, including a 300% increase
                        GEB made a net loss of $199 million.       intensive meter installation program to     for agricultural consumers. The next
                        Delays in power sector restructuring       replace old meters with sealed,             increase was in June 2004, when
                        increased GEB's net losses, and in         tamper-proof meters in the agriculture      rates rose by about 1%, and a
                        FY1998 GOG was no longer able to           sector where the majority of users          further application is being




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
                        subsidize power sector operations to       were unmetered. GOG also enacted            processed. Overall a profit should
                        the extent of meeting the 3% return.       the Gujarat Electricity and Regulation      be made across the group in
                        GEB's return on fixed assets fell to       Act in 2003, which followed the central     FY2005.
                        negative 5% with subsidies and             Government's enactment of the
                        negative 26% without subsidies in          Electricity Act in 2003. A target tariff
                        FY1998, and to negative 5% with            rate was set to be at least two thirds of




                                                                                                                                                      43
                        subsidies and negative 38% without         total supply cost by 2006. The
                        subsidies in FY1999.                       remaining one third will be financed by
Condition        Status at Tranche Release                           Status at PCR                    Status at OEM




                                                                                                                      44
            GOG established the Gujarat                   a cross-subsidy from the industry to
            Electricity Regulatory Commission             the agriculture sector.
                                                          GEB's return on fixed assets




                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
            (GERC), an independent regulatory
            authority for awarding power tariffs, in      deteriorated greatly in FY2000 to
            November 1998, but GERC was                   negative 24% and in FY2001 negative
            unable to revise power tariffs due to         25%, but improved in FY2002 to 6%
            political and social considerations. Its      and FY2003 to 4%.
            revision came on 10 October 2000.             GEB continues to be a loss-making
            GERC reviewed all relevant operating          SOE despite the restructuring and
            data submitted by GEB and other               reorganizing efforts. GEB was divided
            independent power corporations and            functionally into generation,
            undertook public hearings during              transmission, and distribution
            March to October 2000 on the revised          companies. GEB transferred its
            electricity tariffs. The revisions            generating units to its existing
            including substantial upward revision         subsidiary company for generation. A
            for agricultural tariffs were announced       transmission company (Gujarat
            and made effective immediately. This          Electricity Company Ltd.) was also
            will reduce power sector subsidies to         created to take over the transmission
            the capped level of Rs11 billion for          business. Four distribution companies
            FY2001.                                       were created to look after distribution
                                                          functions in four regions of the state.
            The revised power tariffs will not enable
                                                          GEB remains the holding entity to
            GEB to make 3% returns on its fixed
                                                          oversee the remaining functions such
            assets for a few more years. This target
                                                          as bulk power purchase and bulk
            must be met in combination with GEB's
                                                          supply functions.
            own efforts in undertaking rigorous
                                                          GEB has implemented several
            financial and operational restructuring.
                                                          measures to control cost and
            The then-proposed Power Sector
                                                          expenditure including reduction in fixed
            Development Program Loan scheduled
                                                          cost of independent power producers
            to be discussed by ADB's Board in
                                                          through renegotiation, optimization of
            December 2000 was expected to
                                                          fuel mix to reduce high-cost fuel
            address some of GEB's problems
                                                          consumption, renegotiation with
            inherent to all state electricity boards in
                                                          creditors to restructure high-cost loans,
            India in the context of comprehensive
                                                          and attrition with no replacement
            restructuring of the power sector
                                                          combined with 20% cut in staffing and
            industry in Gujarat.
                                                          other measures. These measures
                                                          resulted in a substantial reduction in
                                                          the cost of power purchase and net
                                                          cash loss. GEB also received an
                                                          incentive grant of Rs5,360 million
                                                          under the central Government's
Condition                  Status at Tranche Release                        Status at PCR                         Status at OEM
                                                                 Accelerated Power Development and
                                                                 Reforms Program scheme.
IT: 3. Increase        Fully met. During loan negotiations, a    Condition satisfied.                   No change, although GOG is
irrigation charges     50% increase in irrigation charge was                                            reportedly considering establishing
to levels agreed       agreed as the acceptable rate of                                                 a water regulatory authority.
with ADB.              increase. On 25 October 2000, Gujarat
                       issued an order to raise irrigation
                       charges from the existing rates by 3.0
                       times on rice, 2.5 times on sugarcane,
                       and 2.0 times on other crops starting
                       February 2001.

FT: 4. Introduce       Fully met. The CIP was introduced in      Condition satisfied.                   To prioritize expenditures, GOG
the CIP in the         the context of the Ninth Five-Year Plan                                          initiated the CIP in April 1998 along
context of the Ninth   from 1996 to 1997. A system that                                                 with institutional arrangements to
Five-Year Plan and     prioritizes sectors, projects, and                                               roll over the CIP annually. The
institute              schemes was institutionalized and                                                objective of the CIP is to insulate
arrangements to        implemented. The system was properly                                             expenditures with high social rates
institutionalize and   established and is updated by the state                                          of return and is therefore
roll over the CIP      on an annual basis.                                                              considered as a priority for ad hoc
annually, while                                                                                         expenditure cuts. The program also
protecting it from                                                                                      envisaged raising the ratio of capital
ad hoc budgetary                                                                                        expenditure to NSDP from 2.1% in
cuts.                                                                                                   1996/97 to 2.6% in 1998/99.
                                                                                                        However, this was not implemented
                                                                                                        seriously and the exercise largely
                                                                                                        remained on paper.

FT: 5. Raise           Fully met. Capital expenditure rose to    Capital expenditures were protected.   Capital expenditure is estimated at
capital                3.2% of NSDP in FY1999 and was                                                   3.4% of NSDP in 2005/06. The
expenditures from      3.1% in FY2000.                                                                  expenditure continues to be
2.1% of SDP in                                                                                          adequately protected.
FY1997 to about




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
2.6% of SDP by
FY1999 in line with
the MTFPF.




                                                                                                                                                 45
Condition                Status at Tranche Release                           Status at PCR                        Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                46
B.      Reform of State-Owned Enterprises
IT: 7. Privatize     Partially complied with. GOG adopted a     GCEL: Upon the decision to close,       GCEL was originally in the full




                                                                                                                                                Appendix 2
GCEL and GTCL        properly designed and transparent          GOG provided the voluntary retirement   privatization category of the policy
by selling off 51%   bidding procedure that was acceptable      scheme (VRS) to all employees. On 18    matrix. It was moved to the closure
of the state's       to all parties.                            February 2002, the Gujarat High Court   list, with ADB concurrence.
shares in each,      GCEL: While GOG followed an                passed the order to close the company   GOG offered VRS to all employees
through a            identical bidding procedure for GTCL, it   and appoint an official liquidator.     and the Gujarat High Court passed
transparent          could not find a suitable buyer. A GOG                                             orders in February 2002 to wind up
procedure.           cabinet subcommittee decided to                                                    GCEL and appoint an official
                     reinvite bids while restructuring GCEL.                                            liquidator, marking the beginning of
                     GOG successfully reduced the                                                       the liquidation process.
                     workforce from 1,390 to 740 and                                                    The windup formalities are ongoing.
                     retendered the sale offer in January
                     1999.

                     GTCL: In August 1998, GOG and              GTCL: No progress was made in
                     Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., a leading        privatizing GTCL.
                     tractor manufacturing company in India,
                     agreed on all details including the
                     settlement price, for Mahindra &
                     Mahindra to acquire 51% of GOG's
                     shares. However, Mahindra & Mahindra
                     is reconsidering its offer.

FT: 6. Fully         Condition amended to fully privatize       See I.B.7.                              GTCL: 51% of GOG's shares were
privatize GCEL       GTCL and approve closure of GCEL.                                                  transferred to Mahindra & Mahindra
and GTCL by                                                                                             in December 1999 along with
selling all of the   GCEL: GOG has decided to close                                                     management control; another 9%
state's shares in    GCEL. GOG failed to reach an                                                       was subsequently transferred.
GCEL and GTCL.       agreement with GCEL's final bidder on                                              Share price achieved was Rs12 per
                     payment of wages in arrears resulting                                              share higher than the original offer,
                     from the Fifth Pay Commission's wage                                               successfully negotiated by GOG in
                     increases. GOG discontinued its                                                    spite of pressure to achieve the
                     attempt to divest GCEL and decided to                                              condition to enable the release of
                     close the enterprise. On 9 October                                                 the incentive tranche. The option to
                     2000, GCEL's closure was approved by                                               purchase the remaining 40% is yet
                     a cabinet subcommittee.                                                            to be exercised.

                     GTCL: GOG's 60% shareholding of
                     GTCL was divested. GOG's 51%
Condition                 Status at Tranche Release                          Status at PCR            Status at OEM
                      shareholding of GTCL was sold to
                      Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. on 18
                      December 1999. An additional 9% of
                      GTCL was transferred to Mahindra &
                      Mahindra Ltd. on 30 May 2000. Under
                      the sale-and-shareholders agreement,
                      Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. has an
                      irrevocable option to purchase the
                      remaining 40% share at a
                      predetermined price, binding the state
                      to sell the remaining stake in GTCL on
                      request by Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd.

IT: 8. Offer up to    Complied with. Public issue of Rs235
25% of GSFC           million of GSFC equity, which was
equity for public     equivalent to 25% of pro-forma shares,
issue, as             was floated in February 1997. The price
permissible under     of the issue was fixed at Rs20 per
existing law.         share (premium of Rs10). The issue
                      was oversubscribed and over 60% was
                      acquired at the retail level. The
                      allotment of shares was completed in
                      May 1997. Allowing for the Industrial
                      Development Bank of India's
                      shareholding, GOG's holdings in GSFC
                      were reduced to about 49% (which is a
                      condition of the second tranche). GSFC
                      substantially reduced its nonperforming
                      portfolio. Financial restructuring has
                      also improved GSFC's capital
                      adequacy ratio from 8.4% in March
                      1996 to about 13% in March 1997.




                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
FT: 8. Reduce         Partially complied with. GOG selected     See I.B.9.                   GOG equity stake brought down to
GOG's                 ICICI, IL&FS, and HDFC for divesting                                   49%. Recommendations of the task
shareholding in       26% of its shareholding in GIIC and                                    force, appointed by GOG, waited
GSFC to not more      completed valuation of GIIC's assets                                   before taking final decision on the
than 49% and          through an independent consultant                                      GSFC.
implement financial   after finalizing the accounts for




                                                                                                                                   47
and organizational    1997/98. A cabinet subcommittee on
restructuring of      SOE reforms approved the sale and
Condition                Status at Tranche Release                            Status at PCR                             Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                      48
GSFC along with      constituted a committee to negotiate a
the plan for         purchase price for the issuance of fresh
upgrading its        equity to buyers. However, the offered




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
information and      price by ICICI after their due diligence
technology.          was not acceptable to GOG. GOG is
                     seeking the possibility of entering into a
                     technical collaboration agreement with
                     IL&FS. Organizational restructuring has
                     been implemented based on various
                     studies by outside consultants. GOG
                     took steps for financial restructuring.

IT: 9. Reduce by     GIIC: Partially complied with. GOG           GOG converted outstanding loans              GIIC: All lending activities of GIIC
26% the state's      selected ICICI, IL&FS, and HDFC for          amounting to Rs992.2 million into            have been discontinued and the
shareholding in      divesting 26% of its shareholding in         equity capital during FY2001. GIIC has       focus has shifted to recovery of old
GIIC and GMDC        GIIC and completed valuation of GIIC's       also mobilized Rs1,499.6 million             dues.
and cause GIIC to    assets through an independent                through issuance of long-term bonds          The final decision regarding the
(i) enter into an    consultant after finalizing the accounts     guaranteed by GOG. GIIC carried out          future of GIIC would depend on the
agreement with a     for 1997/98. A cabinet subcommittee          internal restructuring during this period.   recommendations of the task force
technical            on SOE reforms approved the sale and                                                      appointed by GOG to recommend a
collaborator for     constituted a committee to negotiate a                                                    strategy.
enhancing its        purchase price for issue of fresh equity
capacity, and        to the buyers. However, the offered
(ii) initiate        price by ICICI after their due diligence
implementation of    was not acceptable to GOG. GOG is
its organizational   seeking the possibility of entering into a
and financial        technical collaboration agreement with
restructuring.       IL&FS. Organizational restructuring
                     was implemented based on various
                     studies by outside consultants. GOG
                     took steps for financial restructuring.

                     GMDC: Complied with. In October
                     1997, GOG successfully divested 26%
                     of its equity in GMDC to the general
                     public by offering for sale 8,268,000
                     shares of Rs10 each with a premium of
                     Rs120 per share, totaling Rs1.07
                     billion. The offer has met with
                     resounding success despite sluggish
                     market conditions. The offer was
Condition                  Status at Tranche Release                           Status at PCR                       Status at OEM
                       oversubscribed by more than two
                       times.
FT: 9. Reduce          Complied with. In October 1997, GOG          Condition satisfied.                  Legally GOG is not able to divest
GOG's                  successfully divested 26% of its equity                                            more than 49%; 26% has been
shareholding in        in GMDC to the general public by                                                   divested; and a further 23% stake is
GMDC to not more       offering for sale 8,268,000 shares of                                              proposed to be divested in phase II
than 49% and           Rs10 each with a premium of Rs120                                                  of SOE restructuring. Consultants
GMDC to enter into     per share, totaling Rs1.07 billion. The                                            recommended that outside experts
an agreement with      offer has met with resounding success                                              be appointed to assist in further
a technical            despite sluggish market conditions. The                                            restructuring measures. This
collaborator for       offer was oversubscribed by more than                                              recommendation was confirmed by
enhancing              2 times.                                                                           the Phase II Experts Committee
capacity. GMDC to
sell its inefficient
and unprofitable
units.

FT: 7. Reduce the      Partially met. Gujarat is reducing its       GOG now possesses 26%                 The ADB Board approved a waiver
state's 56%            56.6% of GSEC shareholding to 11.0%.         shareholding in GSEC. The bid from    of full compliance as the divestment
shareholding in        The divestment process was prolonged         Ms Adani Exports Ltd. for acquiring   was delayed by negotiations on the
GSEC to 26% or         due to GSEC's possession of an air           45.6% equity, thereby reducing GOG    sale price and by the need to obtain
less by transferring   cargo complex, which required                shareholding to 11% had not           central Government approval for
the same along         approval from the central Government         materialized.                         transfer of GSEC's air cargo
with management        for transfer of ownership at the time of                                           complex at Ahmedabad Airport.
control to a           divestment. Central Government                                                     The entire GOG stake was
strategic partner.     approval was given. On 9 October                                                   transferred to Adani Co. Ltd., in
                       2000, a cabinet subcommittee                                                       February 2004.
                       confirmed the sale, for which final bids
                       were received on 23 June 2000. The
                       selected corporation's quote price was
                       Rs1,500 per share, against the
                       underwriter's estimated share price of
                       Rs5,000. While the difference is




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
                       substantial, the investment amount is
                       not significant. Gujarat is confident that
                       an agreement on the price will be
                       reached since the number of shares is
                       limited (6,840 shares) and the company
                       is profitable. Furthermore, no labor




                                                                                                                                                 49
                       disputes exist.
 Condition                 Status at Tranche Release                           Status at PCR            Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                  50
FT: 11. Adopt, as      Fully met. As recommended by ADB,            Condition satisfied.       GIDC referred to the Expert
agreed with ADB,       GIDC will retain its regulatory, planning,                              Committee, which has made
the recommend-         and land acquisition functions; and                                     recommendations similar to those




                                                                                                                                  Appendix 2
ations of the study    divest those pertaining to estate                                       of the consultants during the
and (i) corporatize    management and estate development.                                      program design phase.
GIDC and divest        GIDC, accepting ADB's
26% of GOG             recommendation, approved GIDC's
shareholding, (ii)     restructuring plan on 12 June 2000.
offer leaseholders     GOG has, however, opted not to
an option to convert   corporatize and to retain its statutory
leaseholds to          position and to continue its regulatory
freeholds in state-    role.
owned industrial
                       To proceed with its restructuring plan,
estates if legally
                       GIDC offered VRS to its staff
feasible, and (iii)
                       members and 615 employees (22% of
strengthen the
                       the total staff) were retrenched as of
regulatory and
                       28 February 2000. On its divestment
planning framework
                       of estate management, GIDC faced
for existing and new
                       reluctance from industries to take
industrial estates.
                       over because of low returns from
                       these estates. However, GIDC has
                       transferred water supply schemes of
                       15 estates; and in accordance with
                       GOG's decision, GIDC will transfer 21
                       estates that will be managed by an
                       independent agency, and divest 51
                       estates situated in municipal limits to
                       municipalities and local bodies.
                       For all new investments, GIDC will put
                       up 26% of the capital and the remaining
                       74% will be provided from the private
                       sector. GIDC invited tender offers for
                       two projects for the development of a
                       residential township in Atali, Dahej, and
                       Ankrleshwar on a build-own-maintain
                       basis. Private sector interests,
                       however, have not been encouraging.
                       The proposals are currently being
                       reviewed for restructuring to attract
                       higher private sector interest.
Condition                 Status at Tranche Release                             Status at PCR                          Status at OEM
FT: 12. Divest 49%    Substantially met. GAIC sold its two           Status remains. (See also Appendix 3.)   Only manufacturing units closed.
of GOG's shares in    subsidiaries and closed down all
GAIC and close        commercial activities, including
uneconomic units      uneconomic units and/or divisions, with
and/or divisions of   the exception of pesticides and its
GAIC.                 distribution network. Voluntary
                      retirement schemes will be offered to all
                      employees of the closed units in
                      accordance with GOG order of 12 April
                      1999.
                      GOG will maintain GAIC's distribution
                      network, used mainly to provide price-
                      controlled fertilizer (urea) and offer
                      agricultural inputs and technical
                      advice to the remote areas of the
                      state. The distribution network was
                      streamlined by disengaging 400
                      independent members of the network
                      out of 800 and adding 150 new
                      members on the basis of a minimum
                      performance target set by GAIC.
                      However, due in part to the recurrent
                      droughts, selling off the pesticide
                      operation and distribution network
                      was possible, as these operations
                      remain commercially nonviable.
                      The uneconomic units undergoing
                      liquidation account for approximately
                      60% of GAIC's net fixed assets and
                      50% of employees. In view of the fact
                      that private sector interest is likely to be
                      low for servicing remote areas of the




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
                      state, GOG opts to retain 100% of
                      GAIC, and dedicate GAIC as a
                      development and/or promotional
                      agency for the state's agriculture.




                                                                                                                                                 51
Condition                   Status at Tranche Release                         Status at PCR                         Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                  52
C.      Evolve an Enabling Environment for Private Sector Involvement in Infrastructure Sectors
10. Announce a




                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 2
                        Complied with. A road policy was           Condition satisfied.                    State roads policy being updated by
state roads sector      announced in January 1997 to                                                       PWD
policy.                 encourage private sector participation
                        in construction and maintenance of
                        roads. The roads sector policy aims to
                        provide an efficient roads network
                        across the state and includes specific
                        guidelines for private sector
                        participation in this sector.

11. Announce a          Complied with. GOG approved and            Condition satisfied.                    Policy forms the basis for
policy for private      announced its BOOT policy for the                                                  infrastructure development in the
sector participation    ports sector in July 1997, which                                                   state through GIDB. The Gujarat
in the state's ports    includes a package of BOOT principles                                              Vision 2020 provides details of how
sector and              serving as a framework for the                                                     public-private participation in all
associated facilities   involvement of the private sector in the                                           sectors including ports will be
including the policy    construction and operation of these                                                implemented.
for creating a          new ports. The scope of BOOT policy
regulatory              guidelines includes issues such as the
framework.              rights and responsibilities of developer
                        and government regulatory control.

FT: 13. Develop a       Fully met. A plan for developing a         GERC has continued to operate. It       The support to develop a regulatory
time-bound action       power sector regulatory framework was      prepared the Gujarat Electricity and    framework for the power sector was
plan for the            developed and substantially                Regulatory Act, which was in harmony    followed with ADB lending and
development of a        implemented. GERC was established in       with the central Government's           technical assistance including
regulatory              November 1998 under the Electricity        Electricity Act 2003. The Gujarat       preparation of a reorganization plan
framework for the       Commission Act of 1998 as an               Electricity and Regulatory Act became   for GEB, consumer awareness and
power sector in         independent organization empowered         effective in 2003 and set a target of   support to providing comprehensive
consultation with       to determine the power tariffs for         two thirds of the supply cost to be     incentives to implement a reform
ADB.                    wholesale, bulk, grid, and retail          financed by tariffs by 2006.            program. Ownership of reforms in
                        electricity. Under the new regulation,                                             the successor entities that have
                        GEB and other licensees are requested                                              replaced GEB is now very high.
                        to submit their proposals for tariff
                        revisions to GERC based on actual
                        data of operation. Upon receipt of such
                        proposals, GERC assesses the
                        proposals together with the operating
Condition                  Status at Tranche Release                          Status at PCR                  Status at OEM
                       data and conducts public hearings,
                       subsequently revising the power tariffs.
                       The process may be undertaken on an
                       annual basis if required.

FT: 14. Set tariff     Fully met. The Ports and Fisheries          Condition satisfied.
objectives based       Department revised port charges based
on economic and        on economic and financial principles
financial principles   including costs incurred, pursuant to
by September           notifications issued on 12 May 1998.
1997. Following        The new charges became effective as
this, revise and       of 14 May 1998.
raise the port
charges based on
specific objectives,
including, in
particular, the cost
of services
rendered.

15. Develop an         Fully met. GOG approved and                 Condition satisfied.
implementation         announced BOOT policy for the ports
plan for a suitable    sector in July 1997, which included a
regulatory             package of BOOT principles serving as
framework for          a framework for involving the private
public and private     sector for construction and operation of
ports development.     new ports. The scope of BOOT policy
                       guidelines covered such matters as
                       rights and responsibilities of developers
                       and government regulatory control.

FT: 16. Levy tolls     Fully met. Tolls determined on the          In addition, two toll roads were




                                                                                                                             Appendix 2
on at least two        basis of construction, maintenance,         completed in 2003 (Ahmedabad-
designated state       and financial costs were levied for         Rajkot) and 2004 (Bagodra-Vasad).
road and bridge        Magdalla Bridge on Magdalla Ichhapor        Four tolled bridges were also built and
projects under         road from 1 September 1998 and              operated, namely Mahi, Watrak,
construction that      Roads over Brides at Gujarat Narmada        Narmada, and Mahi bypass.
are sufficient to      Valley Fertilizer Company Ltd. on




                                                                                                                             53
recover at least       Bharuch bypass joining Bharuch and
50% of annualized      Dehej State Highway to National
Condition                   Status at Tranche Release                           Status at PCR                             Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                          54
construction,          Highway No. 8 from 7 February 1999.
maintenance, and
financial costs.




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 2
FT: 17. Cause          Fully met. R&BD submitted to GIDB its        Condition satisfied.
R&BD to provide        report based on experience in handling
GIDB with a report     build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects,
on experience          although relatively small in size, and
gained from            the same was provided to ADB on 24
negotiations of at     December 1999. Subsequent to
least two private      completion of a large-scale BOT project
sector roads or        in November 1999, a report containing
bridge projects,       recommendations for changes in policy
together with          and the regulatory framework for road
recommendations        development by private sector was
for changes, if any,   provided.
to the policy and
regulatory
framework for
private sector road
development.
ADB, Asian Development Bank, BOOT = build-own-operate-transfer, CIP = core investment program, FY = fiscal year, GCEL = Gujarat Communications and
Electronic Ltd., GEB = Gujarat Electricity Board, GERC = Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission, GIDB = Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board,
GIDC = Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation, GIIC = Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation, GMDC = Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation,
GOG = government of Gujarat, GSFC = Gujarat State Financial Corporation, GTCL = Gujarat Tractor Corporation Ltd., HDFC = Housing Development
Finance Corporation, ICICC = Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation Ltd., IL&FS = Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services, MOU = memorandum
of understanding, MTFPF = medium-term fiscal policy framework, MVT = motor vehicle tax, NSDP = net state domestic product, OEM = operations evaluation
mission, PCR = project completion report, PWD = Public Works Department, R&BD = Roads and Bridges Department, SDP = state domestic product,
SOE = state-owned enterprise, VAT = value added tax, VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                  Table A2.2: Approval of Release Covenants Unrelated to the Tranche

Covenant                                  Status at Tranche Release                         Status at PCR         Status at OEM

A.       Covenants to be Achieved by the Release of the Incentive Tranche
1. Provide a report on the        Complied with.                                     Condition satisfied.   Property tax reform has
review of property tax and        Property Tax: The analysis of the various                                 been carried out.
octroi to ADB.                    aspects of an area-based assessment and
                                  rationalization of property tax rates was                                 Octroi in all local bodies
                                  entrusted to experts. The expert team carried                             except municipal
                                  out a study and submitted detailed reports to                             corporations has been
                                  GOG for all six municipalities of the state. The                          abolished. Abolition of the
                                  reports were submitted in October 1998 to                                 tax in municipal corporations
                                  ADB. GOG initiated action to extend a new                                 was not carried out due to
                                  system.                                                                   inability to find a viable
                                                                                                            alternative.
                                  Octroi Tax: GOG established a committee
                                  chaired by the principal secretary of the Urban
                                  Development Department to examine
                                  measures to rationalize structural reform and
                                  procedural rationalization. GOG constituted a
                                  high-level committee chaired by the finance
                                  minister comprising representatives from all
                                  fields to study octroi alternatives.

2. Initiate implementation of     Complied with. Expenditure prioritization was      Condition satisfied.   CIP not institutionalized
the CIP.                          implemented under the system of earmarking                                beyond the program life.
                                  selected sectors, projects, and schemes. This
                                  system was established in the state and GOG
                                  is regularly and successfully following it.




                                                                                                                                            Appendix 2
3. Initiate steps to (i) design   Complied with.                                     Condition satisfied.   No change.
and implement tax and             (i) GOG established and made operational
expenditure restructuring;             the SPFRC as well as appointed a
(ii) upgrade budget policy             renowned economist as head of the
formulation, planning,                 SPFRC.




                                                                                                                                            55
management, and control           (ii) Three working groups on expenditure
systems; (iii) computerize             management and control, tax reforms, and
Covenant                                Status at Tranche Release                          Status at PCR        Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                56
the various revenue,                  computerization and training were
expenditure, treasury, and            constituted based on the resolution of July
debt accounts; and (iv)               1998.




                                                                                                                                Appendix 2
improve tax administration      (iii) GOG made funds available for
for enhancing tax                     computerization of the Sales Tax
compliance and                        Department.
enforcement.

4. Reorganize and establish     Complied with. GOG established the                  Condition satisfied.   No change.
a full-fledged directorate of   directorate in April 1998. The directorate's
taxation with separate          functions were under overall supervision of the
wings for major taxes, and      additional chief secretary (finance). A joint
strengthen the research         secretary (tax) was appointed as director of
and analytical capability of    taxation. Suitable personnel are being
this directorate.               identified for strengthening research and
                                analytical capabilities.
5. The Technical                Complied with.                                      Condition satisfied.
Secretariat is to submit a
progress report for SOEs
divested or restructured.

6. Make appropriate             Complied with. The necessary budgetary              Condition satisfied.
allocation for the SRF in the   allocation was made. Rs150 million was asked
FY1998 state budget.            as a budgetary allocation for the SRF in
                                FY1999 in addition to the remaining balance of
                                Rs101 million. The SRF has therefore sufficient
                                balance to meet the expenditure likely to be
                                incurred for the VRS by the SOEs.

7. Make GIDB operational        Complied with. GIDB was made operational            Condition satisfied.
with adequate staffing and      through a form of society in July 1997, and a
budgetary allocation for        full-time chief executive officer and sector
project development and         specialists and professionals were appointed
feasibility studies for key     for day-to-day administration. All policy
infrastructure sectors, and     decisions to be taken in respect of objectives of
develop its technical           the board are handled by the Executive
expertise in these areas to     Committee and full meetings of the board.
build capacities of sector      Budgetary allocation was made for
ministries.                     identification and feasibility of infrastructure
                                projects.
Covenant                               Status at Tranche Release                         Status at PCR                    Status at OEM

B.      Covenants to be Achieved by the Release of the Final Tranche
1. Implement the MTFPF,        Fully met. An MTFPF was formulated in              The MTFPF was submitted to        The MTFPF is updated
regularly assess its           FY1997 and thereafter its progress has been        the Cabinet for adoption          annually.
progress, and prepare          assessed regularly and projections revised in      starting FY2002. A draft MOU
projections annually in line   line with base-year data. The SPFRC prepared       between GOG and the central
with revised base-year data    a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan in         Government for the MTFPF
starting from FY1998.          December 2000 for adoption starting FY2002.        was prepared based on this
                                                                                  plan. The SPFRC was
                                                                                  dissolved after completion of
                                                                                  medium-term fiscal
                                                                                  consolidation plan.

2. Finance Department to       Fully met. Gujarat adopted the blueprint           VAT preparation including         The VAT was implemented
take into account the          prepared by the Committee of Chief Ministers       legislation, computerization      from 1 April 2006. The
recommendations of ADB-        for implementing the VAT nationwide by 1 April     system, training and              progress in revenue
financed technical             2002. In preparation for the switch, a             workshop, and public              collections has been
assistance to                  committee was appointed to design a VAT for        awareness campaign, was           extremely good. Revenue
(i) develop a VAT              Gujarat, based on the model VAT legislation        completed. The VAT bill was       increased by over 30% in
blueprint plan, model          prepared by the National Institute of Public       passed by the State               the first 5 months in 2006/07
legislation, and a credit      Finance and Policy. The national model             Assembly and submitted to         relative to the corresponding
system for input taxation;     envisages gradual reduction in the central         the central Government for        period in 2005/06.
(ii) initiate upgrading and    sales tax rate from 4% to 1% in 3 years and a      approval. The Government
modernizing of sales tax       three-tier VAT tariff structure effective from 1   still has not approved the
administration and training    April 2002.                                        submitted bill. Nationwide, the
of staff members in tax        (i) GOG is implementing a $3.4 million             central Government decided
administration including       computerization program to modernize sales         to postpone the original plan
VAT;                           tax administration, which was to be completed      of VAT introduction (1 April
(iii) launch a public          by 2002.                                           2002) indefinitely. Note that
information campaign; and      (ii) GOG constituted a committee for               the proposed three rates are
(iv) examine options for       supervising VAT implementation. The                4%, 8%, and 12%.
eliminating industrial         committee will launch a broad-based public
concessions and                information campaign once the scope of the         In 1999, about 13,000




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 2
exemptions and tax relief      VAT is finalized.                                  companies had industrial
for bankrupt industries in     (iv) GOG has implemented the                       exemptions for sales tax.
line with the                  recommendations of the Committee of State          Currently, about 3,000
recommendations of the         Finance Ministers to eliminate all sales tax       companies enjoy such
Committee of State Finance     incentives to the industry (exception to those     exemption. About 500
Ministers along with the       already in the pipeline) from 1 January 2000,      companies lose their




                                                                                                                                                    57
implementation of similar      and agreed on uniform floor rates of sales         exemptions each year. By
actions by neighboring         taxation to avoid tax competition, effective 1     2009, no companies will enjoy
Covenant                               Status at Tranche Release                           Status at PCR                    Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                   58
states.                        January 2000. The floor rate regime is               any such privilege.
                               expected to bring additional revenue of Rs3
                               billion to Rs5 billion. Removal of incentives will




                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
                               increase tax buoyancy after 2 years and
                               increase the tax revenue base by
                               approximately 20% in 5­6 years.

3. Improve the valuation       Fully met. To strengthen the valuation system,       Another survey was carried         No further development.
system for stamp duty.         tax tables were updated in June 1998. In             out in 1999. A survey will be
                               consultation with the Revenue Department,            carried out to revise the
                               regular updating of tax tables is being              valuation of land by zone. The
                               institutionalized.                                   revision should be completed
                                                                                    in 2 years.

4. The SPFRC, with ADB         Fully met. Based on recommendations of the           GOG continues to improve           Reforms in implementation
technical assistance           Support for Gujarat Public Finance Reforms           tax administration for effective   continue.
support, is to prepare         technical assistance, the profession tax, tax on     and efficient tax
proposals for improvement      goods and passengers, and MVT structures             administration of profession
in tax administration of a     were improved, effective April 1997.                 tax, and other small taxes.
profession tax, tax on                                                              GOG is reviewing
goods and passengers, and                                                           consolidation of profession
MVT, to support effective                                                           and entertainment taxes.
implementation of state tax
reforms.

5. Develop, in consultation    Fully met. GOG is implementing an action plan        GOG continues implementing         Reforms in implementation
with the municipal             for property tax reform while the study for          the reforms in valuation           continue.
corporations and               reforms in valuation systems was completed           systems.
municipalities, a time-bound   and the tax table prepared.
action plan for property tax
reforms, including a tax
table (as an automatic
reckoning mechanism) for
valuation of properties to
support tax assessment.

6. Implement, in               Substantially met. The Bombay Municipal              No further progress.               No change.
consultation with the          Corporation Act was amended to permit levy of
municipal corporations and     property tax under the new matrix-based
municipalities,                system in six municipal corporations in Gujarat.
recommendations of study       Ahmedabad City took the initiative to introduce
Covenant                               Status at Tranche Release                        Status at PCR                   Status at OEM
on the property tax,           the system and has surveyed three of four
including introduction of a    zones in the city to collect information on tax
criteria-based valuation       base (area of properties, number, and
system for property tax.       characteristics) to design revenue neutral tax
                               rates for implementation from FY2002. GOG
                               conducted workshops to educate other
                               municipal corporations and smaller
                               municipalities on the system and GOG plans to
                               amend the Gujarat Municipal Act to facilitate
                               introduction of the new system of property tax
                               in all municipal areas.

7. Implement, in               Substantially met. The decision to abolish         The decision to abolish octroi   Search for a viable
consultation with municipal    octroi was taken by the state. A draft entry tax   was reversed. Seven              alternative revenue source
corporations and               law was prepared to replace octroi and sent to     municipal corporations are       continues.
municipalities,                the central Government for approval. The law       exempted from the octroi
recommendations of             will be enacted and implemented upon               abolition. Revenue from octroi
studies on octroi designed     receiving federal approval. GOG                    is buoyant and liquid in these
to develop uniformity in the   recommended that local bodies rationalize          seven exempted local bodies.
octroi system across these     octroi, and take measures, including
bodies, and to streamline      implementation of uniform rates. Local bodies
octroi administration and      expressed concerns that the new impost,
procedures.                    which will be collected by GOG and passed on
                               to them, may not be as buoyant and liquid as
                               octroi. GOG incorporated safeguards in the
                               draft legislation to ensure high buoyancy and
                               automatic transfer of revenues to local bodies.

8. Finance Department is to    Continued progress. The SPFRC formulated           GOG implemented several          No change.
take into account the          overall guidelines for cost recovery for key       measures to increase nontax
recommendations of ADB-        socioeconomic services and made specific           revenue and reduce subsidy
financed technical             recommendations. GOG has accepted several          expenditure. In January 2004,
assistance for enhancing       SPFRC recommendations and took action to           water charges were




                                                                                                                                                Appendix 2
cost recovery for key          increase cost recovery in transport, technical     increased. The fee in
socioeconomic services,        education, and irrigation. GOG considers           secondary and higher
such as those for the          enhancing cost recovery as an ongoing              secondary schools, colleges,
transport and social           process and is focusing on its improvement as      and technical institutes were
sectors.                       part of the medium-term fiscal consolidation       revised in June 2003. The
                               framework.                                         electricity charges for the




                                                                                                                                                59
                                                                                  agriculture sector were also
                                                                                  increased.
Covenant                             Status at Tranche Release                       Status at PCR                    Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                      60
9. Introduce improvements    Fully met. The entire Finance Department         GOG commissioned the               No change.
in budget plan,              operation and the budget divisions of various    National Informatics Center to
management, and control      departments were computerized. The office of     establish the Gujarat wide




                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
systems; and computerize     Directorate of Accounts and Treasuries was       area network, which connects
tax and expenditure          also fully computerized. Software was            all departments. By FY2006,
systems, as well as          developed for compiling the state's budget and   all departments will be
treasury and debt            is currently being tested. Budgetary             computerized. At the moment,
management systems.          management was substantially computerized.       the Treasury Department has
                             Software was being developed for the sales       its own computerized system
                             tax.                                             that is used to monitor and
                                                                              manage cash on a daily
                                                                              basis. However, the system
                                                                              used has not yet been linked
                                                                              with other units within the
                                                                              Finance Department.

10. Submit to the SPFRC a    Fully met. The SPFRC was formed in               The fiscal consolidated plan,      No change.
progress report on public    November 1996 and submitted proposals for        completed in December 2000,
finance reforms for review   reform for VAT, property tax, and octroi; and    was submitted to the state
by GOG and ADB by            improvements in expenditure management and       Cabinet. Data and analysis in
December 1997. This          control to the state in October 1998. It         the plan was used as a
report, among others,        undertook additional studies on improving        foundation for preparing the
includes reform proposals    strategic management of public resources and     draft MOU between GOG and
for (i) VAT, property tax,   containment of the fiscal deficit. A fiscal      the central Government for
and octroi; and (ii)         consolidation plan is to be completed in         the state to avail of the States
improvements in              December 2000. The relevant state                Fiscal Reforms Facility. The
expenditure management       departments are deliberating on the              draft MOU was submitted to
and control. The             implementation procedures.                       the central Government on 20
recommendations of the                                                        November 2003 for approval.
SPFRC report, as agreed
by ADB and GOG, will be
adopted by April 1998.
Covenant                                Status at Tranche Release                        Status at PCR                    Status at OEM
11. The Technical               Fully met. The progress report on the status of   GOG through the Technical
Secretariat is to submit a      SOE divestment and restructuring together         Secretariat carried forward
progress report for SOEs        with strategies for restructuring eight SOEs      the SOE restructuring agenda
that have been divested or      was submitted to ADB in September 1999.           in the second phase of the
restructured, and prepare                                                         Public Sector Resource
strategies for restructuring                                                      Management Program,
eight other SOEs.                                                                 initiated by GOG. GOG is
                                                                                  contemplating a new target of
                                                                                  SOE restructuring for
                                                                                  FY2005. However, no specific
                                                                                  time-bound and targeted
                                                                                  restructure plan was adopted.

12. Approve the proposed        Fully met. Approval for restructuring eight
reform of eight SOEs.           SOEs was given by the Cabinet subcommittee.

13. Finalize the study on       Fully met. The study was finalized on 10          Condition satisfied.              GIDC referred to the Expert
technical and restructuring     November 1997. The study proposed to                                                Committee, which has made
options for GIDC.               restructure GIDC by unbundling its                                                  recommendations similar to
                                operations. Estate development, estate                                              those of the consultants
                                management, and lease and/or financing                                              during the program design
                                would be divested while maintaining planning                                        phase.
                                and regulation, land acquisition, and land
                                ownership under GIDC.

14. Merge (i) Gujarat State     (i) Substantially met. The Company Law            The necessary procedure for       (i) All formalities for merger
Leather Industry                Board, of the national Department of Company      registering the merger with       of Gujarat State Leather
Development Corporation         Affairs, approved the merger, and an              the Registrar of Companies        Industry Development
with Gujarat Rural              announcement of the merger was made on 22         has been completed and the        Corporation with Gujarat
Industries Marketing            January 2000. No objections on the merger         merger became effective from      Rural Industries Marketing
Corporation, and (ii) Gujarat   were received, and the formal notification of     9 January 2001.                   Corporation are complete.
State Handicraft                the merger was published in the official                                            (ii) The merger of Gujarat




                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 2
Corporation with Gujarat        gazette.                                          Settlement has still not          State Handloom
State Handloom                  (ii) Substantially met. The Company Law           reached a conclusion. GOG         Development Corporation
Corporation.                    Board, Department of Company Affairs,             assigned the Institute of Rural   Ltd. with Gujarat State
                                Government of India, approved the merger.         Management, Anand, to study       Handicraft Development
                                Objections were received from the employee        the proposed merger, and          Corporation Ltd. was
                                union and cooperative bodies. Negotiations        examine the human resource,       operationalized, with a single
                                                                                  financial, and operating terms    development corporation




                                                                                                                                                     61
                                with the objecting parties are ongoing and
                                settlement was expected by the end of             of the merged corporation. A      being established. The
Covenant                               Status at Tranche Release                       Status at PCR                   Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                   62
                               December 2000.                                    preliminary report was          corporation discharges the
                                                                                 submitted and examined by       functions of a social
                                                                                 the department.                 development organization




                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
                                                                                                                 for purchase of handicraft
                                                                                                                 and handloom products from
                                                                                                                 artisans and weavers, with
                                                                                                                 commercial considerations
                                                                                                                 not being in focus.

15. Lease or sell another 20   Partially met. Of the 20 properties, 10           The leasing or selling          Sale/lease of remaining
properties of Tourism          properties were leased or sold. For 7 leased      processes were held up, due     properties is still in abeyance
Corporation of Gujarat Ltd.    properties, litigations were filed and court      to litigation.                  due to legal issues arising
                               judgments from the High Court of Gujarat are                                      from inadequately prepared
                               pending. Problems arose due mainly to the                                         lease deeds.
                               inadequately prepared lease deeds. Having
                               learned from this lesson, consultants were
                               hired to assess the lease value and prepare
                               the lease deeds for the remaining 10
                               properties. These properties will be either
                               leased or sold.

16. Restructure GHB and        Fully met. A cabinet subcommittee suspended       The Urban Development and       All operations of GSCB have
GSCB by transferring all       the activities of GSCB by transferring slum       Urban and Housing               been discontinued. For
construction of low-income     clearance activities to local bodies and/or       Development Department          administrative convenience,
housing from GSCB and          nongovernment organizations and the assets        initiated action according to   GSCB's employees were
rationalizing GSCB             to Gujarat Housing Board. GSBC employees          the cabinet subcommittee's      offered VRS and then
activities.                    will be offered VRS. The closure of GSCB is       decision. Activities of GSCB    redeployed in a separate cell
                               being implemented by the Urban Development        were closed down. Almost all    of Gujarat Housing Board,
                               Department.                                       employees were paid through     with their focus only on
                                                                                 VRS.                            recovery of old dues. During
                                                                                                                 the next 3­4 years the
                                                                                 The Urban Development and       collection of all recoverable
                                                                                 Urban and Housing               dues is expected to be
                                                                                 Development Department has      completed; the funds are to
                                                                                 not yet initiated actions to    be deposited in an escrow
                                                                                 restructure GHB.                account to be made
                                                                                                                 available for GOG use.

17. Report on settlement of    Fully met. A report on settlement of creditors'   Condition satisfied. The        All 17 mills of the company
creditors' dues from the       dues was submitted in October 2000. GSTC          liquidation process is          remain closed.
Covenant                                Status at Tranche Release                         Status at PCR                    Status at OEM
closed textile mills in cases   was ordered to be liquidated by the Gujarat         ongoing.
where closure was               High Court on 6 February 1998 and the High
approved by the relevant        Court appointed an official liquidator in
statutory authorities, and      accordance with the provision of the Company
downsize GSTC.                  Act. A sales committee consisting of
                                commercial banks and GOG representatives
                                was formed to facilitate the liquidation process.
                                However, its completion is expected to take a
                                few more years. The 17 textile mills under
                                GSTC at the time of liquidation were valued
                                and workers were given VRS.

18. Review, with ADB, the       Fully met. GOG approved closure of the three        GOG closed five SOEs. Apart
status of the preparation of    SOEs, namely Gujarat State Construction             from the three identified
closure of three SOEs.          Corporation, GSTC, and Gujarat Film                 SOEs, GOG closed two
                                Development Corporation.                            additional SOEs, namely
                                                                                    Gujarat Small Industries
                                                                                    Corporation (GSIC) and
                                                                                    GDDC.

19. Take necessary steps        Fully met. Three SOEs, Gujarat State Fisheries      For the closure of GDDC,         The GDDC has been closed.
for closure of three SOEs       Corporation, Gujarat Small Industries               GOG sought BIFR approval.        Only land belonging to
and where required seek         Corporation, and Gujarat State Construction         The BIFR case was                GDDC has not yet been sold
Board for Industrial and        Corporation were closed. The liquidation            registered. GOG directed the     but is likely to be transferred
Financial Reconstruction        process is under way, and employees will be         Agriculture Department to        to GOG. VRS for the
(BIFR) approval for such        given VRS.                                          close GDDC activities. Almost    remaining five employees is
closure.                                                                            all employees were given         to be paid from GDDC
                                                                                    VRS.                             resources as per phase III of
                                                                                                                     the VRS.
20. The Technical               Fully met. The report was submitted to ADB in       The SRF is still in operation
Secretariat is to review        September 1999. According to the report,            and is under the purview of
implementation of the SRF       Personal Ledger Account of SRF, as part of          the Technical Secretariat that
and submit a progress           the social safety net under the program of SOE      has a mandate for SOE




                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
report on the SRF to the        restructuring, was made operational with            restructuring. So far 17,800
state and ADB.                  disbursements totaling Rs2,770 million              employees have been given
                                covering 17,143 SOE employees as of                 VRS at the cost of Rs3,280
                                September 1999.                                     million. When the latest VRS
                                                                                    package for 3,040 employees
                                                                                    becomes effective, a total of




                                                                                                                                                       63
                                                                                    20,840 employees will have
                                                                                    been given VRS at a cost of
Covenant                               Status at Tranche Release                          Status at PCR                   Status at OEM




                                                                                                                                                     64
                                                                                   Rs4,240 million.

21. Provide a report to ADB    Fully met. The progress report was submitted        The road map, Vision 2010,       On behalf of GOG, GIDB




                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 2
on progress made by GIDB       to ADB in September 1999. The report                was completed and is             prepared Vision 2010, the
in performing its role and     outlines the progress achieved by GIDB,             accessible through GIDB's        updated Blueprint for
function.                      including the adoption of the Gujarat               website. The document            Infrastructure in Gujarat
                               Infrastructure Development Act, 1999 (also          incorporates 10 infrastructure   2020, as the statutory
                               called the Build-Operate-Transfer Act) and          sectors, including ports,        authority responsible for
                               the preparation of Vision 2010, identifying off     roads, power, water, gas,        coordinating infrastructure
                               the shelf projects in each of the infrastructure    urban infrastructure, and        development in the state.
                               sectors for this decade.                            industrial parks.


22. Prepare the CIP for the    Fully met. The progress report was submitted        Condition satisfied.              Vision 2010 prepared,
power sector for 1997­2012     to ADB in September 1999. The report                                                 including prioritized power
on the basis of a least-cost   forecasts the power demand of the state to                                           sector plan, updated in the
expansion plan.                2010 under different scenarios. The line-up of                                       Vision 2020
                               projects to meet the demand was prioritized, in
                               accordance with preestablished parameters.
                               The CIP for the power sector on the basis of
                               this report was included in the state's overall
                               CIP.

23. GEB to convert, on a       Fully met. The distribution circles of Rajkot and   Condition satisfied.
pilot basis, two of its        Kheda began operation as profit centers with
distribution districts or      the aim of increasing cost efficiencies and
circles into independent       achieving greater commercialization of their
profit centers, to increase    operations.
cost efficiencies of these
circles through greater
commercialization of their
operations.

24. Provide a progress         Fully met. The progress report on GMB               Condition satisfied.             The expert committee
report to ADB on the           restructuring was provided to ADB in                                                 recommended the creation
restructuring of GMB and       December 1999. Under the plan, GMB                                                   of GMA under the Maritime
make GDPC operational.         proposes to maintain its commercial operations                                       Authority Act, with GMA
                               while establishing a separate independent                                            having regulatory
                               regulatory body for the ports sector and                                             responsibilities including
                               downsizing its workforce.                                                            tariffs, with port development
 Covenant                                Status at Tranche Release                          Status at PCR                     Status at OEM
                                                                                                                       activities retained by GMB.
                                 GDPC is in operation as a joint venture with                                          The draft legislation is being
                                 Adani Port Ltd., a private sector corporation                                         considered by a
                                 and will be developing Mundar Port.                                                   parliamentary committee,
                                                                                                                       and is expected to be
                                                                                                                       passed within a year.

 25. Finalize the proposed       Fully met. The CIP was prepared in late 1998        GOG no longer prepares the        GOG prepared Vision 2010
 ports sector CIP for            and a report was provided to ADB in December        CIP. The capital expenditure      including prioritized port
 inclusion by GOG in the         1998. The CIP for the subsector was included        was planned under the state's     sector plan, updated in the
 overall state CIP.              in the state's overall CIP.                         5-year plans.                     BIG 2020.


 26. In the second phase,        Fully met. GMB outsourced loss-making               Condition satisfied.              No change.
 establish a port service        operations such as dredging, rather than
 development corporation to      maintain them under a port service
 handle dredging and related     development corporation.
 port services.

 27. Finalize the proposed       Fully met. The CIP was provided to ADB in           Condition satisfied.              GOG prepared Vision 2010
 roads sector CIP based on       December 1998. Of the roads examined under                                            including prioritized road
 the R&BD strategic options      the strategic option study, which covered 3,000                                       sector plan, updated in the
 study for inclusion by GOG      kilometers of roads in Gujarat, a World Bank                                          Vision 2020.
 in the overall state CIP.       project supported a study of 2,000 kilometers.
                                 The CIP for the roads sector was finalized on
                                 the basis of this study and included in the
                                 state's CIP.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, BOOT = build-own-operate-transfer, BOT = build-operate-transfer, CIP = core investment program, GAIC = Gujarat Agro
Industries Corporation Ltd., GCEL = Gujarat Communications and Electronic Ltd., GDDC = Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation, GDPC = Gujarat Port
Development Company, GEB = Gujarat Electricity Board, GIDB = Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board, GIDC = Gujarat Industrial Development
Corporation, GIIC = Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation, GERC = Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission, GHB = Gujarat Housing Board,
GMA = Gujarat Maritime Authority, GMB = Gujarat Maritime Board, GMDC = Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation, GOG = government of Gujarat,




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 2
GSCB = Gujarat Slum Clearance Board, GSEC = Gujarat State Export Corporation, GSFC = Gujarat State Financial Corporation, GSTC = Gujarat State Textile
Corporation, GTCL = Gujarat Tractor Corporation Ltd., HDFC = Housing Development Finance Corporation, ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation Ltd., IL&FS = Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services, MOU = memorandum of understanding, MTFPF = medium-term fiscal policy framework,
MVT = motor vehicle tax, NSDP = net state domestic product, R&BD = Roads and Bridges Department, SDP = state domestic product, SOE = state-owned
enterprise, SPFRC = State Public Finance Reforms Committee, SRF = State Renewal Fund, TFC = twelfth finance commission, VAT = value-added tax,
VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data and ADB. 2004. Program Completion Report on the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program in India.




                                                                                                                                                           65
Manila.
66     Appendix 3



     OVERVIEW OF THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF FISCAL REFORM IN GUJARAT

A.     Background

1.       The policy shift allowing the states to borrow from multilateral agencies came about
in response to the severe fiscal imbalance and balance of payments problem. After three
and a half decades of low gross domestic product (GDP) growth at 3.5% per year, the Indian
economy accelerated to over 5% in the latter half of the 1980s. While the initial impetus to
growth acceleration came from economic liberalization, this is mainly attributed to the
expansionist fiscal stance of the central Government, partly contributed to by the increase in
public sector wages in FY1987. The gross fiscal deficit of the central and state governments
steadily increased from 5.9% in FY1982 to 9.4% in FY1990, and outstanding liabilities
relative to GDP rose from 46.4% in FY1980 to 61.4% in FY1990. The fiscal expansion-led
growth was inherently unsustainable. The fiscal imbalance spilled over into balance of
payments and the sharp increase in oil prices caused by the Gulf crisis triggered economic
crisis in the country.

2.       The stabilization and structural adjustment reforms initiated in 1991 required
containment of central and state fiscal deficits. State reforms also had to address the issue
of enhancing allocative and technical efficiency in public spending, and creating an enabling
environment for private sector participation in accelerating economic growth. Economic
liberalization required creation of a competitive environment for domestic manufacturers.
The hardening central finances reduced resource transfers to states; one measure adopted
was to allow the reform-oriented states to negotiate loans from multilateral institutions. Given
that fiscal reform was as inherent part of the loan negotiations, allowing the states to borrow
from multilateral institutions could achieve the objectives of (i) improving their finances, (ii)
augmenting outlay on social and physical infrastructure and restructure of public enterprises,
and (iii) creating an enabling environment for private sector functioning.

3.      Notably, until the mid-1990s, the states were not allowed to directly negotiate loans
with multilateral agencies. Gujarat was the first state to avail of the liberalized regime. In
1996 the Asian Development Bank (ADB) revised its operating strategy to advance a portion
of assistance to states in India. Although the loan agreement for ADB was with the central
Government, which retained the repayment liability, negotiations were with the state
government of Gujarat (GOG), which agreed to the ADB conditions. Prudent and efficient
use of the resources provided under the loan, therefore, was as important for the central
Government as it was to ADB. The fact that this was the first loan for public sector resource
management, no precedence and experience was available to assist with designing and
managing the loan, including setting specific conditions and covenants, modifying them to
take account of exogenous shocks, instituting a monitoring system, and providing technical
assistance and building capacity.

4.      The choice of Gujarat state by ADB was appropriate. Gujarat has been a progressive
and reform-oriented state. Of all the states, Gujarat has had a culture of market orientation,
and has significant private entrepreneurship and political leadership with a tradition of good
administration and governance. The state has had a proactive reform agenda and already
had the report of the Gujarat State Finance Commission (GSFC) ready to be implemented.
Taking the GSFC recommendations as conditions resulted in GOG having complete
ownership of the reforms. The strategy also helped with the acceptance of reforms by the
general public. Thus, even with several changes in governments and chief ministers in office
during the period, the reforms adopted in the ADB program never looked in danger and all
the parties were equally committed to implementing them.
                                                                                      Appendix 3      67



B.        Key Developments and Constraints during Implementation

5.     The loan to Gujarat for public sector resource management was followed by similar
loans to Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and Assam by ADB; and to Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka,
and Andhra Pradesh by the World Bank. Over time, considerable experience has been
gained in designing and implementing such loans and in monitoring them to ensure
compliance with the conditions and overall achievement of the objectives. A major lesson
from the Gujarat program has been the need to accommodate exigencies arising from
unforeseen factors while specifying the loan conditions.

6.      An important unforeseen factor that adversely affected Gujarat state finances was
the sharp increase in public sector wages following implementation of the Fifth Pay
Commission's national recommendations in FY1997. As in other states, this contributed to
the sharp deterioration in the fiscal health of Gujarat and required revising the deficit target.
In addition, unforeseen factors such as the severe drought in FY1999, cyclone in FY2000,
and massive earthquake in January 2001 completely destabilized Gujarat's finances. The
loan conditions had to be revised to take account of the adverse impacts. The communal
violence in February 2002 took a significant tool on economic activity and with it, the fiscal
consolidation program.

7.       Because the original design did not account for the influence of exogenous factors on
the set targets, the fiscal deficit targets had to be revised from time to time. Thus, the fiscal
deficit target was originally set to be reduced from 4% of NSDP in FY1996 to 2% in FY1999,
but the actual deficit in the year was 8.9% due to the cumulative effect of the drought,
cyclone, and earthquake. The State Public Finance Reform Committee (SPFRC), at the
behest of the state finance minister, reworked the sustainable level of fiscal deficit to 3.5% of
gross state domestic product (GSDP) in FY2005.

8.      Indeed, the finances of all state governments sharply deteriorated following the pay
increases in FY1998. Stagnancy in tax revenues and decline in the central transfers relative
to the state domestic product (SDP) aggravated the situation. The problem was
compounded by increasing deficits and debt, and rising interest rates. Following the
recommendation of the Eleventh Finance Commission, the Ministry of Finance designed the
medium-term fiscal reforms program requiring the states to reduce the ratio of revenue
deficits to total revenues by 5 percentage points every year to gain eligibility for grants. The
design of this performance-linked grants program had problems. 1 The Twelfth Finance
Commission (TFC) recommended replacing it with an incentive-based debt-restructuring
program. To be eligible to qualify, the states are required to pass a fiscal responsibility act.
This would entitle them to get the benefit of restructuring and consolidation of market loans,
and loans from the central Government with a substantially reduced rate of interest. A state
could also avail of the benefits of waiver of loan repayment due for the next 5 years
beginning FY2005, directly linked to the reduction in its revenue deficit.

9.       Whether or not the incentive system fiscal performance to loan waiver designed by
the TFC is effective, the fiscal management monitoring system has come a long way from
what existed in FY1996 when the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program
(GPSRMP) was designed. Indeed, the Program and those that followed it in other states,
initiated by ADB and the World Bank, have helped to evolve design, implementation, and
monitoring of the conditions to improve states' fiscal performances. Although considerable
work remains, future programs should ensure harmony between the fiscal performance


1
    For a critique of the recommendations of the Eleventh Finance Commission and Medium-term Fiscal Reform
    Committee see Rao. M.D. 2004. Linking Central Transfers to Fiscal Performance of States. Economic and
    Political Weekly. XXXIX (18):1820­1825.
68     Appendix 3



targets set by the central Government and those designed by ADB as conditions for loans to
states.

C.      Current Trends in State Finances

10.     The aggregate fiscal trends for the states show significant improvement since
FY2003. The aggregate revenue and fiscal deficits of the states have declined significantly.
The revised estimate of revenue deficit in FY2005 is about 0.5% of GDP; this is about 2
percentage points lower than in FY2001 (Table A3.1 and Figure A3.1) and only 0.5
percentage point more than the restructuring target set by the TFC for FY2008. Similarly, the
revised estimate of fiscal deficit for FY2005 at 3.2% of GDP is marginally higher than the
adjustment target set for FY2008. Even if the final figures of revenue and fiscal deficits for
the year turn out to be marginally higher, the trend indicates that the states' fiscal health has
clearly shown a significant improvement.

11.     The analysis of the sources of improvements in state finances shows a 2.1
percentage point improvement, increase in revenues contributed to 1.5 points or 72% and
the remaining 0.6 point or 28% was due to compression of expenditures. Within the former,
the bulk of the contribution, about 1 percentage point, was due to increased devolution
recommended by the TFC, higher buoyancy central taxes since FY2002, and increased
grants for various central schemes. Similarly, for expenditures, reduced interest payments
following the debt swap scheme and later due to the adoption of the TFC's scheme of debt
restructuring and write-off contributed to 0.24 point improvement in the revenue deficit.

                  Table A3.1: Fiscal Trends in All Indian States 2001­2007
                                      (Percent of GDP)

  Description                       FY2001      FY2002     FY2003      FY2004   FY2005   FY2006
  Revenue Deficit                     2.59       2.25        2.22        1.17    0.49     0.05
  Gross Fiscal Deficit                4.21       4.17        4.46        3.50    3.20     2.71
  Primary Deficit                     1.47       1.31        1.50        0.68    0.70     0.16
  Revenue Receipts                   11.21      11.44       11.47       11.92   12.74    13.12
  Current Transfers                   4.18       4.18        4.29        4.34    5.13     5.31
  Revenue Expenditure                13.80      13.69       13.68       13.09   13.22    13.16
  Interest Payments                   2.74       2.86        2.96        2.82    2.50     2.54
  Capital Outlay                      1.41       1.49        1.90        1.97    2.39     2.43
  Development Expenditurea            9.50       9.32       10.15        9.40   10.16     9.81
  Nondevelopment
  Expenditurea                        6.05       6.20        6.12        6.03    5.70     5.83
  Social Sector Expenditurea          5.78       5.60        5.42        5.39    5.95     5.82
  Social Servicesa                    5.13       5.00        4.82        4.71    5.19     5.13
  of which
  (i) Education, Sports, Art, and
  Culture                             2.66       2.57        2.40        2.31    2.33     2.91
  (ii) Medical, Public Health,
  and Family Welfare                  0.73       0.70        0.66        0.63    0.72     0.73
 FY = fiscal year, GDP = gross domestic product.
 a
   Indicates GDP for 2006/07 was estimated from Budget at a Glance 2006/07.
 Source: Reserve Bank of India.

12.     In keeping with the general trend in state finances, the finances of Gujarat state have
shown appreciable improvement. Both revenue and fiscal deficit have improved significantly
since FY2000 (Table A3.2, Figure A3.2). The revenue deficit, which was high at 7% of NSDP
in FY2001, is estimated to have been virtually phased out in FY2005. Similarly, the fiscal
deficit was reduced from 8.9% of NSDP in FY2000 and to 3.5% in FY2005. In other words,
                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 3              69



the state has achieved the medium-term target set for FY2005 by the SPFRC. In fact, it has
already achieved the fiscal restructuring target set by the TFC for FY2008.

                                                           Figure A3.1: Trends in Fiscal Imbalances in States

                                         5                                                             Fiscal Deficit
                      Percent of GDP


                                         4
                                         3                                                              Revenue Deficit
                                         2
                                         1                                                                Primary Deficit
                                         0
                                               6       7       8       9        0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7
                                             -9      -9      -9      -9       -0       -0       -0       -0       -0       -0       -0       -0
                                          995     996     997     998      999      000      001      002      003      004      005      006
                                         1       1       1       1       1        2        2        2        2        2        2        2
                                                                                           Years


  GDP = gross domestic product.
  Source: Reserve Bank of India.

                                                                    Table A3.2: Fiscal Trends in Gujarat

                                                                      Revenue                Fiscal             Capital                Development
                                             Financial Year            Deficit               Deficit          Expenditure              Expenditure
                                             1995/96                       (0.4)             (2.8)                   2.0                     11.9
                                             1996/97                       (0.8)             (3.2)                   2.0                     11.3
                                             1997/98                       (1.3)             (4.1)                   2.4                     13.3
                                             1998/99                       (3.2)             (6.3)                   2.5                     14.5
                                             1999/2000                     (3.8)             (7.3)                   2.9                     15.6
                                             2000/01                       (7.0)             (8.9)                   3.3                     20.9
                                             2001/02                       (6.7)             (6.4)                   1.7                     17.0
                                             2002/03                       (3.0)             (5.2)                   2.0                     13.1
                                             2003/04                       (2.6)             (6.5)                   2.3                     11.2
                                             2004/05                       (2.6)             (5.7)                   2.7                     11.9
                                             2005/06                       (0.2)             (3.5)                   3.4                     11.6
                                             Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
                                             Source: Government of Gujarat Annual Budget Papers.




                                                                                  Fiscal Trends in Gujarat
                                                                 Figure A3.2: Fiscal Trends in Gujarat
                                       6.0
                                       4.0
                                       2.0
   Per Cent of NSDP




                                       0.0                                                                                                                         Rev. Def
                                   -2.0 -94     -95     -96     -97     -98     -99     -00     -01     -02     -03     -04     -05     -06     -07                Fis.Def
                                       93     94      95      96      97      98      99      00      01      02      03      04      05      06
                                     19
                                   -4.0     19      19      19      19      19      19      20      20      20      20      20      20      20                     Cap. Exp

                                   -6.0
                                   -8.0
                             -10.0
                                                                                             Years



Source: Government of Gujarat annual budget papers.
70     Appendix 3




D.     Human Development Progress in Gujarat

13.     The GPSRMP-supported fiscal management reform explicitly focused on the
compression of fiscal deficits and ignored the reprioritization of expenditures to achieve
human development goals. Although separate components of the Program dealt with tax
and expenditure reforms, and to some extent capital expenditures, the GPSRMP did not
have any provision to protect spending on social sectors when expenditure compression had
to be made. Social expenditures are easy to reduce when expenditure compression as a
part of fiscal adjustment is implemented. While successive natural calamities in 1999, 2000,
and 2001, and a human-made tragedy in 2002 caused sharp increases in expenditures, the
GPSRMP actually provided some cushion to social sector spending. As illustrated in Table
A3.3, within the social sector, however, the allocation of social priority areas actually suffered
in these years and the reduction in the allocation was particularly severe in 2001/02, partly
due to the earthquake in January 2001 and more importantly due to large-scale communal
disturbances in February 2002.

14.      The public expenditure ratio, measuring the percentage of state income that goes
into public expenditure, is increasing over the long term with a marked increase over the
years FY1996­FY2000 from 19.6% to 33%, although the FY2000 and FY2001 figures were
boosted by the response to the early 2001 earthquake. Since FY1999, this figure has been
maintained around the norm of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) of 25%.
The social sector ratio measuring the percentage of total expenditure allocated to social
services was marginally higher in FY2004 than in FY1991, but has remained between 5 and
8 points below the UNDP norm of 40%. However, it showed slight upward movement during
the first 3 years of the GPSRMP and of course in FY2000 and FY2001. Of some concern
though is the trend of the social priority ratio, which measures the percentage of social
expenditure devoted to human priority concerns (education, health, water, and sanitation).
Although well above the UNDP norm of 50% since FY1991, being around the mid-70%
range until FY1996, it fluctuates through the program period dropping 10% over 4 years as a
result of a succession of natural disasters, and a further 18% in FY2001 as a result of the
large-scale communal disturbances in early 2002, before settling at around 60% after
FY2002. The human development ratio, the product of the above three ratios, measuring the
percentage of state income devoted to human priority concerns, has shown a long-term
improvement with a rapid rise during the program period.
                    Table A3.3: Human Development Ratios in Gujarat

                      Public
                    Expenditure       Social Sector     Social Priority   Human Development
 Financial Year        Ratio             Ratio              Ratio               Ratio
 1991/92                15.9             32.2               74.3                    3.8
 1992/93                14.0             30.2               75.8                    3.2
 1993/94                15.4             32.8               74.5                    3.7
 1994/95                14.7             33.3               74.2                    3.6
 1995/96                16.4             32.2               72.3                    3.8
 1996/97                16.8             30.4               73.4                    3.7
 1997/98                19.6             31.8               70.0                    4.4
 1998/99                23.4             32.9               73.6                    5.7
 1999/2000              26.1             33.9               66.5                    5.9
 2000/01                33.0             35.0               61.9                    7.1
 2001/02                29.9             35.1               43.1                    4.5
 2002/03                26.4             31.8               61.0                    5.1
 2003/04                24.2             32.7               60.2                    4.8
                                                                                                                          Appendix 3     71



 2004/05                                         25.7                          32.7                               65.2        5.5
Source: Government of Gujarat annual budget papers.




                                   Figure
                                Human                Development Ratios
                                          A3.3: HumanExpenditure
                                       Development               RatiosininGujarat
                                                                            Gujarat

                 80.0
    Percentage




                 60.0
                                                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                                                       SSR
                 40.0
                                                                                                                                       SPR
                                                                                                                                       HDR
                 20.0

                  0.0
                        8

                                9

                                       0

                                               1

                                                      2

                                                              3

                                                                     4

                                                                             5

                                                                                    6

                                                                                            7

                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                           9



                                                                                                                  20 1

                                                                                                                  20 0 2

                                                                                                                  20 0 3

                                                                                                                  20 0 4

                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                         0
                      -8

                             -8

                                     -9

                                            -9

                                                    -9

                                                           -9

                                                                   -9

                                                                          -9

                                                                                  -9

                                                                                         -9

                                                                                                 -9

                                                                                                        -9



                                                                                                                       -0




                                                                                                                       -0
                                                                                                                00



                                                                                                                       -

                                                                                                                       -

                                                                                                                       -
                   87

                           88

                                  89

                                          90

                                                 91

                                                         92

                                                                93

                                                                        94

                                                                               95

                                                                                       96

                                                                                              97

                                                                                                      98



                                                                                                                     00

                                                                                                                    01

                                                                                                                    02

                                                                                                                    03

                                                                                                                    04
                                                                                                             -2
                 19

                        19

                                19

                                       19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                              19

                                                                     19

                                                                             19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19



                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                           99
                                                                                                        19
                                                                                       Years

 HDR = human development ratio, PER = public expenditure ratio, SAR = social allocation ration, SPR = social
 priority ration.
 Source: Government of Gujarat Annual Budget Papers.
72        Appendix 4



                          STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISE REFORM IN GUJARAT

A.        Background

1.     India's states have replicated the central Government's model of using state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) to spur industrial and socioeconomic development. Currently, state SOEs
contribute around 5% of gross domestic product (GDP) in terms of aggregate revenues, as
compared to 10% in the case of central SOEs. The total investment in state SOEs is estimated
to have been Rs360,058 crore1 in 2003. Among the states, Andhra Pradesh had the largest
investment in SOEs, accounting for 8% of the country's total investment, followed by Jammu
and Kashmir (7%), and Delhi and Maharashtra (5% each).

2.       Most state governments emulated the central Government in setting up manufacturing
enterprises to increase industrialization in their respective states. State SOEs have also been
used to achieve objectives ranging from employment creation to supply of subsidized services
like power and transport. Of 1,068 state SOEs, more than 50% were engaged in manufacturing
activities. Other categories in which state SOEs operate include promotional and development
activities (16% of all state SOEs), utilities primarily comprising power utilities and road transport
corporations (12%), welfare enterprises providing economic support to the poor (8%), financial
enterprises (7%), and trade and services.

3.     Kerala has the largest number of state SOEs at 109, with 77 engaged in manufacturing.
Uttar Pradesh with 104 SOEs had the second largest concentration, but accounts for the largest
number of enterprises engaged in promotional and welfare activities. In FY2003, the total
revenues earned by all state SOEs was Rs86,284 crore with net losses of Rs6,997 crore
recorded. Most state SOEs continue to depend on annual budgetary support from their
respective state governments. Given the budgetary constraints being faced by most states,
many initiated SOE reforms to reduce the recurring budgetary support required to sustain the
SOEs and allocate additional resources to infrastructure, health, and education.

4.      States like Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka have been the pioneers in SOE
reform in India. Gujarat's total investments in 54 SOEs were estimated at Rs13,000 crore in
FY1994. These enterprises employed 160,000 people, accounting for around 10% of the state's
workforce in the organized sector. Like other states, Gujarat too had to provide recurring
budgetary support to sustain its underperforming SOEs. In FY1994, the year in which the SOE
reform program was initiated, SOEs received budgetary support of more than Rs1,900 crore in
the form of equity infusion, grants, loans, and subsidies.

5.      In 1992, the first attempt to reform Gujarat's SOEs was made when a review undertaken
by the State Finance Commission (SFC) recommended closure of 11 SOEs and divestment in
another 21, with only enterprises engaged in socially relevant activities in the state being
retained under government ownership. SFC proposed establishment of a senior committee
under the chief minister for pursuing divestment in a transparent and professional manner.
However, in the absence of political will and an effective institutional and policy framework for
implementing these measures, SFC's recommendations could not be adopted. Moreover, SOE
reforms were hampered by the prevalent restrictive land and labor legislation, which acted as
barriers to restructuring.



1
    1 Crore is equal to 10 million Rs.
                                                                                     Appendix 4     73


6.      The Bureau of Public Enterprises was established in 1979 under administrative control
of the Finance Department, to serve as a central coordinating agency for state SOEs. Its
mandate was to monitor performance and provide broad guidelines for efficient performance of
enterprises owned by the government of Gujarat (GOG) including2 (i) being involved in matters
relating to wage policies and service conditions of SOEs; (ii) undertaking financial analyses and
evaluation of feasibility studies and investment proposals; (iii) carrying out periodic performance
appraisals of functioning of SOEs; (iv) preparing annual reports on the performance of state
SOEs; (v) promoting management training in critical areas such as financial control, accounts
and audit, material management, personnel, industrial relations, and marketing; (vi) serving as a
repository of information on various aspects of management and performance in the public
sector; and (vii) providing consulting services to line departments in establishing new
enterprises, and offering legal assistance in respect of statutory corporations. However, GOG
did not give the Bureau of Public Enterprises the mandate to implement SOE reforms, a task
assigned to the high-level cabinet committee.

B.        Program Design

          1.      Rationale for the SOE Component of the Program

7.      The long-term development strategy of GOG, as detailed in its Eighth Five-Year Plan
(1992­1997), was to reduce poverty and unemployment. This was to be achieved by ensuring
universal literacy, developing villages, improving reproductive and child health, developing
small-scale industry, and providing skills training. The state set specific social targets to be
achieved by 2001, including maternal and prenatal care, with a reduction of the birth and infant
mortality rates to 21 per 1,000 and 60 per 1,000, expansion of immunization, safe drinking water
to all villages, and provision of pucca roads in 2,403 villages. While GOG had ambitious
development plans, like other states at the time, resource constraints led to severe cuts in public
investments. Given its fiscal constraints, the state was expected to realize investment outlays of
around Rs105 billion during the plan, but had a shortfall of Rs10 billion.

8.       To achieve higher economic growth, GOG announced a new industrial policy in 1995 to
(i) promote private domestic and foreign direct investment in infrastructure development and
technology, (ii) accelerate employment generation and development of less developed regions,
and (iii) divest and restructure SOEs. By March 1995, GOG's total investment in SOEs
(including loans and equity capital) was Rs130 billion, almost at the same level as the state's
Eighth Five-Year Plan. With profit after taxes from SOEs at less than Rs0.9 billion and dividends
of around Rs0.5 billion, compared to an annual subsidy to SOEs of Rs10 billion, the drain on the
state's budget was unsustainable. However, SOEs employed more than 160,000 workers and
accounted for around 10% of the formal employment in the state, which had potentially difficult
political implications. GOG recognized that the adverse impact of SOEs on government finances
needed to be reduced to free up resources for investment in infrastructure and social sectors,
and to encourage the private sector to participate in infrastructure development. It also
acknowledged the need for divestment of its stake in selected SOEs to reduce its role in
commercial activities, as per the 1995 industrial policy.

9.       The Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program (GPSRMP) was designed to
support these reforms by (i) strengthening state public finances and their prudent management;
(ii) divesting and restructuring SOEs; and (iii) strengthening the policy, regulatory, legal, and
institutional frameworks for private sector participation in critical infrastructure sectors like power,

2
    Annual Report on Public Sector Enterprises of GOG compiled by BPE.
74     Appendix 4



ports, and roads. The Program targeted 23 SOEs having a work force of 75,000 (47% of total
SOE employment in the state) and outstanding debt liabilities of Rs76 billion or 80% of total
outstanding SOE debt.

C.     Policy Measures for SOE Reforms under the GPSRMP

10.    Framework to Categorize SOEs. Based on the SFC report recommendations, four
reform strategies were adopted for the 23 SOEs under the Program:

       (i)     Full divestment. SOEs whose operations could be made sustainable by handing
               over management control to a private sector partner selected by competitive
               bidding were to be privatized. Privatization was to be done in 2 stages; first 51%
               of GOG's shares were to be sold to the selected private sector partner, followed
               by the balance of shares to be sold after 1 year.

       (ii)    Partial divestment. Two approaches were proposed. (a) SOEs such as the state
               financial intermediary and the mineral development agency requiring additional
               capital to meet emerging requirements in the industry were to be partially
               divested, with GOG retaining only a 49% stake postdivestment. The partial
               divestment was to be made through an offer of GOG shareholding to the public.
               (b) For the other four enterprises, which were involved in export promotion,
               extending loans, planning, developing, and regulating industrial estates, and
               distribution of agricultural inputs, GOG proposed divesting part of its
               shareholding ranging between 26% and 74%.

       (iii)   Merger. SOEs fulfilling GOG's socioeconomic development responsibilities were
               to be restructured through merger with like enterprises to ensure operating
               efficiencies with associated personnel and financial restructuring.

       (iv)    Closure. SOEs consistently reporting losses and whose net worth had been
               eroded due to unviable operations were to be closed down through a process of
               liquidation after offering the voluntary retirement scheme (VRS) to all employees.

       (v)     Restructuring through sale/lease of assets or unbundling of activities.
               Sale/lease of properties was proposed for the Tourism Corporation as part of the
               overall focus on reducing GOG participation in commercial activities, where
               adequate private sector activity was already prevalent. With respect to the
               Gujarat Electricity Board, functional restructuring involving, among other
               measures, the conversion of two of its distribution circles into an independent
               profit center was proposed. The unbundling of diverse activities was also
               intended to be undertaken by the Gujarat Maritime Board to improve
               sustainability of its operations.

11.     Institutional Framework to Support SOE Reforms. Two bodies were responsible for
implementing, reviewing, and monitoring the SOE reform process. A policy-level cabinet
subcommittee, chaired by the chief minister with the ministers of finance and industries and the
chief secretary, was established to review and approve the (i) extent of shareholding to be
divested in enterprises identified for divestment, (ii) acceptance of a successful bidder's offer, (iii)
price at which shares would be offered to the public, (iv) restructuring plans to be adopted for
enterprises, and (v) enterprises to be closed.
                                                                                      Appendix 4     75


12.     A technical secretariat for privatization headed by a full time ex-chief secretary with four
technical staff was established with logistic and technical support from Gujarat State Investment
Company, which is the apex holding company for all GOG equity investments in SOEs. The
secretariat, which was administratively responsible to the Finance Department, was mandated
as an advisory body to the Finance Department and the line ministries having administrative
control of SOEs, to develop proposals for SOE reforms, value SOEs, and provide negotiation
and contracting support during the privatization process. External consultants with specialized
SOE reform and privatization skills were engaged to support the Technical Secretariat.

13.     State Renewal Fund for Voluntary Retirement Scheme and Social Safety Net for
Displaced Workers. GOG instituted a VRS policy in 1997, as part of the GPSRMP, covering
displaced employees of SOEs identified for restructuring, closure, and privatization. In line with
the Program, in September 1996 the State Renewal Fund (SRF) was established under the
administrative control of the Finance Department to finance VRS payments, cost of
redeployment of surplus human resources, financial restructuring plans of SOEs, and other
associated activities. The SRF was to be financed through (i) contributions from GOG, (ii) the
central Government's National Renewal Fund, (iii) proceeds from the sale of GOG shareholding
in SOEs, and (iv) sale of assets of closed SOEs. A social safety net (SSN) scheme was
intended to provide training to reskill displaced employees enabling them to seek alternate
employment opportunities.

14.    The following institutional mechanism was adopted for VRS disbursement from the SRF
to employees displaced during SOE restructuring:

          (i)       Open a personal ledger account under the SRF for each SOE identified for
                    human resource reform.

          (ii)      Formulate clearly defined rules and regulations for bringing the SRF into
                    operation, including provisions relating to sanctioning of VRS proposals to be
                    funded by the SRF as well as proper accounting and audit of all disbursements
                    from the SRF.

          (iii)     Constitute a high-level committee to administer the SRF, chaired by the chief
                    secretary, with the principal secretaries of the departments of finance, industries,
                    and labor and employment as members, in addition to representation of the
                    additional secretary (institutional finance and Bureau of Public Enterprises) as
                    the member secretary.

          (iv)      Move funds through the state's budget to the personal ledger account under the
                    SRF, based on requirements, to facilitate speedy disbursal of VRS compensation
                    to displaced employees of SOEs identified for restructuring.

15.    The VRS compensation for individual employees was computed based on the lower of
1.5 months salary for every completed year of service or the total salary expected to be earned
by the employee for the remaining period of service, whichever is lower, and 35 days salary for
every completed year of service plus 25 days salary for the remaining years of service.3




3
    Interview with social safety net program expert.
76     Appendix 4



D.     Assessment of Policy Measures

16.       The proposed policy measures were based on two key risks identified during the design:
(i) political and labor union resistance to the retrenchment of SOE employees proposed to be
undertaken under the Program, and (ii) lack of experience of GOG and the respective
enterprises with SOE reforms. While the first risk was proposed to be addressed through regular
consultations with key stakeholders together with a liberal VRS package funded by the SRF, or
alternative employment to displaced employees; the second risk was intended to be mitigated
by leveraging the expertise of the Technical Secretariat, supported by external consultants.

17.      Given the fast pace of reforms undertaken as part of the Program, the process of
managing political and trade union expectations was quite effective. While around 18,000
employees of identified SOEs were offered the VRS aggregating Rs364.5 crore, financed by the
SRF, no instances of labor resistance to the human resource restructuring undertaken as part of
the SOE reforms are recorded, reflecting the relative success of the VRS policy. The Technical
Secretariat was also fairly successful in guiding individual departments and SOEs in the reform
process. However, slight fine-tuning of the program design for a few areas may have increased
its effectiveness:

       (i)     While the categorization of SOEs covered by the Program appears to have been
               based on an analysis of the respective mandates for individual SOEs, the reform
               and restructuring strategy for each category could be improved. For example,
               offering a majority stake (with management control) to prospective private
               partners for enterprises with limited socioeconomic obligations like Gujarat Agro
               Industries Corporation Ltd. (GAIC) may have increased chances of successful
               divestment.

       (ii)    As indicated in the program completion report, selling or leasing properties of
               Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Ltd. (TCGL) was held up on account of litigation.
               It may have been possible to avoid some of these complications by availing of
               expert external advice at the time of implementing the divestment exercise, a
               practice that was subsequently adopted.

       (iii)   Some SOEs, having specific divestment targets as tranche conditions, were
               reportedly adversely impacted by the implementation exercise in terms of bidders
               quoting abnormally low prices, as potential buyers were aware of the
               Government's constraints on this front.

       (iv)    The SSN scheme including counseling and retraining of displaced employees
               was not implemented due to the perceived high support costs and the view that
               the VRS was sufficient to enable displaced workers to proactively adopt
               alternative livelihoods.

E.     Effectiveness of SOE Reforms

18.    The relevant loan conditions, covenants, and the current status of the individual
enterprises identified for reform are presented in Appendix 1.
                                                                                 Appendix 4     77


          1.      SOE Restructuring--Full Divestment

19.      Initially four SOEs were to be fully divested. Divestment of two subsidiaries of GAIC--
Agrocel Pesticides Ltd., and Gujarat Insecticides Ltd.--was completed even before the release
of the first tranche of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) loan in December 2006. Of the other
two enterprises, a 60% equity stake in Gujarat Tractors Corporation Ltd. was transferred to
Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. After two failed attempts at privatizing Gujarat Communication and
Electronics Ltd. (GCEL), GOG decided to close the company.

20.     Gujarat Tractors Corporation Ltd. (GTCL). Four bidders were determined to be
eligible for bidding, however only one, Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd., placed a financial bid at
only 60% of the reserve price fixed for divestment. Following negotiations, GOG transferred
60% of its shareholding in two tranches (51% initially and then 9%) to the bidder at the reserve
price, with the first tranche being transferred in December 1999 and the second in May 2000.
The remaining GOG stake in GTCL, to be transferred to Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. in line with
the sale and shareholder agreements, has not yet been transferred. In September 2004, the
company was referred to the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR), which
declared GTCL a "sick" company, its net worth having been completely eroded due to
accumulated losses.4

21.       Gujarat Communication and Electronics Ltd. The first attempt at privatization was
made in late 1996; two technical bids were received by October 1997. However, the consultants
to the divestment recommended that the bidders be asked to resubmit after being provided
details of the VRS scheme proposed by GOG; a new deadline of February 1998 was fixed. Only
one bid was submitted within the stipulated time. A new government then assumed power and
decided to retender after personnel restructuring, with a revised deadline of March 1999 being
fixed for receipt of bids. Two bids were received, both after the deadline. The cabinet
subcommittee decided to stop the privatization process and asked the GCEL board to initiate
suitable measures to cease business activities. The board approached the labor commissioner
for approval to close. All but 16 employees opted for the VRS and were relieved by December
2000, with 11 of the 16 approaching courts for alternative employment. Some of these cases
are still pending with the court. GCEL's operations were suspended from February 2001. An
official liquidator was appointed in February 2002, with the process of disposal of fixed assets of
the company in progress. Secured creditors including banks and financial institutions have
initiated legal steps to recover their dues. These have yet to be settled.

          2.      SOE Restructuring--Partial Divestment (51% stake)

22.     GOG proposed divestment of management control of Gujarat Industrial Investment
Corporation Ltd. (GIIC) and Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (GMDC). GOG,
which held 100% equity stake in both these enterprises, proposed to initially offer 26% to the
public by mid-1997, followed by an additional 25% by June 1998. These enterprises were
expected to concurrently seek technical collaboration with private sector companies with
relevant expertise and experience, while implementing organizational restructuring to improve
their performance. While national laws precluded GOG divesting management control in an
SOE in the mineral sector, it did succeed in divesting a 26% stake in GMDC through a public
offer of shares in October 1997. However, GOG has not been able to offload its shareholding in
GIIC.


4
    The Hindu Business Line, 2 September 2004.
78        Appendix 4



23.     Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd. Valuation of GIIC's assets was
undertaken through an independent consultant during 1997­1998. However, the divestment of
26% stake in favor of a consortium of Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation Ltd.,
Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services, and Housing Development Finance Corporation,
proposed in August 1998, did not materialize as the share price offered by Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation Ltd. was not acceptable to GOG. Specific restructuring measures
including conversion of outstanding GOG loans of Rs99 crore to equity, infusion of additional
equity of around Rs89 crore, and extending government guarantees for long-term bonds of
Rs1.5 billion floated by GIIC have been implemented. Two VRS schemes, covering 180 of the
324 employees, were implemented.

24.      Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. GOG divested its 26% stake in GMDC
in October 1997 through an offer to the public at a premium of Rs120 per share, realizing Rs107
crores in the process. However, it has not made any additional divestments, with the prevalent
Mining Regulation Act confining mining activities to the government sector and the expected
legislation allowing private sector participation in coal mining not materializing during the
Program's tenure. Though the company entered into a memorandum of understanding with
Rheinbraum Engineering Germany in 2000, a full-fledged collaboration for streamlining GMDC's
lignite projects did not materialize, as the company perceived limited value in the arrangement.
Limited progress has been made in improving operating efficiencies by divesting an
underperforming cement plant acquired earlier through BIFR or outsourcing bauxite-mining
operations. In FY2003, 297 of a total of 2,766 employees availed of the VRS.

25.     Highlights of the financial performance of both the enterprises pre- and postrestructuring
are presented in Table A4.1. As is observed, GIIC's operating performance has deteriorated
significantly with the enterprise posting a net loss of Rs67.02 crore during FY2003, compared to
a profit of Rs44.26 crore in FY1998. The primary reason for this downturn in performance was
an increase in nonperforming assets coupled with cessation of lending activities. Despite
conversion of Rs99 crore of GOG loans to equity together with an infusion of additional equity of
Rs89 crore, GIIC's debt equity was 2.05:1 as of 31 March 2004. Much of the additional
borrowing was guaranteed by GOG, resulting in outstanding government guarantees increasing
by Rs137 crore during the period. For GMDC, while the stock market performance of the
enterprise has been encouraging (market capitalization of Rs1,100 crore as against net worth of
Rs682 crore as of 31 March 2003), the enterprise has availed of GOG guarantees of Rs600
crore postrestructuring to raise external borrowings for its new initiatives.

     Table A4.1: Financial Performance of Enterprises Identified for Partial Divestment
                                       (51% stake)
State Department   Govt investment - pre reforms       Govt investment - post reforms       Performance before          Performance after
(in Rs Crore)      Loans Equity           Guarantee   Loans      Equity        Guarantee     PAT Accumulated             PAT Accumulated
                                                                                                       profit / loss               profit / loss

GIIC               353.36    69.16           23.54    25.00     256.98           160.10 44.26                 61.41    (67.02)          (178.82)
GMDC                         23.53                               23.53           600.00 141.39                21.41    120.46             650.77
GICC = Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation, GMDC                    =    Gujarat     Mineral    and     Development        Corporation,
Govt = Government, PAT = profit after tax.
Source: Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
                                                                                                 Appendix 4       79


          3.       SOE Restructuring--Partial Divestment (26%­74% stake)

26.     GOG proposed to divest between 26% and 74% of its stake in four SOEs. While it
succeeded in divesting its entire equity stake in Gujarat State Export Corporation Ltd. (GSEC) to
Adani Exports Ltd. by February 2004 and reducing its stake in Gujarat State Finance
Corporation Ltd. (GSFC) to 49.9% following a public offer, it has been unable to offload its
shareholding in Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. (GIDC) and Gujarat Agro
Industries Corporation Ltd. (GAIC).

27.     Gujarat State Export Corporation Ltd. With a 57% equity stake in GSEC, GOG
proposed to induct a strategic partner and transfer management control by reducing its
shareholding to 26% or less by June 1998. The divestment process was delayed by the process
of obtaining necessary central Government clearances to transfer ownership of an air cargo
complex to GSEC. Following advertisements in January 1999 seeking expressions of interest
for acquiring a 45.6% equity stake, only one investor responded within the deadline for
submission. The investor was deemed to be qualified to proceed through the subsequent stages
of the divestment process. However, the bid submitted was significantly lower than the reserve
price. GOG offered to negotiate with the investor who initially expressed inability to offer a
higher price. However, following 23 of GSEC's 71 employees availing of a VRS package, GOG
successfully negotiated with the investor to sell the 30% stake in early 2001,5 and eventually
succeeded in offloading its entire equity stake in February 2004.

28.     Gujarat State Finance Corporation Ltd. GSFC was a statutory corporation, in which
GOG proposed to reduce its equity stake from the 68% held prior to the Program. The reduction
was intended to be achieved by means of a public offer for 25% of GSFC's equity (as per the
threshold under the State Financial Corporation [SFC] Act, 1951) followed by the subsequent
divestment of 26% shareholding by June 1998 so that the GOG equity stake in GSFC was
reduced to not more than 49%. The subsequent divestment was subject to the central
Government allowing an amendment to the SFC Act to increase the limit of private shareholding
in a state finance corporation from the maximum limit of 25%. The public issue for a 25% equity
stake floated in February 1997 was oversubscribed. After the public offer, GOG's stake was
reduced to 49.9%, and the composition of the GSFC board changed with the chair being
appointed by Small Industries Development Bank of India. However, GSFC's management
continued to be governed by the provisions of the SFC Act. GSFC implemented restructuring
measures strengthening its adherence to prudential and exposure norms, organizational
restructuring with increased decentralization and empowerment of regional offices, and
upgrading of its systems and processes through automation as per recommendations of the
consultant engaged to assess its systems and processes. Of its 670 employees, 176 availed of
the VRS during FY2004.

29.     Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. GIDC was to be corporatized under
the Companies Act (1956) with GOG's equity stake reduced by 26% by June 1998. Existing
leaseholders of GIDC industrial estates were required to be provided an option to convert their
lease to freehold within this time frame with the objective of repositioning GIDC as a regulatory
body to ensure systematic and planned growth of industrial estates in the state as compared to
its role as a developer and manager of industrial estates. GIDC began implementing a
restructuring plan in November 1997; segregating its estate development and management,
financing, and leasing operations; and seeking private sector participation in these activities.

5
    The conclusion of this deal was relayed to the ADB Board when it was considering release of the final tranche as a
    waiver of the condition relating to GSEC was being sought and this information made the waiver unnecessary.
80         Appendix 4



This was to lead to GIDC focusing on regulatory, planning, and land acquisition activities.
However, given the strategic nature of GIDC's operations in ensuring industrial development in
the state, GOG decided not to proceed with divestment. The unbundling of operations was
delayed because of employee resistance coupled with limited interest shown by private sector
investors in operating industrial estates. Eventually, operation and maintenance of 16 estates
was offered to private sector investors with another 19 estates considered for private sector
participation. GOG has adopted a resolution giving in principal approval for conversion of
leasehold land in industrial estates to freehold with the final orders for implementing the
resolution yet to be issued. Of GIDC's employees, 710--about 20% of GIDC's employee
strength--have availed of the VRS.

30.      Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. GOG, which held 51% equity stake, was
first to acquire the central Government's 49% equity stake in the company and then restructure
it, including closing uneconomic units/divisions. GOG would then divest a 49% equity stake in
the company through a public offer by June 1998. Additionally, GAIC was to adopt commercial
practices in marketing of fertilizers and pesticides, preparatory to divestiture. As GAIC's role in
implementing agriculture sector government subsidy programs had a social and development
objective, GOG decided not to divest. However, restructuring measures were implemented with
all manufacturing units except Gondal being closed by April 2000. The Gondal unit was closed
subsequently, with GAIC currently retaining only its fertilizer distribution activities. All 202
employees belonging to the closed units have availed of the VRS. Following measures adopted
to strengthen the fertilizer distribution network another 239 employees were given the VRS with
150 technicians with requisite skills were appointed.

31.     Highlights of the financial performance of these four enterprises pre- and post
restructuring are presented in Table A4.2. GSFC's operating performance has deteriorated
significantly with the enterprise posting a net loss of Rs158 crore during FY2003, as compared
to a profit of Rs162 crore in FY1998. The primary reason for this downturn in performance has
been an increase in nonperforming assets from 24% of FY1998 outstanding lending to 59% of
FY2002 outstanding lending. This has resulted in an erosion of accumulated profits by Rs749
crore and resulted in its share prices being quoted at below face value--Rs8.70 against face
value of Rs10 in December 2006. Annual support from GOG to GSFC increased by around
Rs16 crore postreform. GIDC's operating performance after the restructuring has reduced
significantly with profits decreasing by more than Rs30 crore resulting in GOG providing Rs35
crore in the form of subsidies to the enterprise. GAIC's operating performance has improved
postrestructuring and consequently GOG's annual financial support to the enterprise has
decreased.
     Table A4.2: Financial Performance of Enterprises Identified for Partial Divestment
                                         (26%­74% stake)
State Department   Govt investment - pre reforms     Govt investment - post reforms     Performance before          Performance after

(in Rs Crore)       Loans      Equity    Guarantee     Loans      Equity   Guarantee      PAT    Accumulated           PAT    Accumulated
                                                                                                   profit / loss                profit / loss
GSEC                             0.08                              1.65                   0.13             2.78        0.22             3.68
GSFC                            26.28       684.33     41.02      49.09        465.53   16.20           14.15      (158.47)        (734.58)
GIDC                 5.29                   26.98       2.53                   14.22    31.59           43.86         1.01          144.12
GAIC                            6.99                    7.00      7.04                  (0.73)          10.50         0.69          (16.26)
GAIC = Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation Ltd, GIDC = Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.,
Govt = Government, GSEC = Gujarat State Export Corporation Ltd., GSFC = Gujarat State Finance Corporation Ltd., PAT = profit
after tax.
Source: Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
                                                                               Appendix 4    81


       4.     SOE Restructuring--Merger

32.    Six SOEs were identified for merger: Gujarat Industries Marketing Corporation Ltd.,
Gujarat Leather Industries Corporation Ltd., Gujarat State Handloom Development Corporation
Ltd., Gujarat State Handicrafts Development Corporation Ltd., Gujarat Housing Board (GHB),
and Gujarat Slum Clearance Board (GSCB). Given the synergies and overlapping operations of
the enterprises, in September 1996 GOG submitted a merger scheme with the
amalgamation/merger schemes to be completed by December 1997.

33.    GOG proposed to amalgamate Gujarat Industries Marketing Corporation Ltd. and
Gujarat Leather Industries Corporation Ltd., as both were involved in marketing leather and
footwear goods produced by rural artisans. The approval for merger from the Company Law
Board was received in January 2000 and the merger was effective by January 2001 on
completion of registration with the Registrar of Companies.

34.     GOG proposed to merge the Gujarat State Handloom Development Corporation Ltd.
with Gujarat State Handicrafts Development Corporation Ltd. to form Gujarat State Handloom
and Handicrafts Development Corporation Ltd. (GSHHDCL) to take advantage of the synergies
of their marketing network and avoid overlapping functions and adverse competition between
these two enterprises. The merger was based on a study by the Institute of Rural Management,
Anand, commissioned by GOG, which recommended merger of the two corporations along with
extensive operating, financial, and personnel restructuring measures. With GOG accepting the
recommendation, necessary applications were submitted to the Company Law Board. After
settling objections of employee unions and cooperative bodies, the merger came into effect in
FY2002. GSHHDCL's current mandate includes development of the handicraft and handloom
sector in the state by providing marketing support to the artisans and weavers. Sixty-eight
employees availed of the VRS as part of the restructuring process.

35.     GOG proposed to restructure GSCB by transferring its functions of constructing low-
income housing to GHB. This activity was required to be completed by December 1997. The
cabinet subcommittee initially proposed closing GSCB and transferring its assets and liabilities
to GHB; nongovernment organizations and local bodies were to be given the responsibility of
continuing GSCB's slum clearance activities. However, given GSCB's huge bad loan portfolio
because of nonrecovery of loans from the low-cost houses constructed by it, the decision to
transfer GSCB's assets and liabilities to GHB could not be implemented. All GSCB operations
have been discontinued and all its employees discharged. The employees were redeployed to
an independent cell of GHB with responsibility for recovering overdue GSCB loans. These
redeployed employees have been appointed on contract with remuneration at 50% of their
GSCB salary. The amount recovered by the cell will be deposited in an escrow account after
meeting the administrative expenses of the cell, and used to settle the outstanding GOG loans
received by GSCB.

36.     Highlights of the financial performance of the merged/amalgamated enterprises pre- and
postrestructuring are presented in Table A4.3. Following the amalgamation of Gujarat Leather
Industries Corporation Ltd. with Gujarat Industries Marketing Corporation Ltd., the operating
performance has improved marginally with net profits of the merged entity increasing by Rs0.23
crore. Postmerger annual subsidies received from the Government have decreased. The
operating performance of the newly merged GSHHDCL has not changed significantly. It
recorded a marginally higher loss in FY2003 as compared to the premerger period. GSHHDCL
continues to receive subsidies from GOG, although the amount received in FY2004 of Rs1 crore
82            Appendix 4



was lower than the Rs3 crore received prior to merger. Financial information for GSCB and
GHB was not available to the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM).

    Table A4.3: Financial Performance of Enterprises Identified for Merger/Amalgamation

State Department                                  Govt investment - pre reforms Govt investment - post reforms   Performance before          Performance after
(in Rs Crore)                                      Loans Equity Guarantee Loans Equity Guarantee                   PAT Accumulated             PAT Accumulated
                                                                                                                             profit / loss              profit / loss
Gujarat Rural Industries Marketing Corporation      2.10      6.59                            9.17                 0.40              0.02      0.35           (0.81)

Gujarat State Leather Industry Dev. Corporation               1.90                                                (0.28)            (0.69)
Merged entity                                       2.10      8.49                            9.17                  0.12           (0.68)     0.35            (0.81)
Gujarat State Handloom Dev. Corporation             3.75      5.48        1.75      9.17     10.23                 (1.53)           (4.24)   (3.62)          (22.14)
Gujarat State Handicrafts Dev. Corporation          1.80      2.61                                                 (1.93)           (7.15)
Merged entity                                       5.56      8.09       1.75       9.17    10.23                 (3.46)          (11.38)    (3.62)          (22.14)
Govt = Government, PAT = profit after tax.
Source: Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.


              5.             SOE Restructuring--Closure

37.    Four SOEs were identified to be closed: Gujarat State Textile Corporation Ltd. (GSTC),
Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation Ltd. (GDDC), Gujarat Fisheries Development
Corporation Ltd. (GFDC), and Gujarat State Construction Corporation Ltd. (GSCCL). Although
closure was not defined in the design, it was inferred that at least operating closure would be
achieved and steps toward financial closure would be initiated.

38.     Gujarat State Textile Corporation. With the performance of GSTC's mills deteriorating
in the 1990s--all mills recorded losses resulting in erosion of their net worth--GOG sought
BIFR approval to close the mills. BIFR approved closure in June 1996, and GSTC closed 11 of
its 17 mills by November 1996. All 13,900 textile workers received the VRS. The Gujarat High
Court issued closure orders in February 1997, with an official liquidator being appointed to
oversee the process as per the provisions of the Companies Act (1956). Though valuation for
sale of assets of all 17 mills was undertaken, only the plant and machinery of 4 mills and
buildings of 3 mills could be disposed of with Rs22 crore being realized. The assets of another
mill were auctioned for Rs14 crore, but the sale is delayed by a challenge pending in the Gujarat
High Court. The proceeds from the sale of assets will be available if any balance remains after
settling all GSTC liabilities. Around Rs634 crore of GOG investments in terms of equity and
loans remained blocked in GSTC as of FY2004. Part of these investments may be unblocked
only after conclusion of the windup proceedings following the settlement of all GSTC's liabilities
and dues.

39.       Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation Ltd. GDDC was closed in 1999 after
receiving BIFR approval. All but five employees were given the VRS in FY1999, with the VRS
being partly funded by the SRF and partly by utilizing intercorporate deposit amounts placed by
other SOEs with GDDC. The GDDC land is likely to be transferred to GOG, with the plant and
machinery having already been disposed of. Around Rs114 crore of GOG investments in terms
of equity and loans remained blocked in GDDC as of FY2004. Part of these investments may be
released only after conclusion of the windup proceedings following the settlement of all GDDC's
liabilities and dues.
                                                                                                   Appendix 4     83


40.    Gujarat Fisheries Development Corporation Ltd. GFDL was closed in 1997 after its
operations were suspended, and all assets and liabilities transferred to Gujarat Fisheries
Corporation Association. All employees were given the VRS and subsequently redeployed in
Gujarat Fisheries Corporation Association. The windup process of GFDC is currently in
progress. Around Rs4 crore of GOG investments in terms of equity and loans given were
blocked in GFDC as of FY2004.

41.    Gujarat State Construction Corporation Ltd. GSCCL was closed in 1997 following
suspension of its business operations. All but 14 employees were given the VRS. The windup
process of GSCCL is still in progress. Around Rs11 crore of GOG investments in terms of equity
and loans given remained blocked in GSCCL as of FY2004. Part of these investments may be
released only after conclusion of the windup proceedings following the settlement of all
GSCCL's liabilities and dues.

42.     Table A4.4 summarizes key parameters pertaining to these four enterprises, which were
subject to closure. About Rs444 crore was blocked in the enterprises in the form of GOG
investments in equity and loans at the time of closure (Rs764 crore in FY2004).VRS payments
totaling Rs291.2 crore have been disbursed to 15,874 employees of SOEs subject to closure,
from the SRF. Moreover, the VRS payback period for GFDC was 1 year, considering the VRS
payout vis-à-vis the reduction in annual recurring GOG support, post closure. Since the extent
of Government support to GDDC and GSCCL actually increased after operations were
completed, the computation of payback period for these enterprises is not relevant. Financial
information on GSTC, post closure, was not available to the OEM.

                 Table A4.4: Key Parameters for GOG Enterprises Subject to Closure

                                                                       Capital blocked
                                                                        at the time of
                                VRS payout      No.of employees          closure (Rs            Payback
            State Department     (Rs Crore)         for VRS                 Crore)              (Years)


         GSTC                         225.00                140.00                386.59
         GDDC                          60.00                 15.00                 44.99
         GFDC                            1.23                  1.21                  4.22           1.0
         GSCCL                           4.96                  2.53                  7.99
         GDDC = Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation Ltd., GFDC = Gujarat Fisheries Development Corporation
         Ltd., GOG = government of Gujarat, GSCCL = Gujarat State Construction Corporation Ltd., GSTC = Gujarat
         State Textile Corporation, VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
         Sources:          Note on VRS by Bureau of Public Enterprises, Department of Finance, Government of
         Gujarat and Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.


       6.        SOE Restructuring--Sale/Lease of Assets or Unbundling of
                 Activities.

43.    Three SOEs were to be restructured with the focus in one, TCGL on the sale and/or
lease of assets, and in the other two--Gujarat Maritime Board (GMB) and the Gujarat Electricity
Board (GEB) on significant restructuring and unbundling of activities.

44.      Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Ltd. GOG proposed selling or leasing a number of
TCGL assets. The final subtranche covenant of the Program required GOG to sell or lease 20
properties in addition to the 10 properties disposed off prior to release of the first tranche.
However, the sale or lease of 10 of the 20 remaining properties could not be concluded due to
litigation arising out of the inadequate drafting of the lease agreements, leading to the process
being discontinued. Fifty-two employees were given the VRS. As per the report of the
84        Appendix 4



Comptroller and Auditor General of India for FY2004, a decision has been taken to close all
unviable units of TCGL with all employees attached to these units being offered the VRS. GOG
provided Rs9.5 crore as subsidies to TCGL during FY2004.

45.    Gujarat Electricity Board. Initiating power sector reforms was one of the final
subtranche conditions for the Program that required GOG to develop a time-bound action plan
for designing a regulatory framework for the power sector in consultation with ADB. The final
tranche covenants required GEB to convert, on a pilot basis, two of its distribution districts into
independent profit centers with the objective of increasing cost efficiencies by commercializing
the operations. The Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission was established in November
1998, and approved the tariff revision proposal of GEB in 2000. GEB has already established
two profit centers at the Anand and Rajkot distribution circles. Table A4.5 outlines some key
features of GEB's financial performance before and after restructuring.

46.     In accordance with program requirements, a progress report on the proposed power
sector projects in the state, prioritized in accordance with preestablished parameters, was
submitted to ADB in 1999. Additionally, the core investment program for the power sector based
on this report was included in the state's overall core investment program. GEB's performance
has deteriorated postrestructuring with net losses of Rs475.81 crore recorded in FY2003. In
FY2004, GOG had to support the operations of GEB by providing loans of Rs2,034 crore and
subsidy of Rs1,056 crore. In addition, the Government provided guarantees of Rs700 crore
during the year.

                         Table A4.5. Highlights of Financial Performance of GEB

State              Govt investment - pre reforms     Govt investment - post reforms     Performance before       Performance after
Department
(in Rs Crore)       Loans      Equity    Guarantee     Loans       Equity   Guarantee     PAT    Accumulated      PAT    Accumulated
                                                                                                   profit / loss           profit / loss
GEB               2,705.92                3,007.00   2,754.33                6,648.86   119.48         771.62 (475.81)      (5,427.22)

GEB = Gujarat Electricity Board, PAT = profit after tax.
Source: Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.


47.      Gujarat Maritime Board. Under a restructuring plan for GMB, submitted by GOG to
ADB in December 1999, the SOE intended to retain its commercial operations as a port
management enterprise, while establishing a separate independent regulatory body for the port
sector. The downsizing of GMB's workforce was also proposed. The expert committee
appointed as part of phase II of SOE reforms recommended the creation of Gujarat Maritime
Authority (GMA) under the Maritime Authority Act, with GMA having regulatory responsibilities
including tariff fixation, with port development activities being retained by GMB. Legislation for
implementing these reforms was drafted and is being considered by a parliamentary committee,
it is expected to be passed within a year.

48.     In the meantime, the Gujarat Port Development Company (GPDC) was instituted as the
investing arm of GMB for directing equity into new ports to be developed in the joint sector. The
Port Service Development Corporation was established to handle dredging and related port
services. Eventually GMB decided to outsource loss-making operations like dredging rather
than maintain them under the Port Service Development Corporation. In line with the program
prescription, GOG approved and announced a build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) policy for the
ports sector in July 1997, which included a package of BOOT principles serving as a framework
                                                                                                   Appendix 4         85


for the involvement of the private sector in the construction and operation of new ports.
Financial information in respect of GMB was not available to the OEM.

F.          Social Safety Net Mechanism

49.    The status of VRS disbursements from the SRF as of 31 March 2002 is presented in the
Table A4.6.

                        Table A4.6: Details of VRS Disbursement in GOG Enterprises

                                                       Number of        Employees          VRS           VRS per
                                                       Displaced        Availing of     Disbursed       Employee
     Item                                              Employees         the VRS        (Rs Crore)      (Rs Lakh)
     Gujarat State Textile Corporation Ltd.                14,000         14,000          225.0                 1.6
     Gujarat Fisheries Development Corporation                121            121            1.2                 1.0
     Ltd.
     Gujarat State Construction Corporation Ltd.              266            253             5.0                2.0
     Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd.            1,365          1,365            46.0                3.4
     Gujarat Tractors Corporation Ltd.                        260            215             7.5                3.5
     Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation Ltd.             1,505          1,500            60.0                4.0
     Gujarat Small Industries Corporation Ltd.*               339            323            11.1                3.4
     Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation Ltd.                 202            202             7.0                3.5
     Gujarat State Export Corporation Ltd.                      42            29           1.7                  5.9
     Total                                                 18,100         18,008         364.5                  2.0
     GOG = Government of Gujarat, VRS = voluntary retirement scheme.
     Note: 1 Lakh is equal to Rs100,000 and 1 Crore is equal to Rs10,000,000.
     Source: Bureau of Public Enterprises, Department of Finance, Government of Gujarat.

50.     The average VRS payout ranged between Rs1 lakh and Rs5.9 lakh per employee,
computed in line with the VRS formula delineated in para. 21. In addition, about Rs158 crore
were spent by individual SOEs on VRS programs implemented after April 1999, based on a
separate scheme announced by GOG, encompassing 4,080 employees. All together, almost
22,100 employees received the VRS aggregating around Rs522 crore.6 The 14,000 employees
displaced from the units of GSTC were also provided retraining support through the Gandhi
Labour Institute of the central National Renewal Fund. However, none of the other employees
availing of the VRS was provided this facility, although the program design incorporated the
component of training retrenched human resources.

51.    Interactions with representatives of the Finance Department indicated that the VRS
package for displaced employees was designed to ensure that the returns from the investment
of VRS compensation would protect the entire remuneration previously earned by the
employees. However, discussions with SSN program experts, associated with the closure of
GSTC and similar programs in other states, revealed that the VRS compensation disbursed for
GOG SOEs, together with the earnings from alternative employment in the informal sector, are
estimated to have protected only around 65% of the earnings of displaced employees.

G.          Sustainability of SOE Reforms

52.   The analysis of the SOE program indicates that GOG largely succeeded in implementing
SOE reform, particularly for enterprises identified for full divestment besides those earmarked
6
    As noted in para. 50 of the report, a detailed postprogram assessment found the ex ante estimates were very close
    to the design estimates.
86     Appendix 4



for merger. With regard to SOEs identified for closure, operating closure was achieved, with
financial and legal closure awaiting the completion of the liquidation process. Though GOG was
relatively less successful in carrying out reforms for enterprises identified for partial divestment,
GOG's commitment to SOE reforms appeared strong. This was essentially due to the apparent
broad political consensus on the need for SOE reforms to more effectively utilize resources as
well as make the public sector more responsive. This was evident during implementation, where
despite changes in the state's political leadership, the direction and pace of reforms were
maintained.

53.      The initiation of Phase II of SOE reforms after Program completion, with the constitution
of an independent Expert Committee for examining 13 select SOEs, in addition to those
identified under the Program, for recommendations on their restructuring and divestment,
besides approval of a list of another thirty SOEs for submission to the committee, is suggestive
of GoG's continued commitment to SOE reforms. While a leading industrialist from the state
chairs the Expert Committee, the other members include prominent academicians and
businesspersons, indicating the opportunity to leverage their expertise and experience in
undertaking further SOE reforms.

54.     Interactions with key GOG officials associated with SOE reforms indicated a
commitment on the part of the government to pursue SOE reform initiatives postimplementation
of the GSPRMP. The OEM was informed that to save budgetary resources, enterprises that do
not have a social purpose and are not performing would be closed.

H.     Issues

55.    Financial sector SOEs such as GIIC and GSFC continue to be a major source of
concern, with their continued dependence on GOG resources and inadequate operating
processes, controls, and professional capabilities, which have led to high levels of
nonperforming assets. Enterprises in this sector accounted for around 7.3% of aggregate GOG
investment in SOEs as of 31 March 2004. Experiences in other states also suggest that SOEs
involved in extending loans and making investments often suffer because of politically motivated
and populist financing combined with a lack of government accountability. These enterprises are
often used to circumvent budgetary restrictions through off-budget resource mobilization,
thereby leading to fiscal indiscipline and adversely impacting government finances.
Consequently, financial sector enterprises owned by GOG must be prioritized for restructuring
and divestment.

56.     While some SOEs may need to be retained under government ownership because of
their socioeconomic mandate, which may be dischargeable only by government, existing
government practices suffer from inherent limitations in specific areas like inducting qualified
and experienced professionals, enforcing adequate accountability, and motivating superior
performance while discouraging underperformance. Consequently, for any SOE reform initiative
to be sustainable, appropriate frameworks and mechanisms must be put in place to provide
SOEs with the requisite flexibility to incorporate/follow contemporary practices in the areas of
corporate governance, human resource management, operations, etc. For example, some state
governments are exploring options including hiring expert resources for key SOE positions at
market-linked salaries, implementing formal performance management systems in SOEs as in
private sector companies, and maintaining an arms-length relationship between the government
and the SOE.
                                                                                  Appendix 4     87


57.     Experience suggests that a nodal agency is needed for SOE reforms to ensure proper
implementation, as the administrative departments lack requisite expertise and time for this. In
case of the GSPRMP, the Technical Secretariat played this role. However, with the secretariat
now disbanded, requisite capacity needs to be developed in the Bureau of Public Enterprises,
operationalized in 1979 to serve as the coordinating agency for state SOEs, or any other nodal
body for managing the SOE reform initiative. In addition to acting as a central repository of
knowledge and experience, the nodal agency usually plays a key role in identifying relevant best
practices; standardizing processes, practices, and documentation; and acting as a secretariat to
the forum empowered to take key decisions on the SOE reform initiative.

58.     Outcomes may be further optimized in some cases by adopting alternate SOE reform
strategies. Thus, while a public listing may provide additional avenue for mobilizing capital and
improve corporate governance through compliance with listing guidelines, induction of a
strategic partner may be a better way of achieving fundamental improvements to SOE
management and operating styles. Consequently, both GSFC and GMDC continue to be
controlled by GOG and managed by bureaucrats, thereby limiting opportunities for radical
performance improvement. Similarly, around Rs764 crore of outstanding GOG investments in
equity and loans were blocked in FY2004 in the four SOEs undergoing closure through
liquidation, a process that inevitably takes between 1 and 5 years. Possible options that could
have been explored for freeing up capital invested by GOG earlier include 100% equity stake
sale to potential private sector investors with GOG underwriting all existing liabilities until the
date of the transaction.

59.    As has been indicated in the program completion report, selling or leasing TCGL
properties was held up because of litigation. Some of these complications may have been
avoided by availing of expert external advice at the time of implementing the divestment
exercise, a practice that was adopted subsequently.

60.     The operating performance of a number of enterprises like GIIC, GSFC, and GIDC seem
to have deteriorated after restructuring, with an increase in GOG support. Experience in similar
situations suggests that unless some of the fundamental issues associated with government
ownership including inadequate accountability and managerial responsibility, and excessive
interference are effectively addressed, a one-time exercise involving financial, operating, and
personnel restructuring may not be adequate for bringing in sustainable viability.

61.    Discussions with key GOG officials suggest that having the divestment of a specific SOE
as a tranche condition had an adverse impact on the divestment process, with some of the
prospective bidders trying to take advantage of the situation by quoting lower prices, given the
pressures on GOG to complete the process within a stipulated time.

62.     For many of the enterprises undergoing 100% as well as partial divestment, a two-stage
process of divestment was adopted, with GOG initially selling a part of its stake, followed by a
second tranche of divestment after an interval of 1­2 years. While a two-phase divestment may
enable higher value realization, it also has associated risks like (i) potential lack of interest of
government to divest the balance stake because of change in policies, transfer of key officials,
etc.; and (ii) possible change in interests and prerogatives of the private sector investor/partner
owing to internal policies, market forces, etc. For enterprises like GTCL and GMDC, one of the
primary reasons for the second tranche of divestment not materializing seems to have been
adoption of this phased approach for divestment.
88     Appendix 4



63.     The SOE component of the Program appeared to have placed limited emphasis on
assessing the socioeconomic impact of large-scale human resource displacement. No evidence
is available of tracer studies to assess the impact of SOE reforms on displaced workers. While
the Program initially included a separate component for retraining displaced workers for
adopting alternate livelihoods, this was not implemented owing to the high support costs
perceived and a view that the displaced workers would proactively adopt alternate livelihoods.
However, the experience with other similar programs in states like West Bengal suggests that a
formal program for counseling and retraining of displaced workers usually goes a long way to
mitigating associated trauma and adverse socioeconomic impact of retrenchment.

64.     The Program did not unambiguously define "closure," resulting in agencies associated
with implementation interpreting the term to mean operating closure, rather than financial and
legal closure of the identified enterprises. This ambiguity could create a situation where
operationally closed SOEs are revived, defeating the spirit of the program measures. However,
given the cumbersome process involved in the legal closure of enterprises and the fact that the
Program only had a 2-year tenure, while legal closure could not possibly have been identified as
an outcome, financial closure should have probably been mandated to prevent revival of
operationally closed SOEs.

I.     Recommendations

65.    Decisions on the most appropriate type of reform for a SOE must include an audit to
ensure that financial records are in order, and involve outside experts in SOE reform to ensure
the most appropriate options are considered.

66.    Using budgetary impact parameters as tranche release conditions in lieu of divestment
milestones for specific SOEs is likely to provide greater flexibility to the government in
implementing SOE reform. If milestones are necessary then recognizing the time and resources
required to close a SOE and to ensure that at least financial closure is achieved is important.

67.     Conducting periodic studies to assess the socioeconomic impact of retrenchment on
displaced workers will provide valuable inputs to revise appropriate SSN interventions such as
providing insurance and training support for mitigating adverse socioeconomic impacts.

68.    Extensive policy dialogue with government officials is required to ensure that they
understand that a formal mechanism for counseling and training of displaced workers and their
dependents will mitigate adverse socioeconomic outcomes and be positively received by all
stakeholders including political parties and trade unions.
                                                                                                Appendix 5       89


             FISCAL CONSEQUENCES OF MULTILATERAL ADJUSTMENT LENDING
                               TO STATES IN INDIA1

A.        Introduction

1.       Large and increasing fiscal imbalances at the state level, had adverse consequences for
macroeconomic stability, and raised major concerns about growth and equity by impacting on
efficiency in resource allocation, technological progress, and the intergenerational distribution of
tax burden. Wide differences in the fiscal health of the states, failure of the fiscal transfer system
to offset states' genuine fiscal disadvantages, and significant interstate differences in standards
of governance and delivery systems have led to increasing inequalities in the provision of social
services and physical infrastructure. Moreover, the transition from a planned to a market
economy has created unequal opportunities for different states, as states with greater market
development, access, and good infrastructure facilities are better able to take advantage of the
opportunities. At the same time, coalition governments supported by parties with varied
ideological persuasions and the emergence of regional parties in states aligned to the
Government of India have put tremendous strain on the institutions of federal governance. The
problem was exacerbated by the short electoral cycle governing the political parties and
politicians.

2.      Uncontrolled subnational deficits and contingent liabilities have made the task of
macroeconomic stabilization 2 much more difficult and complex. The pro-cyclical pattern of
spending when the subnational deficits are uncontrolled is even more concerning. When an
attempt is made to control the borrowing through the budget, states resort to borrowing through
special purpose vehicles and accumulate liabilities in public sector enterprises, particularly
power utilities. Some states control their deficits by compressing outlays on essential public
services. Finally, the involvement of many actors in subnational fiscal consolidation, particularly
bilateral and multilateral agencies besides the central Government, makes the incentive
structure unclear and complex.

3.      The consequences of states' fiscal stress are not confined to the deficit measures alone;
there are significant repercussions on revenues and expenditures as well. When states are
unable to soften the budget constraints, the fiscal stress shows itself in compressed expenditure
allocation to basic public services. In fact, the sociology of fiscal politics is such that the fiscal
stress in a state invariably results in compressing productive spending on maintenance and
creation of physical infrastructure, with significant adverse impacts on economic growth in the
state.

4.       For the same reason, fiscal adjustment focusing on any measure of deficit reduction is
inadequate, as it ignores the possibility of keeping deficits low by cutting down spending on
essential public services. Many quantitative and qualitative aspects of a fiscal imbalance need
to be taken into account in calibrating fiscal adjustment to prevent inappropriate policy
responses. Second, the ability of states to achieve fiscal correction depends on economic and
political constraints. Third, it is important to understand whether the stringent conditions of
structural adjustment lending by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB) have
succeeded in hastening the process of subnational fiscal consolidation, or resulted in softening
1
    Prepared by M.G. Rao Operations Evaluation Mission consultant, and P. Chakraborty, Senior Economist, National
    Institute of Public Finance and Policy, New Delhi.
2
    Macroeconomic stabilization is a central government function as macro policy instruments have countrywide
    spillover Oates, W. E. 1999. An Essay on Fiscal Federalism. Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. XXXVII (3), pp.
    1120­1149.
90        Appendix 5



the recipient states' budget constraints. This study undertakes econometric analysis to unravel
the effects of adjustment lending on states' finances in the medium term. The results of the
paper are preliminary and tentative, as adjustment lending is a relatively recent phenomenon.

5.      Evaluating fiscal adjustment by states is difficult because fiscal policy consists of a long
vector of components including public investment, consumption, transfers to households, and
the structure of the tax system.3 It becomes even more complex as fiscal adjustment measures
have both quantitative and qualitative dimensions. 4 The problem is compounded as states
conceal their actual fiscal positions through various off-budget borrowings.

B.        Fiscal Imbalances in States: Quantitative and Qualitative Dimensions

          1.       State level Fiscal Imbalance: Recent Developments

6.      Table A5.1 presents the trends in revenue and fiscal deficits of the states taken together.
The analysis shows that, despite severe pressures on their finances, the states tried to contain
their revenue and fiscal deficits until FY1997. However, the pressure of salary and pension
revision increased both revenue and fiscal deficits sharply from FY1997. The problem was not
helped by the steadily declining tax devolution from the center, of over 1% to gross domestic
product (GDP) over the period from FY1990 to FY2001. Similarly, a sharp increase in
indebtedness and the rising cost of borrowing led to a significant increase in interest payments.
The period since the late 1990s has also seen a sharp increase in contingent liabilities incurred
through public enterprises and special purpose vehicles. These are well recorded and
analyzed.5

                                     Table A5.1: Fiscal Trends in States
                                              FY2001­FY2006

          Description                           FY2001       FY2002      FY2003      FY2004      FY2005      FY2006
     1.   Revenue Deficit                           2.59        2.25        2.22         1.17        0.49        0.05
     2.   Gross Fiscal Deficit                      4.21        4.17        4.46         3.50        3.20        2.71
     3.   Primary Deficit                           1.47        1.31        1.50         0.68        0.70        0.16
     4.   Revenue Receipts                         11.21       11.44       11.47        11.92       12.74       13.12
     5.   Current Transfers                         4.18        4.18        4.29         4.34        5.13        5.31
     6.   Revenue Expenditure                      13.80       13.69       13.68        13.09       13.22       13.16
     7.   Interest Payments                         2.74        2.86        2.96         2.82        2.50        2.54
     8.   Capital Outlay                            1.41        1.49        1.90         1.97        2.39        2.43
     9.   Development Expenditurea                  9.50        9.32       10.15         9.40       10.16        9.81
    10.   Non-Development Expenditure a             6.05        6.20        6.12         6.03        5.70        5.83
    11.   Social Sector Expenditure a               5.78        5.60        5.42         5.39        5.95        5.82
    12.   Social Servicesa                          5.13        5.00        4.82         4.71        5.19        5.13
          of which:

3
    de Castro. A. S., I. Goldin and L. A. P. da Silva. 2002. Relative Returns to Policy Reform: Evidence from Controlled
    Cross-Country Regression. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2898. The World Bank. Washington.
4
    See, Alam, A. and M. Sundberg 2002. A Decade of Fiscal Transition. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
    No. 2835. The World Bank. Washington D.C.; and Rao, G. M. and M. W. Sundberg. 2003. The Quality of Fiscal
    Adjustment and Subnational Fiscal Reform. Mimeo.
5
    See Rao, G. M. 2002. State Finances in India. Economic and Political Weekly Vol. XXXVII (31) August 3­9, and
    World Bank. 2005. State Fiscal Reforms in India: Progress and Prospects, A World Bank Report. Macmillan India
    Ltd. New Delhi.
                                                                                                                                              Appendix 5     91



         Description                                                       FY2001             FY2002       FY2003           FY2004           FY2005      FY2006
         a. Education, Sports, Art, and
            Culture                                                               2.66             2.57          2.40            2.31             2.33     2.91
         b. Medical, Public Health, and
            Family Welfare                                                        0.73             0.70          0.66            0.63             0.72     0.73
Note:   Figures are percentage of gross domestic product (GDP).
a
  GDP for FY2006 has been estimated from Government of India. 2006. Budget at a Glance 2006­07, New Dehli.
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

7.      Even if deficits are taken to measure the fiscal health of the states, considering the
deficits in the consolidated accounts alone could be misleading. This is because, while some
states provide for the losses in power utilities through subsidies, others do not. The fiscal deficit
in the states, reworked to include the losses in power utilities, is shown alongside the fiscal
deficits in the consolidated accounts in Figure A5.1. It shows that the deficits on account of
power utilities are high and increasing; in FY2001, while the combined fiscal deficits of the
states as a ratio of GDP was about 5.1%, the fiscal deficits (including the power sector deficit)
was 6.45%. It also illustrates that the power sector deficits have shown a steady increase over
the years. In the mid-1990s, deficits on account of the power sector--not included in the state
budgets--was virtually zero. However, by FY2001, it was about 1.4% of GDP. This implies that
any attempt to infer the severity of fiscal stress in the states, only on the basis of budgetary
measures of deficits, may not be appropriate.


                                  Figure A5.1: Fiscal Deficit with       r e without
                                                                  F ig uand  1       Power Sector Deficit
                                                                    n d w ith o u t P o w e r S e c to r
                                     F is c a l D e fic it w ith(AaComparison)
                                                                 D e fic it: A C o m p a r is o n
                        GSDP)
                     to SDP




                                7.00
                                   7
                                6.00
                                   6
                                5.00
             percent to




                                   5
                                4.00
                                   4
          As percent




                                3.00
                                   3
                                2.00
                                   2
                                1.00
                                   1
                                0.00
                                   0
         (As



                                          3


                                                      4


                                                                  5


                                                                              6


                                                                                          7


                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                                  9




                                                                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                           00
                                       -9


                                                   -9


                                                               -9


                                                                           -9


                                                                                       -9


                                                                                                   -9


                                                                                                               -9




                                                                                                                                      -0


                                                                                                                                                  -0
                                  92


                                               93


                                                           94


                                                                       95


                                                                                   96


                                                                                               97


                                                                                                           98




                                                                                                                                  00


                                                                                                                                              01
                                                                                                                       -2
                                                                                                                      99
                                 19


                                              19


                                                          19


                                                                      19


                                                                                  19


                                                                                              19


                                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                 19




                                        F D Including P sector D eficit                             F D E xclud ing P sector D eficit
       FD = fiscal deficit, SDP = state domestic product.
       Source: Reserve Bank of India.

8.      Concerned with the steadily deteriorating fiscal health of the states, the Eleventh
Finance Commission (EFC) was required to "...draw a monitorable fiscal reforms programme
aimed at reduction in revenue deficits of the states...."6 However, the monitorable program of
linking grants to fiscal performance indicators, recommended by the EFC, had serious
shortcomings in the way it was designed and did not help to improve the situation much.
Therefore, the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) was required to "...review the state of the

6
    Public Finance. 2000. Report of the Eleventh Finance Commission. June. Available:
    http://www.tn.gov.in/tsfc/11threport.pdf.
92        Appendix 5



finances of the Union and the States and suggest a plan by which the governments, collectively
and severally, may bring about a restructuring of the public finances restoring budgetary
balance, achieving macro-economic stability and debt reduction along with equitable growth."7

9.      The fiscal restructuring plan recommended by the TFC requires that combined revenue
deficits of the center and states should be eliminated by FY2008, and aggregate fiscal deficit
should be contained at 6% of GDP. The state governments on their part would have to
restructure their finances to eliminate the revenue deficit and contain the fiscal deficit at 3% of
GDP by FY2008. While the revenue deficits would have to be phased out--not only in the
aggregate but in each of the states--fiscal deficit targets for individual states would have to be
set on the basis of the sustainability conditions of each state (based on the ratio of interest
payments to revenue receipts).

10.     The TFC made detailed recommendations on the measures to accelerate the growth of
revenues and decelerate the growth of expenditures in states to achieve fiscal consolidation. It
also recommended that the states should enact state fiscal responsibility acts (FRA), and work
out medium-term fiscal plans to achieve revenue and fiscal deficit targets. This would entitle
them to avail of the benefits of debt restructuring, involving consolidation of debt for a fresh term
of 20 years at a reduced interest rate of 7.5%. The states have acted swiftly to join the fiscal
restructuring program and 23 states have passed FRAs. Another incentive component--writing
off the repayments of central loans due from FY2005 to FY2009--was linked to progress in the
reduction in revenue deficits.

          2.       Recent Trends in State Finances

11.     The aggregate fiscal trend in state finances shows significant improvement, particularly
since FY2003 (Figure A5.2). The aggregate revenue and fiscal deficits of the states have shown
a sharp decline. The revenue deficit in FY2005 is estimated at just about 0.5% of GDP, about
2% lower than in FY2001 (Table A5.1). Similarly, the fiscal deficit for FY2005, estimated at 3.2%
of GDP, is marginally higher than the target set for FY2008. The states' capital expenditure
relative to GDP has also increased from 1.5% in FY2002 to 2.4% in FY2005. Even if the final
accounts of revenue and fiscal deficits for FY2006 are marginally higher, it is clear that the fiscal
health of the states has shown a significant improvement and they are well on their way to
achieving the targets set by the TFC.




7
    Public Finance. 2002. Report of the Twelfth Finance Commission. November. Available:
    http://indiabudget.nic.in/es2004-05/chapt2005/chap25.pdf.
                                                                                                                                     Appendix 5         93




                                                                Fiscal2:
                                                              Figure
                                          Figure A5.2: Trend in        Imbalances in States
                                                 Trends in Fiscal Imbalances in States
                         5                                                             Fiscal Deficit
                   GDP



                         4
                 GDP




                                                                                       Revenue Deficit
          Centofof




                         3
                         2
      Percent




                         1                                                               Primary Deficit
      Per




                         0
                                 6         7         8         9         0         1         2         3         4         5         6         7
                             5-9       6-9       7-9       8-9       9-0       0-0       1-0       2-0       3-0       4-0       5-0       6-0
                            9         9         9         9         9         0         0         0         0         0         0         0
                         19        19        19        19        19        20        20        20        20        20        20        20
                                                                                     Years

     GDP = gross domestic product.
     Source: Reserve Bank of India.

12.     Is the improvement in state finances caused by states' own efforts or is it due to
exogenous factors? The states' own efforts include measures to improve revenue productivity
from tax and non-tax sources assigned to them, and those initiated to compress expenditures.
The exogenous factors with favorable impact on state finances include the introduction of debt
swap scheme, larger tax devolution from increased buoyancy of central taxes, larger transfers
for various central schemes, and those arising from the TFC's recommendations.

13.    The disaggregated analysis of the sources of improvements in state finances presented
in Table A5.2 shows that of the 2.1% improvement, increase in revenues contributed to 1.5%
and the remaining 0.6% was due to compression of expenditures. About 1% of the improvement
was due to increased devolution recommended by the TFC, higher buoyancy of central taxes
since FY2002, and increased grants for various central schemes. On the expenditure side,
reduction in interest payments following the debt swap scheme and later caused by adoption of
the TFC's scheme of debt restructuring and write-off, contributed to a 0.24% improvement in
revenue deficit. The interest payment as a ratio of GDP declined from 2.96% in FY2003 to
2.82% in FY2004 and is estimated at 2.5% in FY2005.

                             Table A5.2: Fiscal Consolidation: Contribution of Different Factors

                                                                                                                   Cumulative Contribution
                                                                                                                  Improvement     to the
                                                            Percentage point changes in                             in FY2005 improvement
                                                           the fiscal variables as a ratio of                          over    in revenue
Description                                                 SDP over the previous year in                             FY2001    deficit (%)
Fiscal Variables                                      FY2002          FY2003          FY2004          FY2005
Revenue Deficit                                        (0.34)          (0.03)          (1.05)         (0.68)             (2.1)
Fiscal Deficit                                         (0.04)           0.29           (0.96)          (0.3)            (1.01)
Primary Deficit                                        (0.16)           0.19           (0.82)          0.02             (0.77)
Revenue Receipts                                        0.23            0.03            0.45           0.82              1.53                  (72.9)
Own revenues                                            0.23           (0.08)           0.4            0.03              0.58                  (27.6)
Current Transfers                                         0             0.11            0.05           0.79              0.95                  (45.2)
94      Appendix 5




                                                                               Cumulative Contribution
                                                                              Improvement     to the
                                       Percentage point changes in              in FY2005 improvement
                                      the fiscal variables as a ratio of           over    in revenue
 Description                           SDP over the previous year in              FY2001    deficit (%)
 Revenue Expenditure               (0.11)      (0.01)     (0.59)      0.13       (0.58)        27.6
 Interest Payments                  0.12         0.1      (0.14)     (0.32)      (0.24)        11.4
 Capital Outlay                     0.08        0.41       0.07       0.42        0.98
 Developmental Expenditure         (0.18)       0.83      (0.75)      0.76        0.66
SDP = gross state domestic product.
Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
Source: Reserve Bank of India.

14.      In contrast, cumulative improvement in revenue deficit in FY2005 over FY2001, resulting
from increase in states' own revenues was about 0.6% and compression of noninterest
expenditures was 0.34%. Thus, states' own effort contributed 43% to the reduction in revenue
deficit and 57% of the reduction is attributable to exogenous factors. While this is lower than the
reduction caused by central transfers and savings because of debt swap, it is still important.
Higher transfers are likely to continue and, more importantly, higher buoyancy of central taxes is
also likely to show buoyancy in tax devolution. The benefits of debt restructuring implemented
on the basis of the TFC's recommendations will continue in the future. Thus, in the medium
term, the improvement in the fiscal situation is likely to continue.

15.     The reduction in the revenue deficit has had a favorable effect--not only in reducing
fiscal and primary deficits but also in increasing capital outlay in the states. Of the 2% reduction
in revenue deficit-gross state domestic product (SDP) ratio, 1% was used to reduce fiscal
deficits and the remainder was used to increase capital outlay in the states. Despite this, the
increase in development expenditure, which includes social services with a large revenue
expenditure component, has been lower than the capital outlay (0.66%). In other words, there
was no increase in states' developmental expenditure as a ratio of SDP in FY2005 over that of
FY2002. In some social sectors such as education, the expenditure-SDP ratio was actually
lower in 2005­2006 than in 2002­2003. This may be partly because some central transfers,
such as that for the national primary education scheme (SSA), do not pass through state
budgets and are given directly to districts or spending agencies. Nevertheless, it is important
that the focus on reducing deficits should not cause compression of social sector expenditures.

16.      While the improvement in the fiscal health of the states is noteworthy, some recent
developments threaten to reverse the trend. The first is the risk of pay revision. Some state
governments have already appointed pay commissions (Karnataka and Punjab), and the
Government's decision to appoint a pay commission would cause ripple effects. Revision in pay
and pensions contributed to an increase of over 2% in revenue expenditures in states from
FY1997 to FY2000. A similar increase could destabilize the finances of the states again.
Second, the era of low interest rates seems to be over. Although the average rate of interest
has fallen significantly because of the TFC debt restructuring plan, new loans by states will have
higher interest rates. Third, some states have not shown any inclination to adopt the path of
fiscal discipline recommended by the TFC. The recent assembly election in Tamil Nadu showed
political parties' inclination to resort to competitive populism to come to power, which is a sure
route to fiscal profligacy. Finally, the pressure to generate larger resources for the 11th Five Year
Plan has led to the idea that the deficits do not matter. Combined with the recent experience of
a fast-growing economy, despite persisting deficits, this has led to the belief that it is not
necessary to adhere to the fiscal adjustment path recommended by the TFC.
                                                                                 Appendix 5     95




17.     The introduction of value-added tax (VAT) in place of a cascading type sales tax is an
important positive development at the state level and it is expected to improve the buoyancy of
the state tax system significantly. In general, the VAT revenue registered over 15% growth in
FY2005 over the previous year. It was feared that the introduction of VAT could result in
substantial loss of revenue in the initial years, and a provision of Rs60.5 billion was made to
compensate states in the budget for FY2005. However, the actual compensation was
significantly lower. Despite having revenue reducing the VAT rate structure, the revenue
increase in VAT states in the first year was similar to those in states that did not switch to VAT.

18.     The increase in revenue productivity from the introduction of VAT is shown more clearly
when the revenue collections from VAT are observed during April­August 2006. By April 2006,
all the states except Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu had switched to the VAT regime and the
collections during the first 5 months show a revenue increase of 28% over the same period the
previous year. All states, except Arunachal Pradesh, have registered significant increases in
revenues. In Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, and Jharkhand, growth or revenues from
VAT during the first 5 months of FY2006 were more than 30% compared with the same period
in FY2005. Although the increase in FY2005 was lower than the trend growth in states such as
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Kerala, the growth rate accelerated significantly in FY2006,
and the first 5 months of FY2006 have seen growth of over 30% in Andhra Pradesh, 18% in
Karnataka, and 24% in Kerala. Thus, VAT reform is likely to increase the revenue productivity of
the tax system significantly in the medium term.

19.     There is no room for complacency, however. The available evidence shows that traders
are slowly adjusting to the new tax system and discovering ways to evade the tax, as the
information system required for effective administration and enforcement has not proceeded
alongside structural reform. Evasion is done by keeping the entire chain of transactions outside
the tax net. The chain is also circumvented by showing resales to registered dealers as sales to
final consumers. The success in the implementation of VAT will depend on taking immediate
measures to strengthen the information system. The success of the tax information network in
garnering significant additional revenues from income taxes at the central level should be the
eye-opener for the states.

20.     Overall improvement in state finances should not obscure serious fiscal problems in
individual states. Table A5.3 shows that fiscal problems in West Bengal, Kerala, Jharkhand, and
even Punjab are worrisome. In Kerala, there was hardly any improvement in revenue deficits
since FY2003, and revenue deficit continues to be as high as 4% of SDP. The fiscal deficit
relative to SDP declined from 6.2% in FY2003 to 4.4% in FY2004, but increased the next year
to 5.2%. In West Bengal, despite improvement by 1.2%, the revenue deficit was 3.7% of SDP.
The fiscal deficit declined from 6.8% to 4.6% during the period. Yet, with almost 3.5% going to
bridge revenue deficit, the capital outlay was just about 1.1% of SDP. In Jharkhand, a state with
very high revenue and fiscal deficits, the revenue deficit is budgeted to decline to 1.4% in
FY2006 from 3.3% in the previous year.

21.      Implementation of the TFC's debt restructuring scheme has substantially reduced states'
outstanding liabilities. Besides, reduction in the effective interest rates on states' borrowings,
combined with high growth rate of SDP in most states, has ensured a reduction, albeit marginal,
in debt-SDP ratio in recent years. Some 23 states have passed FRAs, as recommended by the
TFC, and are eligible for benefits under the debt restructuring plan; others are likely to pass the
legislation within the next few months. West Bengal is a notable exception--despite its severe
imbalance, it has not passed the FRA. Kerala passed the act but, with the change in the party in
96         Appendix 5



power, the new government has not shown any inclination to adhere to the set targets of fiscal
and revenue deficit reduction.

                            Table A5.3: Fiscal Health of Individual States

                         Percentage of Fiscal Deficit to SDP       Percentage of Revenue Deficit to SDP
                        2003­      2004­     2005­      2006­      2003­      2004­     2005­     2006­
                         2004       2005      2006       2007       2004       2005      2006      2007
 Item                   Actual     Actual      RE         BE       Actual     Actual      RE        BE
 General Category States
 Andhra Pradesh          (4.04)     (4.04)     (3.61)     (3.21)    (1.61)     (1.26)    (0.49)    (0.39)
 Bihar                   (8.34)     (2.17)     (8.05)     (5.19)    (0.49)     (1.88)     0.24     (0.86)
 Chhattisgarh            (5.72)     (2.92)     (2.84)     (2.84)    (1.66)      0.35      1.69      2.37
 Goa                     (4.61)     (4.86)     (5.32)     (5.04)    (1.45)      (1.1)    (0.54)    (0.23)
 Gujarat                 (5.53)     (0.35)        (3)     (3.12)    (2.24)      2.25      0.17         0
 Haryana                 (3.97)     (1.45)     (2.01)     (1.76)    (0.37)     (0.31)    (0.65)     (0.3)
 Jharkhand               (4.17)      0.57     (10.33)     (9.37)      0.36      1.33     (3.26)    (1.37)
 Karnataka               (3.46)     (2.42)     (2.86)     (2.79)      (0.4)      1.1      0.71      0.82
 Kerala                  (6.19)     (4.43)      (5.2)     (5.38)    (4.11)     (3.65)    (3.98)    (3.73)
 Madhya Pradesh          (7.46)      (6.3)     (4.23)     (3.95)    (4.56)      1.67     (0.02)     0.79
 Maharashtra             (5.47)     (5.01)     (4.01)     (1.85)    (2.53)      (2.7)    (0.35)     0.07
 Orissa                  (6.57)     (8.54)     (5.33)     (5.32)    (2.61)     (0.88)    (0.88)    (0.66)
 Punjab                  (6.01)     (4.66)     (3.75)     (3.32)    (4.39)     (3.84)    (1.75)    (1.29)
 Rajasthan               (7.02)     (5.56)     (4.96)     (3.79)    (3.26)     (1.25)     0.18      0.51
 Tamil Nadu              (3.32)     (2.95)     (2.59)     (2.39)    (0.93)     (0.37)    (0.17)    (0.09)
 Uttar Pradesh           (7.74)     (5.51)     (5.09)     (4.47)    (8.64)     (2.97)    (1.21)       0.4
 West Bengal               (6.9)    (5.15)     (4.79)     (4.47)    (4.91)     (3.98)    (3.67)    (3.08)
 Special Category States
 Arunachal Pradesh      (10.31)    (15.23)      0.33      (3.93)      7.59     (0.31)    20.62      6.19
 Assam                   (3.46)     (0.43)    (0.580      (0.51)      (1.7)     0.39      0.41      0.47
 Himachal Pradesh        (13.2)     (9.01)     (4.09)     (3.82)      (8.9)    (5.77)    (0.41)    (0.97)
 Jammu & Kashmir           0.09     (4.83)     (5.41)          0      9.96      7.55      9.04         0
 Manipur                   (7.8)   (11.14)    (7.090      (2.15)    (1.19)      2.27      10.7     15.88
 Meghalaya               (4.19)     (5.95)    (3.640      (1.28)      1.77     (0.95)      2.2      5.09
 Mizoram                (12.15)     (7.91)    (10.23)     (3.91)      3.34      3.76      5.57      3.71
 Nagaland                   2.9      8.51      16.98         15      10.07       2.5       6.5      6.49
 Sikkim                  (3.61)    (12.12)    (16.09)   (13.74)      11.54     11.03     11.47     12.61
 Tripura                 (4.76)     (2.89)      (5.7)   (5.58)0       1.48      4.74      4.92      3.75
 Uttaranchal               (8.1)   (10.75)    (10.87)   (11.43)     (4.38)      (4.7)    (1.89)    (0.63)
BE = budget estimate, SDP = state domestic product, RE = revised estimate.
Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
Source: Budget documents of state governments.
                                                                                               Appendix 5       97




22.     Interestingly, fiscal stress as measured by revenue and fiscal deficits is not related to the
level of development of the states as measured by their per capita SDP. The analysis shows
that, in FY2003, the correlation between revenue deficit and per capita SDP was ­0.07 and
between fiscal deficit and per capita SDP, it was 0.236. However, this does not mean that fiscal
stress in poorer states is any less or that their fiscal discipline is any better. The simple fact is
that their spending on social and economic services is extremely low. For example, Bihar shows
a revenue surplus of 0.24% in FY2005, Rajasthan shows a revenue surplus, and the revenue
deficits in Orissa and Madhya Pradesh are small. However, per capita expenditure on social
and economic services in all these states was well below average. In Bihar, it was Rs1,075,
which was only 48% of the non-special category average (Rs 2,035). In Uttar Pradesh, revenue
deficit was reduced from 2.98% of SDP in FY2000 to 1.21% in FY2005, but per capita
expenditure on social and economic services (Rs1,187) was 42% lower than the all-state
average.

C.        Explaining Fiscal Stress: Economic and Political Factors

23.     The finances of every single state deteriorated during the latter half of the 1990s,
although they have improved in the last couple of years because of higher transfers from the
center. The reasons for the deterioration were (i) sharp increases in wages, salaries, and
pensions following the implementation of the Fifth Pay Commission's recommendations at the
central level; (ii) an increase in the debt servicing burden, with the increase in their cost of
borrowing; (iii) an increase in explicit and implicit subsidies and transfers because of inadequate
cost recoveries in the provision of quasi-public services; (iv) declining buoyancy in state taxes in
the 1990s over the previous decade; (v) a decline in the transfers from the center following
deceleration in tax devolution; and (vi) a sharp deterioration in power sector finances.

24.     The fiscal stress was partly because the states did not undertake systematic tax reforms
after the economy was liberalized in 1991 (footnote 6). The changes in their tax policy and
administration have been largely ad hoc. Of course, the major reform--the introduction of state
level VAT--was implemented only from April 2005.8

25.     The revenue from states' own taxes grew substantially more slowly, and there was a
sharp decline in the tax buoyancy in every state except Bihar in the 1990s compared with the
previous decade (Table A5.5). The buoyancy of tax revenue, which was more than one in every
state during the 1980s, declined in the 1990s to less than one in all the states except Assam,
Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh. This is not surprising since over 70% of the growth
in GDP during the latter half of the 1990s was attributable to growth in the services sector,9 a
large proportion of the production and consumption of which is not taxed by states. The case of
West Bengal is striking as it had the lowest buoyancy in the 1990s (0.76).




8
    Rao, G. M. and R. K. Rao. 2005. Trends and Issues in Tax Policy and Reform in India. Paper presented at the
    Conference on India Policy Forum 2005, July 25­26, 2005.
9
    Acharya, S. 2001. India's Macroeconomic Management in the Nineties. Indian Council of Research in International
    Economic Relations. New Dehli.
98     Appendix 5



              Table A5.5: Growth and Buoyancy of States' Own Tax Revenues

                                     Compound Growth Rate          Buoyancy Coefficients
      State                         1980­1990   1991­2002         1980­1990   1991­2002
      Andhra Pradesh                   16.16        14.36            1.13            0.93
      Assam                            19.41        13.16            1.32            1.14
      Bihar                            14.75        12.90            1.01            1.12
      Gujarat                          14.45        14.68            1.07            0.91
      Haryana                          14.70        13.63            1.06            0.89
      Karnataka                        15.62        14.54            1.13            0.90
      Kerala                           15.10        15.30            1.20            0.89
      Madhya Pradesh                   15.45        13.71            1.12            1.24
      Maharashtra                      14.84        13.89            1.06            0.90
      Orissa                           15.71        12.56            1.22            0.84
      Punjab                           13.52        12.47            0.98            0.94
      Rajasthan                        16.06        14.66            1.12            0.89
      Tamil Nadu                       14.19        14.36            0.99            0.86
      Uttar Pradesh                    15.72        13.57            1.19            1.04
      West Bengal                      15.20        11.64            1.16            0.76
     Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

26.     Reforms on the expenditure side were difficult in the latter part of the 1990s, an era of
coalition politics and competitive populism. While the effect of pay revision was felt in all the
states, some states (such as Karnataka) tried to contain the damage by not entirely adhering to
central pay scales and not filling vacancies created by natural attrition. On the other hand, pay
revision in Punjab was even more liberal than the revision of the Government's pay scales. The
effect of savings on debt servicing as a result of the debt swap scheme is yet to unfold fully.
This will benefit more states with a large stock of small saving loans at high interest rates.

27.      Variations in the intensity of the stress among the states depend on the structure of
expenditures. The burden of salary revision varied depended on the share of salaries in total
government expenditures and the extent of pay revision granted by the state government.
Similarly, the interest burden depended on the stock of debt, its composition, time profile, and
average interest rate payable. There were also exogenous shocks such as earthquakes in
states like Maharashtra and Gujarat. Most of the states responded to the fiscal stress by
compressing expenditures, and compressed most maintenance expenditure and creation of
infrastructure, as support in the states on these is relatively weak. The ability to compress
expenditures depends on the political strength and complexion of the state government. Recent
developments, such as the emergence of coalition governments at the center and in some of
the states, which increases the dependence of the main ruling party at the center on other
political parties, and the short electoral cycle of political parties affects the prospects for fiscal
consolidation. The emergence of regional parties and their "pivotal" role in the central coalition
results in the adoption of asymmetric and discretionary fiscal arrangements. A pro-labor
government as in West Bengal or coalition governments in the states could not implement
policies to compress wages, salaries, and pensions. In contrast, some states such as Haryana,
Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu did well to both increase revenues from own sources and manage
expenditures to contain the size of revenue and fiscal deficits.

28.    The important fiscal implications of these political developments may be summarized. In
general, lowering of the time horizon has resulted in (i) greater competitive populism with
                                                                                              Appendix 5      99


reluctance to raise revenue from taxes and user charges, and (ii) an increase in expenditures
with short-term political gains rather than long-term benefits for development. Second, coalition
governments at the center with several parties including left wing parties has made it extremely
difficult to undertake any rationalization of employment and wages, salaries, and pensions. At
the same time, the common minimum wage program adopted by the United Progressive
Alliance government has the potential to increase expenditures substantially. As many of the
programs are within states' control, this has serious consequences for states' fiscal health.
Third, bipolarization of the polity at the center has divided the ruling parties in the states as
friendly and unfriendly to the center. States with strong central support could allow their fiscal
situation to drift and have high deficits, and use the levers of their bargaining power to get larger
transfers and bailouts. Even a rule-based system of intergovernmental finance has considerable
scope for asymmetry and discretion.10

D.      Structural Adjustment Loans and Fiscal Consolidation

29.     This section analyses the impact of structural adjustment lending on states' finances.
The experience with subnational adjustment lending from multilateral institutions is relatively
recent. According to Article 293 of the Constitution, states cannot contract exogenous loans and
even in the case of domestic loans, they have to seek permission from the central Government
as long as they are indebted to it. Thus, even though detailed loan negotiations are conducted
by multilateral institutions with state governments, the final contract is with the central
Government, which onlends to the states. This creates an incentive problem, as the ultimate
borrower has no repayment liability to the lender, and the enforcement of the contract will be the
responsibility of the central Government despite the level of detail of the conditions imposed by
the lending institutions.

30.      Wide-ranging international experiences of structural adjustment loans (SAL) have
produced mixed outcomes. A World Bank review11 conducted in 1992 observed that adjustment
lending was associated with fiscal deficit reduction and increase in revenue, but the general
spending cuts were often at the expense of critically important operation and maintenance
(O&M) and overspending on salary relative to non-salary inputs. While analyzing the effect of
development assistance on public sector behavior, Mavrotas and Quattara 12 observed that
official development assistance reduced revenues in the short run but raised them in the long
run. The study by Gupta, Clements, Pivovarsky, and Tiongson13 of foreign aid in 107 countries
during 1970­2000 found that, while concessional loans were associated with higher domestic
revenue mobilization, grants had the opposite effect.

31.   The states in India that have availed of the SAL facility and the year of introduction of the
SAL-induced fiscal reform program in those states are in Table A5.6. To date, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, and Kerala have availed of SAL assistance from ADB; 14 and the World Bank has




10
   Rao, G. M. and N. Singh. 2005. Political Economy of Indian Federalism, Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
11
   Cited in World Bank. 2005. State Fiscal Reforms in India: Progress and Prospects, A World Bank Report. New
   Delhi: Macmillan India Ltd.
12
   Mavrotas G. and B. Quattara. 2004. Public Sector Revenue Response to Development Assistance, Time Series
   Evidence from Costarica, Cote D Ivorie, The Philippines. Available: http://hkkk.fi/~haaparan/NNDE/Ouattara.pdf.
13
   Gupta, S., B. Clements, A. Pivovarsky, and E.R. Tiongson. 2003. Foreign Aid and Revenue Response: Does the
   Composition of Aid Matter? International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 3176. New York.
14
   ADB also approved an SAL in Assam in 2004.
100      Appendix 5



assisted Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, and Orissa. The relative fiscal
performance of these states vis-à-vis states that did not avail of an SAL is now examined.15

                                        Table A5.6: Year of Fiscal Intervention through SAL

                                                                         Year of Fiscal      SAL Facility
                                       State                              Intervention       Provided by
                                       Andhra Pradesh                         2002            World Bank
                                       Gujarat                                1996              ADB
                                       Karnataka                              2001            World Bank
                                       Kerala                                 2002              ADB
                                       Madhya Pradesh                         1999              ADB
                                       Uttar Pradesh                          2000            World Bank
                                       ADB = Asian Development Bank, SAL = structural adjustment loan.
                                       Sources: ADB and World Bank documents.

32.      The combined fiscal deficits to SDP ratio became marginally lower in SAL states than
the rest of the states from FY2000 onward (Figure A5.3), and tended to decline. However, as far
as revenue deficits are concerned, there was not much difference between SAL and non-SAL
states.16 The ratio of fiscal deficit to SDP ratio remained stagnant during FY2000 to FY2002 for
the non-SAL states. By 2001, all five states had introduced fiscal reform except Andhra
Pradesh, which followed in 2002. A similar trend is observed concerning revenue and primary
deficits to SDP ratio of both categories of states (Figures A5.4 and A5.5). However, unlike fiscal
and revenue deficits, the primary deficit to SDP ratio declined for both categories of states from
the late 1990s--the fall is sharper in the case of states with SAL. The World Bank study
(footnote 5) also noted that there has been a sustained reduction in the revenue deficits of
states that availed of SAL-induced fiscal reform.


                                                Figure A5.3: Fiscal Deficit to SDP Ratio
                                               A Comparison of States with and without SAL

                           7
                           6
         FD to SDP Ratio




                           5
                           4
                           3
                           2
                           1
                           0
                               1987-       1989-     1991-       1993-        1995-       1997-       1999-   2001-
                                88          90        92          94           96          98         2000     02
                                                       FD of SAL States        FD of Non-SAL States

        FD = fiscal deficit, non-SAL = non-structural adjustment loan, SAL = structural adjustment loan,
        SDP = gross state domestic product.
        Source: Reserve Bank of India.




15
   The analysis is confined to the 15 major states in India, leaving aside the special category states excluding Assam.
   These 15 major states comprise all of the non-special category states, excluding Goa, and one special category
   state, i. e., Assam.
16
   There was a decline in the SAL states in FY2002, the last year for which date is available.
                                                                                                                      Appendix 5     101



                                                  Figure A5.4: Revenue Deficit to SDP Ratio
                                                  A Comparison of States with and without SAL

                               5
            RD to SDP Ratio


                               4
                               3
                               2
                               1
                               0
                                   1987- 1988- 1989- 1990- 1991- 1992- 1993- 1994- 1995- 1996- 1997- 1998- 1999- 2000- 2001- 2002-
                                    88    89    90    91    92    93    94    95    96    97    98    99 2000 01        02    03

                                                               RD of SAL States       RD of Non-SAL States

          non-SAL = non-structural adjustment loan, RD = revenue deficit, SAL = structural adjustment loan,
          SDP = gross state domestic product.
          Source: Reserve Bank of India.

                                                   Figure A5.5: Primary Deficit to SDP Ratio
                                                  A Comparison of States with and without SAL
                 PD to SDP Ratio




                                   4
                                   3
                                   3
                                   2
                                   2
                                   1
                                   1
                                   0



                                      20 0
                                      19 8

                                      19 9

                                      19 0

                                      19 1

                                      19 2

                                      19 3

                                      19 4

                                      19 5

                                      19 6

                                      19 7

                                      19 8

                                     99 9



                                      20 1

                                      20 2

                                             3
                                           -8

                                           -8

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9

                                           -9



                                           -0

                                           -0

                                           -0
                                          00
                                        90

                                        91

                                        92

                                        93

                                        94

                                        95




                                        00

                                        01

                                        02
                                        87

                                        88

                                        89




                                        96

                                        97

                                        98

                                        -2
                                      19




                                   19




                                                               PD of SAL States         PD of Non-SAL States

          non-SAL = non-structural adjustment loan, PD = primary deficit, SAL = structural adjustment loan,
          SDP = gross state domestic product.
          Source: Reserve Bank of India

33.     Overall, the upward movement of revenue, fiscal, and primary deficits have been on hold
or there has been a marginal improvement in these deficits in SAL states subsequent to
structural adjustment lending. However, it would be misleading to conclude that there are clear
trends as the analysis period is not long enough and the reduction in the deficits is not clear and
decisive.

34.    It is important to find out whether and to what extent fiscal intervention through SAL
resulted in the expected improvement of revenues and rationalization of expenditures.17 Before
model specification and estimation, an exploratory analysis of state level fiscal variables was
undertaken in the pre- and post-reform period in these six SAL states. The period chosen was
from FY1987 to FY2002.

35.    There are a spectrum of indicators to judge fiscal reform. To start with, the pre- and post-
reform tax buoyancy is compared. In all states, except Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, own

17
     Orissa is excluded from the analysis, as the SAL-induced fiscal reform has just been introduced in the last fiscal
     year.
102        Appendix 5



tax buoyancy was higher in the post-fiscal intervention year than the pre-fiscal intervention year
(Table A5.6). However, there are sharp interstate differences in the pre- and post-reform
buoyancies. The revenue buoyancy was highest in Karnataka, followed by Kerala, Andhra
Pradesh, and Gujarat.

                     Table A5.6: Buoyancy of Own Tax Revenues: Comparison of
                               Pre- and Post-Fiscal Intervention Years

                                 Pre Fiscal           Post Fiscal       Difference of
                                Intervention         Intervention       post and pre        Buoyancy of
                                    Year                 Year              reform          the combined
          State                  Buoyancy             Buoyancy          buoyancies             period
          Andhra                    0.910                1.617                                 0.938
          Pradesh                                                          0.707
          Gujarat                   0.921                0.976             0.055               0.932
          Karnataka                 0.964                4.397             3.433               0.984
          Kerala                    1.007                1.980             0.973               1.015
          Madhya                    1.027                0.978                                 1.075
          Pradesh                                                          (0.049)
          Uttar Pradesh             0.997                0.792             (0.204)             1.078
          Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
          Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

36.    However, when the buoyancy of non-tax revenues of the state is analyzed, higher
buoyancy is observed in the post-reform period in the states, except in Andhra Pradesh where it
declined and in Uttar Pradesh where it was negative (Table A5.7).

                  Table A5.7: Buoyancy of Own Non-Tax Revenues: Comparison of
                               Pre- and Post-Fiscal Intervention Years

                                                          Post-Fiscal      Difference of
                                  Pre-Fiscal             Intervention     Post- and Pre-       Buoyancy of
                              Intervention Year              Year             Reform          the Combined
      State                       Buoyancy                Buoyancy         Buoyancies             Period
      Andhra Pradesh                0.799                   0.027             (0.772)              0.781
      Gujarat                       1.005                   1.879              0.874               0.934
      Karnataka                     0.733                   0.763               0.03               0.689
      Kerala                        0.736                   2.111              1.375               0.728
      Madhya Pradesh                0.818                   3.405              2.587               0.813
      Uttar Pradesh                 0.679                  (0287)             (0.966)              0.626
      Note:   Figures in parenthesis are negative.
      Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

37.      To assess the performance on the expenditure side, the non-interest expenditure
elasticity was estimated in pre- and post-reform periods.18 Inclusion of interest payment in the
expenditure model may give spurious results, as it is sticky upwards and committed in nature.
Interest payment in the states also increased because of the increase in the average cost of
debt caused by financial liberalization during the 1990s. The expenditure elasticity declined

18
     Interest payment being a committed expenditure, will not vary by whether a debt state undertakes fiscal reform
     unless reform is accompanied by aggressive debt restructuring. Furthermore, the benefits from a softening of
     interest rates would accrue to all the states.
                                                                                        Appendix 5   103


significantly in Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh (Table A5.8), while it increased in Karnataka,
followed by Kerala and Gujarat. These increases reflect softening of the budget constraint
because of the fresh infusion of resources via SAL.

                 Table A5.8: Elasticity of Non-Interest Expenditure: Comparison of
                              Pre- and Post-Fiscal Intervention Years
                                                                    Difference Of
                                Pre-Fiscal          Post-Fiscal     Post- and Pre-    Buoyancy of
                               Intervention        Intervention        Reform        the Combined
         State                Year Elasticity     Year Elasticity     Elasticity         Period
         Andhra Pradesh             0.947                (0.007)        (0.954)         0.932
         Gujarat                    0.701                 1.186          0.485          0.910
         Karnataka                  0.948                 6.523          5.575          0.982
         Kerala                     0.948                  2.46          1.512          0.955
         Madhya Pradesh             0.925                 0.986          0.061          0.972
         Uttar Pradesh              0.934                 0.674          -0.26          0.943
         Note:    Figures in parenthesis are negative.
         Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.

          1.      Model Specification and Estimation

38.     The econometric analysis of the impact follows a modeling strategy that controls for
state-specific factors, including unanticipated shocks other than the fiscal intervention through
SAL. In the present context, unanticipated shocks were the Gujarat earthquake and the
bifurcation of the states of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.19 In addition, the specification
includes the effects of pay revision caused by implementation of the Fifth Pay Commission's
award, the earthquake in Gujarat, and the bifurcation of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
The period chosen for the analysis was FY1987 to FY2004.

39.   The following expenditure model has been specified for Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
and Kerala:
                 ln iex =  +  lg sdp +  ln ixt -1 + f du + S du + U t

          For Gujarat, the expenditure model shocks is specified as:

                  ln iex =  +  lg sdp +  ln ixt -1 + f du + S du + E du + U t

          For Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the specification is:
                  ln iex =  +  lg sdp +  ln ixt -1 + f du + S du + µbdu + U t

          Where, lg sdp = log of gross state domestic product
                   f du = fiscal int ervention dummy
                   S du = Salary revision dummy
                   E du = Earthquake dummy


19
     The states of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh were carved to form two other states--Chhattisgarh and
     Uttaranchal respectively.
104    Appendix 5




                bdu = State bifurcation dummy
40.     According to the expenditure models specified above, the primary government
expenditure is expected to be positively related to the SDP and the lag of its own expenditure.
The sign of fiscal intervention dummy would primarily depend on the nature of fiscal
intervention. If the intervention focused more on expenditure restructuring rather than
expenditure contraction, a positive coefficient may be produced, implying enhancement of
primary expenditure. The sign of the dummy for salary revision is expected to be positive, as
well as the earthquake dummy for Gujarat. It is difficult to predict the sign of the state bifurcation
dummy used for Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, as it would depend primarily on whether
the bifurcation of the state leads to a fiscal loss or gain.

41.     The results of the state-specific expenditure models presented in Table A5.9 reveal that
the coefficient of lagged expenditure variable was positive and significant in Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh. In other words, past expenditure determined the
level of the current fiscal year expenditure. The fiscal intervention dummy shows a negative sign
for Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, and Madhya Pradesh, implying that fiscal intervention induced
contraction of expenditure, although the coefficients are not statistically significant. In Uttar
Pradesh, however, the sign of the fiscal intervention dummy is positive but not significant. In
Gujarat, the earthquake dummy is positive but not statistically significant.

42.     The coefficient of the fiscal intervention dummy is positive and statistically significant in
only in Kerala. This implies that fiscal intervention has helped increase the share of non-interest
or the primary expenditure in Kerala, and the coefficient is 0.097. Exploratory analysis for Kerala
showed that the dummy used to capture the Fifth Pay Commission recommendation induced
salary revision.

                 Table A5.9: Results of the State-Specific Expenditure Models
                                          1987­2005

  States                      C          LSDP     LNIEX(-1)       Fdu         Sdu         Edu         bdu
                                                           a
  Andhra Pradesh          (0.427)           0.167       0.858       (0.043)                 (0.018)
                                            0.619       2.936
  Gujarat                   (0.335)         0.331       0.640a      (0.004)        (0.004)    0.082
                                            1.751       3.449
  Karnataka                 (1.338)a        0.723a      0.281         0.030                 (0.062)
                            (2.426)         3.154       1.222
                                     a
  Kerala                     (1.262)        1.076a    (0.167)         0.097b                  0.118a
                            (2.143)         4.097     (0.634)         1.836                   2.613
                                                              a
  Madhya Pradesh            (0.551)         0.266       0.750         0.022                 (0.030)  (0.189)b
                                            0.985       2.946                                        (2.013)
                                                              a
  Uttar Pradesh             (0.581)         0.332       0.670         0.056                 (0.035)  (0.080)
                                            1.159       2.509
  bdu = state bifurcation dummy, C = control, Edu = earthquake dummy, Fdu = fiscal intervention dummy,
  LSDP = lagged gross state domestic product, LNIEX = expenditure model, Sdu = salary revision dummy.
  Note:    Figures in parenthesis are negative and figures italicized are the t-statistics.
  a
    Indicates significance of the variable.
  b
    Indicates significance at 10%.
  Source: (Basic Data) State Finance Accounts.
                                                                                             Appendix 5   105


43.    The state-specific revenue side models were then estimated separately for own tax
revenues and own non-tax revenues. The following model was specified for Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, and Kerala:
        lotr =  + gsdp + f du + u t
        lontr =  + gsdp + f du + u t

44.    In the case of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, the state bifurcation dummy was also
incorporated:
      lotr =  + gsdp + f du + bdu + u t
      lontr =  + gsdp + f du + bdu + u t
Where, otr = own tax revenues
       ontr = own non tax revenues

45.     The results of state-specific revenue models are presented in Tables A5.10 (own tax
revenues) and A5.12 (non-tax revenues). Own tax revenues are a positive function of state
income, and statistically significant for all the states, unlike in the expenditure model. The fiscal
intervention dummy has a negative sign for Gujarat, but not significant. This could be partly due
to the natural calamities and communal problems. It is significant with a positive sign for all
other states. This implies that the intervention and associated reforms did not bring about
significant improvement in the revenues in Gujarat.

46.     In the case of non-tax revenues, the fiscal intervention dummy is significant with a
negative sign in Gujarat (Table A5.11), indicating that the non-tax revenues showed a decline
after the structural adjustment reforms were introduced. It is positive and significant in Andhra
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, and is not significant in the remaining states. The state bifurcation
dummy, though negative, remained statistically insignificant in both Madhya Pradesh and Uttar
Pradesh.

                             Table A5.10: States' Own Tax revenues

                   State                       C          LSDP          FD        BD
                   Andhra Pradesh           (1.544)a     0.898a       0.274a
                                           (2.542)      16.283        3.071
                   Gujarat                  (1.898)a     0.940a     (0.024)
                                           (3.733)      19.298
                   Karnataka                (2.340)a     0.992a       0.157a
                                           (5.829)      26.427        2.592
                   Kerala                   (2.534)a     1.006a       0.044b
                                          (16.253)      66.811        1.707
                   Madhya Pradesh           (3.433)a     1.047a       0.242a     (0.204)b
                                           (5.086)      16.680        3.556      (1.866)
                   Uttar Pradesh            (3.387)a     1.032a       0.271a     (0.026)b
                                           (4.953)      17.096        3.602      (0.247)
                   BD = budget deficit, C = control, FD = fiscal deficit, LSDP = lagged
                   gross state domestic product.
                   Note:    Figures in parenthesis are negative and figures italicized are
                            the t-statistics.
                   a
                     Indicates significance of the variable.
                   b
                     Indicates significance at 10%.
                   Source: (Basic Data) Finance Accounts.
106    Appendix 5



                            Table A5.11: Own Non-Tax Revenue Model

                    State                        C           LSDP         FD         BD
                                                                    a          a
                    Andhra Pradesh             (2.236)          0.814        0.581
                                                                9.815        4.331
                    Gujarat                      (6.234)a       1.211a     (2.451)a
                                                 (5.334)       10.819      (2.451)
                                                         b
                    Karnataka                    (1.536)        0.744a       0.002
                                                 (1.709)        8.847
                    Kerala                       (1.779)a       0.740a     (0.014)
                                                 (3.675)       15.825
                    Madhya Pradesh               (1.752)        0.827a     (0.094)     (0.205)
                                                                5.810
                    Uttar Pradesh                (2.870)a       0.822a       0.479a      0.048
                                                 (2.962)        9.613        4.496
                    BD = budget deficit, C = control, FD = fiscal deficit, LSDP = lagged gross
                    state domestic product.
                    Note:     Figures in parenthesis are negative and figures italicized are
                              the t-statistics.
                    a
                       Indicates significance of the variable.
                    b
                       Indicates significance at 10%.
                    Source: (Basic Data) Finance Accounts.

E.     Concluding Remarks

47.     This study has analyzed the nature and causes of fiscal stress in state governments in
India, and has examined the impact of fiscal reform initiated through structural adjustment
lending to selected state governments. The study shows that there has been a steady
deterioration in the deficit indicators of the states during the 1990s, with a turnaround in recent
years. However, the deficits shown in the budgets do not reveal a complete picture, since off-
budget deficits are not included because of the power sector and other utilities. The study noted
that off-budget deficits caused by power sector loss have increased steadily in recent years to
constitute about 1.4% of GDP, and should be added to the deficits measures derived from the
budget to get a realistic picture of the deficits. Thus, the deterioration in state finances is worse
than what the deficit figures derived from the budgets reveal.

48.     The analysis of revenue and fiscal deficits show significant interstate variations. The
performance of West Bengal, in terms of both the size of deficits and their change over time, is
worrisome. Other badly performing states include Punjab and Gujarat, the latter mainly because
of adverse fiscal fallout from the earthquake in 2001. At the other end of the spectrum, Haryana
and Tamil Nadu have performed well in terms of containing their deficits. Curiously, some of the
low-income states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have also contained their deficits--raising
serious doubts on the appropriateness of taking only these measures to understand fiscal stress
in the states. Given the structure of incentives, many of the poorer states have preferred to
reduce their expenditures, particularly on social and economic services, with adverse growth
implications for the future, as a route to contain the deficit. There is no significant relationship
between the level of development expenditure and the size of revenue or fiscal deficits in states.

49.     The study shows that the response to fiscal stress could differ, depending on the
structure of incentives faced by states and their political environment and alignments. States
that cannot easily soften their budget constraints by increasing the off-budget liabilities or
bargain and secure larger grants from the center, have to increase revenues, cut expenditures,
                                                                                  Appendix 5    107


or incur larger deficits. States such as Haryana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh
have tried to contain their deficits, partly by containing expenditures and partly by raising
revenues. In contrast, states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have cut developmental
expenditures, given the weak constituency for these expenditures. States such as West Bengal
and Punjab did not increase revenues but continued to incur expenditures, so they incurred
large deficits.

50.     The emergence of coalition governments at the center, and regional parties in the states
that became "pivotal" partners in the central Government, can have important implications for
the fiscal health of the states but the state response to fiscal stresses. The bipolarization of the
polity and asymmetric treatment of various states by the center also influences the fiscal
response of the states. Above all, lowering of the time horizon of the political parties has
imparted competitive populism to the policy environment. All these factors have adversely
affected fiscal discipline in the states.

51.     The state-specific effect of SAL has been mixed in terms of fiscal consolidation. The
exploratory data analysis of key fiscal variables across states revealed some improvement in
the expenditure structure and revenue effort for a subset of states that have introduced SAL-
induced fiscal reform. The econometric analysis shows that, while fiscal intervention had a
positive and statistically significant impact on own tax revenues in Karnataka and Kerala, the
impact on the expenditure side was insignificant. Although there was evidence of softening of
the budget constraints in some states in terms of non-interest expenditure, overall, there seems
to have been some fiscal gain in terms of reduction in revenue and fiscal deficits of SAL states
vis-à-vis non-SAL states. This remains true even when the consolidated fiscal deficits, including
power sector deficits, of non-SAL and SAL induced states is compared. Many of the gains seem
to have occurred in terms of improved revenue productivity of the tax system and not through
expenditure compression.

52.     These results are tentative. The impact of interventions on revenue productivity and
expenditure economy cannot be immediate, but must take place in the medium term. More
analytical work is necessary before conclusions are drawn. Nevertheless, initial results are not
very encouraging since adjustment lending did not result in expenditure economy in any of the
states. However, in two of the four states analyzed, the revenue productivity of the tax system
improved following adjustment lending.
108       Appendix 6



                           TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR RESTRUCTURING
                             STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES OF GUJARAT

A.        Background

          1.       Basic Data1

    Cost ($)                                                       Estimated             Actual
    Foreign Exchange                                              440,000.00           435,340.13
    Local Currency                                                160,000.00           155,550.00
    Total                                                              600,00          590,890.13
                                                                         0.00

    Number of Person-Months (consultants)                    34.00                           30.43
    Executing Agency: Finance Department of the Government of Gujarat

    Milestones                                                                           Date
    President's/Board Approval                                                          2 April 1996
    Signing of TA Agreement                                                             7 July 1996
    Fielding of Consultants                                                        4 November 1996
    TA Completion: Expected                                                       30 December 1997
                    Actual                                                             30 April 1998
    TCR Circulation                                                                   5 March 1999

    Mission Type                                                    Number               Date
    Fact-Finding                                                      1           3­5 February 1997
    Inception                                                         1             12­23 May 1997
    Operations Evaluation                                             1           2­28 October 2006
    TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report.
    Source: OED Mission.

          2.       Rationale

1.      India's economic liberalization efforts in the 1980s and 1990s put a focus on the
rationale and role of public enterprises in a changing economic environment. The 1980
industrial policy resolution of the central Government clearly acknowledged the potential role
that the private sector could play in future industrial growth. Accordingly, this policy statement
focused attention on the need to promote competition in the domestic market. This was also
evident in the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1980­1985), where the Government revised its original
policy of maintaining a direct presence in the industry sector. It also identified reasons why
public enterprises were underperforming, including (i) inadequate productivity; (ii) poor
managerial capacity and limited accountability; (iii) overstaffing; (iv) lack of continuous
technological improvement; (v) inadequate attention to research and development, and human
resource development; and (vi) increasing competition from the private sector.2

2.     The Government's 1991 statement on industrial policy, reaffirmed the earlier analysis of
public enterprises underperformance, and outlined a new policy to address this including (i)
reviewing the portfolio of public enterprises focusing on strategic, high technology, and essential

1
    Asian Development Bank. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Restructuring State-Owned Enterprises of
    Gujarat. Manila. (TA 2552-IND for $600,000, approved on 2 April 1996).
2
    http://siadipp.nic.in/publicat/nip0791.htm
                                                                                                  Appendix 6      109


infrastructure; and providing an enabling environment for private investors to enter these sectors;
(ii) closing financially unviable public enterprises and establishing a social security mechanism
to protect affected workers; (iii) divesting part of the government's shareholding to private
investors, financial institutions, the public, and workers; (iv) instituting corporate governance
reforms focusing on improving the professionalism and powers of public enterprise boards, and
(iv) increasing management autonomy and accountability through performance-based
memoranda of understanding that would be placed before Parliament. Almost every
Government budget speech since 1992 has contained statements reaffirming the Government's
commitment to reforming public enterprises. In 1993, the Government established a divestment
commission.3

3.       Recognizing its dire fiscal situation, and taking a lead from the Government's revised
public enterprise policy, the Gujarat state government (GSG) was the first state government to
initiate an in-depth review of its finances including its state public enterprises, referred to as
state-owned enterprises (SOEs). In October 1992, the Gujarat State Finance Commission was
constituted to undertake a comprehensive review of state finances; examine alternative and
new sources of revenue, and the potential for privatization of state SOEs; analyze government
expenditure trends; and recommend steps to reduce such expenditure. The finance
commission's report, released in April 1994, proposed that GSG substantially reduce the growth
of current expenditure by (i) improving planning of executive and investment outlays, (ii)
rationalizing the tax structure including better cost recovery with particular attention to the
Gujarat Electricity Board, (iii) delegating some government activities to the private sector, and
(iv) disinvesting and privatizing its SOEs on an extensive scale.4 The report formed the basis of
the first state program loan of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Gujarat Public Sector
Resource Management Program (GPSRMP).5 This technical assistance (TA) (footnote 1) was
designed and approved during the GPSRMP design phase.

          3.       Objectives and Scope

4.      The TA's outcome (objective) was to strengthen the Technical Secretariat to ensure
effective, smooth, and transparent restructuring of SOEs. 6 The outputs (scope) of the TA were
(i) proposals prepared for divestiture or restructuring at least 12 SOEs identified under GSG's
public sector reform program (PSRP); (ii) technical advice provided on divestment and
privatization matters including valuation; corporate and financial restructuring; corporate
management; legal, taxation, and regulatory frameworks; and associated labor issues and
strategies; and (iii) an overall approach and strategies developed for the restructuring and
eventual divestment of other SOEs over the medium term.

          4.       TA Completion Report

5.    The TA completion report (TCR) rated the TA as generally successful noting that the
outcome and outputs were substantially met, and the continued strong ownership by the Gujarat
Finance Department, the Executing Agency. The consultant was rated satisfactory, being

3
    A detailed history and updated status of Government of India and state government SOEs is provided on the
    Government's Divestment Department's Web site: www.divest.nic.in, accessed 20 January 2007.
4
    Government of Gujarat. 1994. Report of the Gujarat State Finance Commission. Gandhinagar.
5
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved
    on 18 December).
6
    The requirement that TA papers included a TA framework was introduced 3 months after the approval of this TA.
    Consequently the design describes the objective and outputs with no reference to indicators, risks, or assumptions.
110    Appendix 6



adaptable and innovative in addressing changes in implementation, and the Finance
Department was satisfied with the consultant's professional advice. The TCR notes the
implementation arrangements were effective, and the Finance Department, consultants, and
ADB worked as a team. The TCR recommended that GSG continue its SOE reform efforts and
policy dialogue to enhance the restructuring process through the GPSRMP.

B.     Assessment of Implementation Performance

       1.     Design

6.       The outcome and outputs in the TA design (footnote 6) reflect an appropriate level of
ambition. However, the proposed time frame of 16 months is quite ambitious, given that this is
the first TA extended to a state for restructuring complex SOEs, which requires time to change
the attitudes of government officials.

       2.     Engagement of Consultants

7.      Six firms were short-listed, and five proposals submitted. The five proposals were
evaluated, and on 8 July 1996 the consultant selection committee invited Price Waterhouse
International Privatization Group, U.S. to negotiate the contract. A contract for a maximum of
$595,000 was signed on 18 October 1996, for implementation over 16 months. Consultants
were fielded on 4 November 1996, the fieldwork was to be completed by February 1998. Price
Waterhouse provided five consultants: an international team leader, and privatization and
corporate restructuring policy expert (7.2 person-months); accountant and valuation expert (7.67
person-months); valuation expert (6.93 person-months); and two national specialists, including
an investment banker and a corporate lawyer (totaling 13.8 person-months). Two contract
variations were made to accommodate GSG's request to hold a workshop, and discuss the
SOE studies at the final stage of the TA.

       3.     Organization and Management

8.      The GSG Finance Department was the Executing Agency. A cabinet subcommittee was
established, to be supported by the Technical Secretariat, to undertake the preparatory and
technical analysis of the SOEs, and prepare proposals for their restructuring and divestment.
The Technical Secretariat was overseen by the Finance Department.

       4.     Implementation Schedule and Financing Arrangements

9.      The TA was approved on 2 April 1996 and signed on 17 July 1996, with a planned
completion date in December 1997. However, the consultants were not fielded until 4 November
1996, and the completion date was extended to 30 April 1998. The TA was closed on 31 March
1999. ADB approved $600,000 financed by the Japan Special Fund; $590,890, or 98.5% of the
total estimated budget, was utilized.

       5.     Supervision

10.    The TA was supervised from ADB headquarters with monitoring also provided by India
Resident Mission staff. The project officer assigned to the TA was promoted, and replaced by
another staff, who retained responsibility until TA completion and wrote the TCR. The GPSRMP
review missions also reviewed TA progress.
                                                                                                  Appendix 6      111




C.        Evaluation of Outputs

          1.       Outputs

                   a.       Proposal for Divestiture or Restructuring of at Least 12 SOEs
                            Identified under the PSRP

11.     An inception mission in February 1997 approved the consultant's inception report
including the work program, confirming that both the consultant and GSG had a mutual
understanding of the objectives and scope. They agreed to develop restructuring proposals for
10 SOEs instead of 12; and within that subset, prepare a valuation report for one SOE that was
supposed to be a conduit for the proposed lending facility. 7 The consultants assisted the
Technical Secretariat to prepare the required studies, which provided the basis for specific SOE
reform measures. A final tripartite review mission was fielded in November 1997, and the
consultants organized a workshop to present study findings.

                   b.       Technical Advice on Divestment and Privatization of SOEs

12.     The workshops, on-the job training, and proposals provided under the TA were useful in
giving knowledge and information necessary for the process of SOE restructuring. During TA
implementation, a significant number of Technical Secretariat and SOE staff were trained and
advised on the restructuring process. GSG officials acquired a better understanding of the
issues and strategies for restructuring SOEs. The TA succeeded in providing a support to the
GPSRMP, and laid the foundation for a restructuring program.

                   c.       Overall Approach and Strategies for Restructuring and Eventually
                            Divesting other SOEs over the Medium Term

13.      As a result of the on-the-job training of Technical Secretariat staff, the phase II of
divestment and restructuring is now in progress. The Technical Secretariat, headed by ex-
additional chief secretary and four professional staff, now meets on an as-needed basis. The
secretariat serves as an advisory body to Cabinet and also to the Finance Department and
other line ministries in developing divestment proposals for SOEs. As a result of this TA, an
institutional mechanism for the public sector restructuring program has been institutionalized.
GSG has created a subcommittee of the Cabinet, chaired by the chief minister with the
ministers of finance and industries as members, to review and approve the details of modality,
extent of privatization or divestment, and pricing and restructuring of SOEs. Proposals for SOE
reforms, prepared by the Technical Secretariat are submitted through the Finance Department
to this subcommittee for consideration. The TA also helped set up an effective social safety net
mechanism to simplify budgetary procedures for the voluntary retirement scheme, by
constituting a state renewal fund under the direct control of the Finance Department. GSG
introduced three sets of policy resolutions regarding the voluntary retirement scheme, with the
last resolution shifting responsibility for scheme payment from the government to the concerned
SOE.



7
    This is also known as the Gujarat Private Sector Infrastructure Facility, which was envisaged to provide assistance
    for the development of key infrastructure subsectors in the private sector. This assistance is subject to the
    development of a satisfactory regulatory environment in the infrastructure subsector being targeted and the
    availability of viable project pipeline. The facility was never developed.
112      Appendix 6



         2.        Performance of Consultants

14.      Both GSG and ADB found the performance of consultants to be generally satisfactory
and commended their high degree of professionalism. The consultants understood the needs of
GSG and the Technical Secretariat. The consulting team worked well together and with senior
government officials. Delay during implementation resulted from (i) some SOEs providing limited
support; (ii) GSG's request to update valuation analysis to reflect latest audited figures; and (iii)
difficulty in subcontracting the legal study of an SOE. The final report was submitted almost 4
months after the tripartite meeting because the consultant had to wait to incorporate the
comments of GSG and the SOEs. The quality of the reports on SOEs was considered good by
the users, with excellent analytical treatment of issues and valuation. The consultant's
recommendations were generally well accepted by GSG, and served as guidelines for
privatization and restructuring by the technical secretariat.

         3.        Outcomes and Impacts

15.     The TA assisted GSG to improve the efficiency and productivity of the SOEs, and
lessened their financial burden on the government. The SOE restructuring studies were
implemented through the GPSRMP. Of the 24 SOEs identified for restructuring and closing, 7
were closed, 2 were privatized, 3 were partially disinvested, and 8 were in an advanced stage of
restructuring. More than 22,000 employees availed of the voluntary retirement scheme, resulting
in annual recurring savings of Rs11 billion from the state budget. In continuing the PSRP, GSG
has constituted an outside independent expert committee to study all SOEs and joint sector
companies. The committee has made recommendations on 6 of 13 SOEs reviewed to date.

D.       Overall Assessment

16.    The Operations Evaluation Mission rates the TA overall as successful. 8 The TA was
highly relevant (footnote 9). The TA was consistent with the GSG PSRP and ADB's India
strategy, in particular the GPSRMP outcome. The TA is rated as effective.9 The TA succeeded
in providing a supportive role to the GPSRMP and laid the foundation for the restructuring
program; the three outputs and outcome were met. However, the time frame for implementation
of 16 months was too ambitious taking into consideration that it was linked to a 2-year program
loan, which was extended. A successful mix of international and national consultants, and the
use of appropriate training methods, leads to the TA being rated as efficient.10 The continued
use of manuals, updating of training materials, and the reported phase II of the PRSP, results in
the TA being rated as most likely sustainable.11




8
   Overall performance is based on four criteria: relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
   was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: irrelevant (0), less relevant (1), relevant (2), and highly
   relevant (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with highly successful > 2.7,
   successful 2.7 < S < 1.6, partly successful 1.6 < PS < 0.8, and unsuccessful< 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines for
   Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
9
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: ineffective (0), less effective (1), effective (2), and highly
   effective (3).
10
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: inefficient (0), less efficient (1), efficient (2), and highly efficient
   (3).
11
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: unlikely sustainable (0), less likely sustainable (1), sustainable
   (2), and most likely sustainable (3).
                                                                            Appendix 6   113


E.     Conclusions

       1.     Key Issues and Lessons

17.    Given the complex and time-consuming nature of SOE reform, provision of sufficient TA
resources to assist GSG to see through the reforms agreed is important. In this case, a 16-
month TA was designed to start 6 months before approval of a 2-year program loan. The
program loan took 4 years to complete, and even then a number of specific SOE reforms had
not been completed. Consideration needs to be given during design to the realistic time and
therefore resource requirements of this kind of TA.

       2.     Follow-Up Actions and Recommendations

18.     In designing TA to support future reform programs, mission leaders should ensure that
sufficient resources are allocated to address requirements that arise through implementation.
114       Appendix 7



    TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT OF GUJARAT INDUSTRIAL
                          INVESTMENT CORPORATION

A.        Background

          1.       Basic Data1

    Cost ($)                                                       Estimated                Actual
    Foreign Exchange                                              385,000.00             345,068.30
    Local Currency                                                115,000.00              72,585.00
    Total                                                         500,000.00             417,653.26

    Number of Person-Months (consultants)                       24.00                          24.13
    Executing Agency: Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation

    Milestones                                                                              Date
    President's/Board Approval                                                             30 May 1996
    Signing of TA Agreement                                                          18 November 1996
    Fielding of Consultants                                                           24 February 1997
    TA Completion: Expected                                                            September 1997
                    Actual                                                               31 March 1998
    TCR Circulation                                                                   8 December 1998

    Mission Type                                                    Number                  Date
    Fact-Finding                                                      1                   January 1996
    Inception                                                         1                3­7 March 1997
    Operations Evaluation                                             1              2­28 October 2006
    TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report.
    Source: OED Mission.

          2.       Rationale

1.      The state and central governments in India have long recognized the need to upgrade
and expand infrastructure to accelerate economic growth, and in particular, that significant
private sector investment would be required to improve infrastructure facilities and services.
Moreover, they recognize that empowering the private sector to be partners in development
would not only mobilize additional resources, but also improve the efficiency of public service
management practices. Gujarat has long been one of India's more progressive states, and in
1994, the Gujarat State Finance Commission produced a report with recommendations to
reform the state's finances, including rationalizing the many government agencies responsible
for developing infrastructure. This report formed the basis of the first state program loan of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program
(GPSRMP).2

2.     The Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation (GIIC) was established by the Gujarat
state government (GSG) in 1968, to catalyze industrial growth and development in the state. It

1
    Asian Development Bank. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial
    Investment Corporation. Manila (TA 2579-IND, for $500,000, approved on 30 May).
2
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved
    on 18 December).
                                                                                                  Appendix 7      115


adopted a two-pronged strategy of being a development banker providing term loans to
establish small, medium-sized, and large industrial units; and an entrepreneur promoting
medium-sized and large projects in joint partnership or association with leading industrial private
sector companies. By 1995, GIIC had expanded its financial services to include leasing, bill
discounting, infrastructure development, and investment banking; with infrastructure project
development being a relatively new area of operations. At the time of technical assistance (TA)
design, GIIC was implementing a chemical port terminal project and processing four projects in
the port and transport subsectors, and had several projects under preparation. GIIC was
expected to be able to build on its appraisal skills for industrial projects to develop, with proper
guidance and training, expertise in infrastructure development and financing. A fact-finding
mission visited Ahmedabad in January 1996 to discuss the scope and objectives, cost,
implementation arrangements, and terms of reference of the TA. The TA (footnote 1) was
approved by the President on 2 April 1996, during the GPSRMP design phase.

          3.       Objectives and Scope

3.      The TA's outcome (objective) was to enhance GIIC's capacity to promote infrastructure
development, mobilize financing, and supervise the implementation of infrastructure projects
sponsored by the private sector, especially in the roads, transport, ports, and power
infrastructure sectors in Gujarat.3 The TA had five outputs: (i) Strengthen the capability of GIIC
to design and develop proposals for private infrastructure projects using build-own-operate and
build-operate-transfer arrangements. This included undertaking full project appraisal--technical
feasibility, financial and economic appraisal, environmental and social analysis, risk
assessments, and review of legal agreements and other documentation--and monitoring and
supervising project implementation. (ii) Develop GIIC's ability to finance infrastructure projects,
including suitable financing mechanisms such as build-own-operate, build-operate-transfer, and
their variants; and to access the domestic capital market through appropriate financial
instruments and schemes. (iii) Build GIIC's risk management capacity with emphasis on
management of foreign exchange risk to effectively channel foreign funding for infrastructure
projects, including hedging against foreign exchange risks. (iv) Enhance the sustainability of
GIIC's capacity to support private infrastructure projects. (v) Identify GIIC's future training needs,
and the potential scope of possible partners, and operating arrangements for technical
collaboration of GIIC with other domestic or international organizations.

          4.       TA Completion Report

4.     The TA completion report (TCR) rates the TA as successful. GIIC's capacity was
considered to have been enhanced through the training and provision of manuals. The TCR
notes that, at the time of TA completion, follow-up actions and recommendations for the
divestment of GSG's 26% share in GIIC and GIIC's restructuring under the GPSRMP had been
delayed significantly. The TCR recommends that GIIC should fulfill the commitment and
continue its efforts to enhance its capability in infrastructure. It also mentions that the proposed
lending facility4 pipelined in ADB's 1999 country strategy and program, considered that GIIC
could be one of the channeling financial institutions.




3
    The requirement that TA papers include a TA framework was introduced 2 months after approval of this TA.
    Consequently the design describes the objective and outputs with no reference to indicators, risks, or assumptions.
4
    The Gujarat private sector infrastructure facility was proposed to provide resources to attract private sector
    investment to develop key infrastructure sectors.
116    Appendix 7



B.     Assessment of Implementation Performance

       1.      Design

5.       The TA was designed assuming that GIIC was in a healthy financial position that would
continue through the life of both the TA and the GPSRMP. The design of the outputs is overly
complex and could be simplified to three outputs. Three of the five outputs involve building staff
capacity in three different areas of expertise--designing projects for private sector participation,
financing infrastructure projects, and risk management. The fourth output deals with the
institutional structure, and the fifth involves preparing a training program for the future. This final
output was not included in the terms of reference of the TA consultants.

       2.      Engagement of Consultants

6.      A contract was signed with the Hagler Bailly Consulting, Inc. U.S., in association with
Price Waterhouse LLP, U.S., and Dalal Consultants & Engineers Pvt., India, on 14 February
1997. The TA proposed 11.5 person-months international consulting services and 12.5 person-
months national. The actual person-months provided totaled 24.13 person-months. The
international consultants included a power expert/team leader, port expert, road and surface
transport expert, and investment banking expert. The national consultants included an
infrastructure expert, investment banking expert, environment and social expert, and economist.
Consultants were fielded on 24 February 1997, and proposed to complete the fieldwork by
September 1997. No major contract variations were made, except for the reallocation of some
person-days. The total expenditure was within the TA budget.

       3.      Organization and Management

7.     GIIC's support to the TA as Executing Agency was satisfactory. It made the necessary
arrangements to provide consultants with necessary office accommodation and support.
However, GIIC's administrative department was not assigned executing agency responsibilities,
which is considered unusual.

       4.      Implementation Schedule and Financing Arrangements

8.      The TA was approved on 30 May 1996 with funds from the Japan Special Fund. The TA
letter was signed after 5.5 months, on 18 November 1996. The TA was originally scheduled to
be implemented over 9 months, commencing September 1996, and to be completed by May
1997. Actual implementation started on 24 February 1997, and actual training ended September
1997. Although the required training materials were given to GIIC staff on time, a final report
and manuals acceptable to ADB were submitted in March 1998. The total cost of the TA was
estimated at $550,000, with GSG contributing the equivalent of $50,000 in the form of office
accommodation, transport, remuneration and per diem of counterpart staff, and other support
services. The actual disbursement was $417,653.26, or 83.5% of the estimated cost.

       5.      Supervision

9.      The TA was supervised from ADB headquarters. At the time of the Operations
Evaluation Mission (OEM), GIIC staff were unable to recall seeing an ADB review mission,
although they recalled the name of the ADB project officer. ADB documents show that an
inception mission was undertaken in May 1997, along with a TA review during the
Reconnaissance Mission for the proposed facility lending. By this time the main training
                                                                                            Appendix 7    117


program had been successfully concluded. The consultants and the ADB project officer had
frequent e-mail exchanges. Why ADB accepted the consultants' final report is unclear, as the
report presented the proposed investment facility as a reality, when ADB had responded that
this facility was not approved, and sent correspondence to the consultant and GIIC accordingly.

C.        Evaluation of Outputs

          1.      Outputs

10.     The first three outputs involved building GIIC staff capacity through intensive training,
based on manuals prepared by the consultants, focusing on the project cycle; mobilization of
funds for financing infrastructure projects; and risk management with emphasis on management
of foreign exchange risk. Training was provided in a 2-day orientation workshop, 3-week
intensive training, and 3-day wrap-up meeting. GIIC staff used these manuals for some case
studies developed from actual projects, and in processing some infrastructure projects valued at
over Rs10 billion in 1998 and 1999. Of the 24 GICC staff who underwent training, only four
remain with GIIC. The fourth output on enhancing sustainability of GIIC's support for private
sector infrastructure projects required restructuring GIIC; the initiation of this was slow. The fifth
output was not included in the consultant's terms of reference and was not achieved.

          2.      Performance of Consultants

11.       GIIC found the performance of the consultants to be satisfactory. They felt that the
consultants understood completely the needs of GIIC, and helped them do the required work.
However, in the TCR, ADB found the performance of consultants as less than satisfactory.
Although the consultants provided various training manuals, their initial assumption that ADB
would provide additional funds was inappropriate. The draft manuals sent the wrong signals to
GIIC staff and GSG officials regarding ADB's position on the proposed infrastructure financing
facility. This confusion continued throughout the TA despite ADB's efforts to correct it.5 ADB had
not committed to make any loan to GIIC, nor had it identified potential terms and conditions. The
minutes of the GIIC board meeting on 12 September 1997 indicate that in principle ADB had
agreed to extend a credit line to GIIC. Unfortunately the contents of the consultants' final report
was not revised with only a note before the contents page inserted stating "the Revolving Line of
Credit mentioned in this Final Report has not been approved by the ADB Board, and the
provision of this TA does not commit the ADB to provide a loan to the GIIC. All of the terms and
conditions related to the ADB loan mentioned in this report and manuals are indicative only of
those typically found in these types of loan agreements and not bind either ADB or GIIC."

          3.      Outcomes and Impacts

12.     The TA was designed to enhance GIIC's capacity to develop and finance infrastructure
projects in Gujarat. Twenty-four GIIC officers in sector teams (roads, ports, and power), were
trained under the TA to implement the seven manuals defining standards for appraisal and
financing of infrastructure projects developed by the TA. However, GIIC's financial position
deteriorated from 1996, when new accounting rules imposed by the Reserve Bank of India
forced the recognition of interest reversals and provisioning for nonperforming loans, and the
company simultaneously began to suffer a steep loss in the market value of its investment


5
    Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation staff were still raising these questions in TA wrap-up meeting of
    September 1997.
118      Appendix 7



holdings.6 A 1997 valuation report of GIIC's financial status, quality of investment portfolio, and
size of its operations 7 indicated that gauging the depth of the company's problems with its
nonperforming loans is difficult because no systematic effort has historically been made to
assess the recovery scenarios and to estimate losses on a loan-by-loan basis. In 2001, GSG
engaged consultants to conduct a due diligence assessment of GIIC operations. They
recommended GIIC suspend lending activities, focus on recoveries of old dues arising from past
loans in addition to creditors' settlement, and restructure GIIC finances to clean up its balance
sheet. This was done, however it undermined achievement of the TA objective, and as the
training had been conducted prior to the valuation and due diligence procedure, meant that the
scope of training was inappropriate for the immediate tasks facing GIIC.

13.     Since 2001, GIIC has undertaken a number of measures as part of an operating and
financial restructuring plan, including halving its staff numbers through the introduction of two
voluntary retirement schemes. In financial year 2006, GIIC had a total market capitalization of
Rs490 billion. Of the 59 companies GIIC has invested in, 31 were making a profit, while 28
continued to make a loss.

D.       Overall Assessment

14.      The Operations Evaluation Mission rates the TA overall as unsuccessful.8 The TA is
rated as less relevant (footnote 7). Although GSG prioritized the capacity development of GIIC,
and ADB endorsed institutional capacity building of GIIC, the GIIC financial status and quality of
portfolio did not enable it to act as an investment vehicle for GSG. The TA is rated as
ineffective.9 Prior to the conduct of an audit of GIIC's financial status, training materials were
prepared and GIIC staff trained. The skills acquired were not applicable once GIIC refocused its
activities solely on loan recovery. Procedures and manuals remain with GIIC, and have been
referred to since, but the timing and sequencing of training was inappropriate. The TA is rated
as inefficient10 as GIIC was not in a position to effectively utilize the TA resources. The TA is
rated as unsustainable 11 as although GIIC has been relatively successful in recovering its
financial position, GSG's phase II SOE reform independent advisory committee has
recommended that GIIC be closed.




6
   Nonperforming assets as a percentage of total assets increased to 31% in 2000 and 38% in 2001. With financial
   liberalization, access to traditional sources of concessionary finance to institutions such as GIIC have diminished in
   importance, leading to greater reliance on funds generated at market rates of interest.
7
   The consultant engaged by ADB under the TA, prepared a report, Valuation of the Common Stock of Gujarat
   Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd. as of March 31, 1997.
8
   Overall performance is based on four criteria: relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
   was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: irrelevant (0), less relevant (1), relevant (2), and highly
   relevant (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with highly successful > 2.7,
   successful 2.7 < S < 1.6, partly successful 1.6 < PS < 0.8, and unsuccessful< 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines for
   Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
9
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: ineffective (0), less effective (1), effective (2), and highly
   effective (3).
10
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: inefficient (0), less efficient (1), efficient (2), and highly efficient
   (3).
11
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: unlikely sustainable (0), less likely sustainable (1), sustainable
   (2), and most likely sustainable (3).
                                                                                  Appendix 7    119




E.     Conclusions

       1.      Key Issues and Lessons

15.     The value of the TA was undermined when an independent assessment of GIIC's
financial status found that it was incapable of performing its existing functions. It would be in no
position to act as a conduit for a large financing facility. Had GSG's audit of GIIC been updated,
and an in-depth assessment conducted during TA design, the TA would not likely have been
approved.

       2.      Follow-Up Actions and Recommendations

16.    No follow up actions.
120        Appendix 8



       TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING OF GUJARAT
                     INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT BOARD

A.         Background

           1.      Basic Data1

    Cost ($)                                                      Estimated                  Actual
    Foreign Exchange                                             816,000.00                 702,525.44
    Local Currency                                                34,000.00                   9,546.66
    Total                                                        850,000.00                 712,072.10

    Number of Person-Months (consultants)                          32.00                          35.87
    Executing Agency: Industry and Mines Department of the Government of Gujarat

    Milestones                                                                               Date
    President's/Board Approval                                                        18 December 1996
    Signing of TA Agreement                                                           23 December 1996
    Fielding of Consultants                                                                 1 June 1997
    TA Completion: Expected                                                           23 December 1998
                      Actual                                                             1 October 1999
    TCR Circulation                                                                   28 December 2004

    Mission Type                                                   Number                    Date
    Inception                                                        1                      August 1997
    Operations Evaluation                                            1                2-28 October 2006
TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report.
Source: OED Mission.

           2.      Rationale

1.      State and central governments in India acknowledge the need to upgrade and expand
infrastructure to accelerate economic growth, and in particular, that a significant level of private
sector investment is required to improve infrastructure facilities and services. Moreover, they
recognize that empowering the private sector to be partners in development would not only
mobilize additional resources, but also improve the efficiency of public service management
practices. Gujarat has been one of India's more progressive states, and in 1994, the Gujarat
State Finance Commission produced a report with recommendations to reform the state's
finances, including rationalizing the many government agencies responsible for developing
infrastructure. This report formed the basis of the first state program loan of the Asian
Development Bank (ADB), the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program
(GPSRMP).2


2.      The government of Gujarat (GSG) recognized the need to effect structural changes
including policy and regulatory frameworks, and a mechanism to coordinate private sector
investment in public infrastructure. In 1995 the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board (GIDB)


1
    Asian Development Bank. 2001. Technical Assistance to India for Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat
    Infrastructure Development Board. Manila (TA 2716 for $930,000, approved 18 December).
2
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved
    on 18 December).
                                                                                                 Appendix 8      121


was established,3 chaired by the chief minister of Gujarat, as the highest policy-making body on
infrastructure development, and the overall coordinating body for the state's infrastructure
program. GIDB 4 was established to (i) formulate policies for infrastructure development
particularly through privatization modes, (ii) coordinate individual infrastructure sector
development plans to ensure a cohesive and integrated development plan, and (iii) facilitate the
mobilization of private investment. GSG and ADB agreed during GPSRMP design to attach a
technical assistance (TA) to the program loan to strengthen GIDB capacity. The TA was
approved with the program loan in December 1996 (footnote 1).

          3.       Objectives and Scope5

3.       The outcome (objective) of the TA was to build GIDB capacity to take a strategic and
nodal role in the formulation of infrastructure policies, and promote private sector participation in
infrastructure development. The TA output statements were (i) strengthening GIDB to take a
role in advising on policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks of key infrastructure sectors; (ii)
developing in-house expertise of GIDB in specialized areas, for example, project development,
finance, promotion, and marketing; and (iii) preparing documentation for build-own-operate
(BOO) and/or build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects, and designing and conducting a related
training program. The TA was to contribute to the effective implementation of infrastructure
sector policy reforms envisaged under the GPSRMP loan, which had three main outcomes: (i)
strengthening the state's public finances and their prudent management; (ii) reducing the role of
the public sector in commercial activities; and (iii) evolving enabling policy, regulatory, legal, and
institutional frameworks for private sector participation in critical infrastructure sectors, namely
power, ports, and roads. The TA was designed to support the GPSRMP's third outcome.

          4.       TA Completion Report

4.      The TA completion report (TCR) rates the TA as successful as it facilitated compliance
with all the GPSRMP tranche and nontranche covenants for the third outcome. The TCR
confirms that GIDB, an apex body created to develop integrated master plans with intersector
coordination and synchronization, was still in operation and formulating high-level infrastructure
policies. Through the October 1999 enactment of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act,6 a
clear framework for private sector participation in terms of financing, constructing, operating,
and maintaining infrastructure projects was provided, mitigating the risks to private sector
participation in infrastructure projects. Since TA completion, GIDB expanded its responsibility to
cover as many as 11 sectors including ports, power, roads, railways, airports, urban
infrastructure, water, information technology, industry, gas, and tourism. The TCR points out
that the success of GIDB's mission depends greatly on quality communications bilaterally
(between GIDB and each implementing agency) and among all GIDB members. The
responsibility to implement the plans, however, rests mostly within the agencies. It also points
out the importance of political support for GIDB's mission to ensure agency cooperation. A local
area network that links data and information of infrastructure projects of different infrastructure
sectors for gathering information for policy development, implementation, and monitoring was a
recommendation for follow-up action in the TCR.

3
    The Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board was created on 19 June 1995 through administrative resolution No.
    1095-867-1, and given statutory status with the promulgation of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act (1999).
4
    General information about the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board can be accessed on its website
    www.gidb.org.
5
    A TA framework was not included in the TA paper, although the TA was approved 5 months after a framework was
    required.
6
    Also known as the BOT Law.
122    Appendix 8




B.     Assessment of Implementation Performance

       1.      Design

5.      The TA design and the consultant's terms of reference were appropriate and adequate
to achieve the outcome. The design included many components covering advice on legal and
regulatory guidelines, procedures, and documentation; training and development of in-house
expertise of GIDB staff and officials of implementing agencies in specialized areas and
BOO/BOT, and project development and evaluation; and facilitation of BOT project development
and implementation. The three output statements can actually be just two output statements
since the first output refers to the formation of a legal framework for public and private
partnership, and the second and the third output statements are capacity-building outputs. The
TA specifically proposed to establish a project development cell within all government
departments dealing with infrastructure. Instead, the state implementing agencies established
privatization cells that seek and follow advice from GIDB.

       2.      Engagement of Consultants

6.      A contract was signed with Pricewaterhouse Management Consultants USA and Price
Waterhouse (India) on 7 May 1997 for $790,000. The TA proposed 28 person-months of
international and 14 person-months of national consulting services, and utilized 28.6 person-
months pf international and 7.3 person-months of national consultants. The international
consultants included an investment adviser and team leader, a BOT expert, four sector experts,
and a financial expert. The national consultants included two sector technical experts, two
financial analysts, and two lawyers. Consultants were fielded on 1 June 1997, and proposed to
complete the fieldwork by 31 May 1998. However, 10 contract variations were required. The
major setback was the premature departure of the team leader 3 months after commencement,
due to a personal emergency. Recruiting a replacement took 5 months and resulted in contract
variations affecting other consultants' time schedules. This delayed project implementation
extending the final completion date to 9 months after scheduled completion. Other contract
variations included additional technical training courses; minor adjustments in time inputs of
individual team members; and replacement of certain positions, such as the lawyer and financial
adviser.
.
        3.      Organization and Management

7.      GIDB's administrative department, the Industry and Mines Department, was the
Executing Agency. Its performance is rated as satisfactory. Counterpart staff were made
available, although they did not work full time for the TA at the initial stage of implementation.
With the help of consultants, a technical secretariat was created to support GIDB, and oversee
TA implementation including (i) reviewing agency plans and coordinating the overall
infrastructure development plan; (ii) appraising projects proposed for public-private partnership
(PPP); (iii) monitoring policy implementation to address policy issues, policy gaps, and
impediments of implementation guidelines; and (iv) promoting Gujarat's BOT program. In
addition, nodal agency group meetings were organized with participation from both government
and private sector representatives from the power, road, and ports sectors to review sector-
specific policy and implementation issues. The implementation issues discussed and gathered
became inputs in the creation of an infrastructure master plan. These group meetings also
became a feedback mechanism while the TA was being implemented. Office space,
transportation, communication, and equipment provided were adequate. The TA provided
                                                                                 Appendix 8    123


budgetary allocation for the procurement of a set of computer hardware and software, printers,
and a photocopying machine to support project implementation. This equipment was transferred
to GIDB after TA completion.

       4.      Implementation Schedule and Financing Arrangements

8.      The TA was approved on 18 December 1996, with the TA letter signed 5 days later, on
23 December 1996. The TA was originally scheduled to be implemented over 12 months, but
actual implementation required an additional 22 months before the project was completed. The
original schedule was ambitious as it took 7 months to field consultants. Finalization of the
report and manuals were much delayed (para. 6), with the TA being closed in January 2004.
The total cost of the TA was estimated at $850,000, with GSG contributing the equivalent of
$80,000 in kind for space, counterpart staff, local transportation, and other services. The actual
disbursement by ADB was $712,072, or 83.7% of the estimated cost.

       5.      Supervision

9.      The TA was supervised from ADB headquarters. ADB review missions concluded that
the key objectives of the TA were adequately met. However, a review mission in January 2000,
after physical completion of the TA, indicated that GIDB required further assistance in new
infrastructure sectors to strengthen and fully establish the role of GIDB as the prime mover of
Gujarat's BOT program. This assistance was to be provided under a $4.5 million World Bank TA
project to help (i) GIDB undertake prefeasibility studies for private infrastructure projects to be
bid out to the private sector, (ii) GIDB access capacity building by way of training within India
and internationally to provide exposure to international best practice, and (iii) develop
information and marketing systems. The project was in the form of a 70% loan and 30% grant.
However, GSG was only prepared to utilize the grant portion, which provided GIDB staff training
within India, after which the project was canceled.

C.     Evaluation of Outputs

       1.      Outputs

               a.    Strengthen GIDB to Advise on Policy, Legal, and Regulatory
                     Frameworks of Key Infrastructure Sectors

10.     Legal Framework for Public and Private Partnership. The TA proposed to develop a
general policy framework and standard procedures for competitive bid evaluation, technical and
financial analysis, contract terms and conditions, and procedures for BOO/BOT policies.
Permanency of policy guidelines as compared to administrative orders provides transparency
and consistency in the rules applied, and provides a broad policy framework for implementing
private sector participation. An enabling legislation was required to implement PPP in Gujarat.
The TA supported the drafting of a bill, which was enacted as the Gujarat Infrastructure
Development Act, providing a regulatory framework for private sector participation in financing,
construction, maintenance, and operation of infrastructure projects. It provides a fair and
transparent mechanism for competitive selection of developers, including through international
competitive bidding. Model concession agreements across sectors were also established. A
model concession agreement is required for projects in all infrastructure sectors because the
model document translates sector policies into a contractual framework, stipulating conditions
on which a concession is being granted. It addresses issues of jurisdiction, and governing law. It
124    Appendix 8



also addresses contractual allocation of risk between government and the private sector
developer, establishing the respective roles and responsibilities.

11.    Policy Reforms. The TA assisted GSG through GIDB to frame three key sector policies:
power (1995), roads (1996), and ports (1997). These policy reforms address sector-specific
issues with respect to PPP. They define the structure for the sector; and prescribe the roles,
responsibilities, and rights of the government and the private sector partner during project
implementation including termination and transfer issues.

12.     Gujarat Infrastructure Master Plan--Vision 2010. The TA was designed to help with
strategic planning. In 1999, GIDB developed a 10-year vision for infrastructure development in
the state. Vision 2010 is based on integrated planning across infrastructure sectors identifying
the strategic priorities, drivers (sectors that are prime movers and are the demand generators
for other sectors), and linkages (sectors that have strong backward linkages) across sectors for
coordinated development. It also detailed a list of projects for implementation over the first 5
years.

               b.      Develop In-house Expertise of GIDB in Project Development,
                       Finance, Promotion, and Marketing; and Preparing Documentation
                       for BOO and BOT Projects and a Training Program

13.     Capacity Building Programs for GIDB Staff and Government Officials. Eight officials
from GIDB and 120 staff of key implementing agencies directly involved in implementing BOT
projects participated in a BOT training program. The training program included (i) briefing and
roundtable discussion of the policy framework of the draft BOT Law and evaluation guidelines
on BOT concession agreements, (ii) BOT project development and evaluation, and (iii) financial
analysis and application of a computer-based model. Although GIDB staff considered the
training too short, staff performance improved markedly over the long term. Of the eight GIDB
staff who attended, only two remained with GIDB at the time of the Operations Evaluation
Mission. The OEM learned that materials from these trainings continue to be utilized during in-
house training of new staff creating a ripple effect within GIDB and other implementing agencies.

       2.      Performance of Consultants

14.      Both GSG and ADB rate consultant performance generally satisfactory. The consultants
understood the needs of GIDB, and communicated effectively with GIDB staff and implementing
agency officials, building a very productive working relationship. The consultant reports were
considered to be very helpful by GIDB staff, enabling them to frame the policies and regulatory
reforms across different sectors. The consultant submitted an inception report in July 1997 and
a midterm report in July 1998. The draft final report was submitted in September 1998. A
tripartite meeting was held in October 1998 to present the seven-volume draft final report.
Manuals for four infrastructure sectors were generally comprehensive and well prepared. The
final report comprehensively discussed overall progress and achievement of the TA. After
reviews by ADB and GSG, the consultant made the suggested revisions and the final report was
accepted in October 1999.
.
         3.     Outcomes and Impacts

15.      The Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act was a landmark law in India, where for the
first time a state laid out a clear legal and institutional framework for private sector participation.
Drawing on PPP experiences since its promulgation, the act was amended in 2006 to allow
                                                                                                        Appendix 8       125


projects of special nature7 to be directly negotiated, instead of going through the bid process.
Vision 2010 was being prepared at the time of the TA completion. Vision 2010 identifies 383
need-based projects covering various sectors. GIDB coordinates with the sector-specific
agencies to implement the proposed agenda. In March 2005, GIDB conducted a midterm review
of Vision 2010 and produced an updated vision and strategy until 2020--the Blueprint for
Infrastructure in Gujarat 2020. 8 The blueprint moves beyond infrastructure including an
assessment of social sector requirements and sets quantifiable targets for education, health,
social safety, environment, governance, and gender equality. Interestingly, upper middle income
countries as defined by United Nations Development Programme--Hungary, Malaysia, Mexico,
South Africa, and Thailand--are considered as providing good benchmarks for social sector
development in the state.

16.    GIDB continues to frame sector policies including an information technology policy
(1999), a gas distribution policy (2002), and a special economic zone policy (2004). GIDB has
also drafted a water act that is currently under consideration by the state parliament

17.     Continuous training in GIDB and other agencies is now in place. GIDB currently has 12
sector infrastructure experts and 6 interns covering power, ports, urban transport, urban water
and sanitation, urban solid waste management, roads, gas grid, information infrastructure,
railways, airports, and industrial parks. Sector experts are trained on the job to cover more than
one sector as alternates. Because GIDB staff are highly qualified, they are attractive to the
private sector resulting in frequent staff turnover. A local area network for GIDB was also set up
for monitoring projects of different implementing agencies to enhance GIDB operating efficiency.

18.     Although the TA suggested a promotional marketing plan during its implementation, it
was only 3 years ago that GIDB as GSG's BOT coordinator put in place a strategic promotion
and marketing plan for the state's BOT program. The approach to the marketing and business
development activities of GIDB concentrates on both traditional and state-of-the-art
mechanisms ensuring that potential investors come to know about the infrastructure offerings of
the state as well as GIDB's role. It has published brochures, distributes compact discs to
interested individuals, and regularly maintains its web site.

19.    GIDB is now perceived as a think tank by the private sector and implementing agencies,
where the relationship can be considered as a warm and fruitful partnership.

D.         Overall Assessment

20.     The OEM rates the TA overall as highly successful.9 The TA is rated as highly relevant
(footnote 9). GSG prioritized the establishment of a sound policy and regulatory framework, and
established GIDB as its nodal agency for infrastructure development including coordination of
private sector investment in public infrastructure. The TA met GIDB's priorities, and continues to

7
    These projects include (i) a project that is innovative or involves proprietary technology or franchise that is
    exclusively available with an individual globally; (ii) a project wherein competitive bidding as provided has failed to
    select a developer; (iii) a project to provide social services to the people including community services and public
    utilities; and (iv) an infrastructure project that is an essential link for another bigger infrastructure project owned or
    operated by the same person.
8
    The Blueprint for Infrastructure in Gujarat 2020 is available at www.gidb.org/BIG2020.htm.
9
    Overall performance is based on four criteria: relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
    was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: irrelevant (0), less relevant (1), relevant (2), and highly
    relevant (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with highly successful > 2.7,
    successful 1.6 < S < 2.7, partly successful 0.8 < PS < 1.6, and unsuccessful < 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines for
    Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
126      Appendix 8



be relevant to GSG's development strategy. The TA was consistent with ADB's India strategy,
and in particular the GPSRMP outcome. The TA is rated as highly effective.10 GIDB was able to
utilize the experience and lessons identified during TA implementation by putting in place a legal
framework for PPP in a timely manner. Sector policies, procedures, and manuals contributed to
ensuring order, transparency, and equal opportunities in developing PPP. The TA is rated as
efficient.11 The design was in general appropriate, but implementation time specifically for initial
fielding consultants delayed the TA. Consultants prepared their expected outputs, which were
put to good use by GIDB. TA resources were efficiently utilized with a sound mix of consultant
inputs and training methods. GIDB continues to provide quality services under its mandate
including (i) amendment of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act; (ii) new sector policies;
(iii) preparation of the Blueprint for Infrastructure in Gujarat 2020; (iv) continuous training; (v)
strong promotional and marketing plans including a web site, distribution of brochures, compact
discs, and initiating forums; and (vi) support for changing government officials' attitudes toward
private sector participation, leads to a rating of most likely sustainable.12

E.       Conclusions

         1.        Key Issues and Lessons

21.    The TA supported an institution that GSG was fully committed to. The quality of technical
advice contributed to TA success. As noted in the TCR, GIDB has moved into new areas and
would benefit from technical advice focused on new knowledge areas. This raises a challenge
for ADB, with its limited TA funds, as to how it can support future needs of institutions it has
previously successfully assisted.

         2.        Follow-Up Actions and Recommendations

22.      No follow up actions.




10
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: ineffective (0), less effective (1), effective (2), and highly
   effective (3).
11
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: inefficient (0), less efficient (1), efficient (2), and highly efficient
   (3).
12
   Based on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, as follows: unlikely sustainable (0), less likely sustainable (1), sustainable
   (2), and most likely sustainable (3).
   MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE PROGRAM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
    REPORT FOR THE GUJARAT PUBLIC SECTOR RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
                   PROGRAM IN INDIA (Loan 1506-IND)



         On 13 August 2007, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.     General Comments

       1.      We appreciate OED's evaluation of the Gujarat Public Sector Resource
       Management Program and its overall satisfactory rating of the project. We note
       that the findings of the PPER are useful and the issues and lessons identified in
       the PPER will provide a better approach in preparing similar programs in the
       future.

       2.       Public resource management programs constitute an important area of
       ADB's operations in developing member countries. The Gujarat Public Sector
       Resource Management Program (the Program) was the first of ADB's
       comprehensive state reform programs in the public resource management area
       and it has since been replicated by other such programs in six other states of
       India as well as in other countries. We note that the PPER findings are indeed
       consistent with our lessons learned from the Program and adopted in subsequent
       programs in the sector. We are also encouraged to note the PPER findings that
       (i) the Program strengthened state finances and their prudent management; (ii) it
       largely succeeded in implementing state-owned enterprise (SOE) reform and
       successfully encouraged private sector participation in the state's infrastructure
       development by creating an enabling environment through the enactment of the
       Gujarat Infrastructure Act, and (iii) the state government continued to implement
       reforms supported by the Program after the completion of the Program.

       II.    Comments on Issues, Lessons and Follow-Up Action.

       3.      We agree with the PPER suggestions that (i) public sector reforms
       require a long-term commitment and ideally an indicative allocation of required
       resources should be programmed at the design stage and (ii) nominal fiscal
       targets provide a focus for reforms but may be inappropriate as loan conditions
       because the fiscal targets can be influenced by a variety factors that may be
       beyond the control of the states. We note that to focus loan conditions at a
       broader level of balanced budget over the cycle, the concerned operating
       department had subsequently adopted the Medium Term Fiscal Policy
       Framework (MTFPF) and used the same in subsequent programs.

       4.      The PPER further suggested that (i) mechanisms to review conditions
       and covenants that may be negatively impacted by exogenous factors be clearly
       specified in the design; and (ii) naming SOEs for privatization or partial
       divestment in tranche release conditions may negatively affect the state
       government's negotiation position.

       5.     On (i) in para. 4 above, we note, however, that it may be impractical to
       assess the effect of exogenous factors on policy actions, tranche conditions, and
covenants, and to provide mitigation measures at the outset of the Program due
to the uncertainties surrounding the occurrence and the scope and degree of
impact of such factors. Rather, it might be more practical to have governments
address the issue by exploring provisions for catastrophe insurance or by
providing appropriate reserves to meet such contingencies, particularly those that
may occur with some regularity, such as flooding or even earthquakes in
earthquake prone areas.

6.     On (ii) in para. 4 above, we note that names of actual SOEs for
divestment had not been identified in subsequent programs and only amounts for
divestment had been specified to give the governments flexibility in divesting
enterprises. Nonetheless, difficulties were still encountered due to market
vagaries.

7.     We support the proposed follow up action that, in formulating the India
2007-2010 Country Partnership Strategy, ADB's state level interventions should
be reviewed to assess opportunities and financing modalities to support priority
aspects of public resource management reforms.
