Evaluation Study




Reference Number: PPE: IND 2011-03
Project Numbers: 29473
Loans 1868/1869
Program Performance Evaluation Report
February 2011




India: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development
Program




Independent Evaluation Department
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                     (as of February 2011)

            Currency Unit       ­     rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                     Re1        =     $0.0220
                   $1.00        =     Rs45.335

                            ABBREVIATIONS

ABA                 ­        aerial bundled conductors
APDRP               ­        Accelerated Power Development and Reform Program
ATC                 ­        aggregate technical and commercial
CERC                ­        Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
CSEB                ­        Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board
CSU                 ­        central sector utilities
DISCOM              ­        distribution companies
DMC                 ­        developing member countries
EIRR                ­        economic internal rate of return
EISP                ­        Energy Infrastructure Services Project
FIRR                ­        financial internal rate of return
FRP                 ­        financial restructuring plan
HVDS                ­        high-voltage distribution system
IAS                 ­        Indian Administration Service
IPP                 ­        independent power producers
MFF                 ­        multitranche financing facility
MOU                 ­        memorandum of understanding
MPEB                ­        Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board
MPG                 ­        Madhya Pradesh Government
MPGenco             ­        Madhya Pradesh Power Generation Company
MPSEB               ­        Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
MPSERC              ­        Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Regulatory
                             Commission
MPTransco           ­        Madhya Pradesh Power Transmission Company
NTPC                ­        National Thermal Power Corporation
O&M                 ­        operation and maintenance
PCR                 ­        project completion report
PFC                 ­        Power Finance Corporation
PMU                 ­        project management unit
PPER                ­        project performance evaluation report
RAPDRP              ­        Revised Accelerated Power Distribution Rehabilitation
                             Project
REC                 ­        Rural Electrification Corporation
RGVY                ­        Rajeev Gandhi Vidutkarana Yojana
Tradeco             ­        trading company
SDP                 ­        sector development program
SERC                ­        State Electricity Regulatory Commission
T&D                 ­        transmission and distribution
                                              NOTES

       (i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government ends on 30 June. FY before a calendar
              year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2000 ends on 30
              June 2000.

       (ii)   In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                           Key Words
     asian development bank, energy, india, madhya pradesh, power sector development,
     project, project performance evaluation, program loan, sector development program.




Director General      H. S. Rao, Independent Evaluation Department
Director              R. B. Adhikari, Independent Evaluation Department

Team leader           P. Perera, Senior Evaluation Specialist, Independent Evaluation
                      Department (until 4 November 2010)
Team members          B. Palacios, Senior Evaluation Officer, Independent Evaluation
                      Department
                      I. Garganta, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant, Independent
                      Evaluation Department
                      Independent Evaluation Department, PE-741


In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the Asian Development Bank, Independent
Evaluation Department, does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of
that territory or area.
                                                  CONTENTS
                                                                                                         Page

BASIC DATA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                i
I.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                          1
           A.   Project Description and Expected Outcomes                                                        1
           B.   Evaluation Purpose and Process                                                                   1
           C.   Key Findings of the Project Completion Report                                                    1
           D.   Key Evaluation Issues                                                                            2
II.        DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION                                                                         3
           A.   Rationale                                                                                    3
           B.   Cost, Financing, and Executing/Implementing Arrangements                                     6
           C.   Application of Counterpart Funds                                                             9
           D.   Consultants                                                                                  9
           E.   Outputs                                                                                     11
           F.   Design Changes                                                                              14
           G.   Procurement and Scheduling                                                                  15
           H.   Loan Covenants                                                                              15
           I.   Power Sector Policy Framework                                                               16
III.       PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT                                                                           17
           A.   Overall Assessment                                                                          17
           B.   Relevance                                                                                   18
           C.   Effectiveness                                                                               21
           D.   Efficiency                                                                                  27
           E.   Sustainability                                                                              29
IV.        OTHER ASSESSMENTS                                                                                34
           A.   Impacts                                                                                     34
           B.   Performance of the Asian Development Bank                                                   35
           C.   Performance of the Borrower                                                                 37
V.         ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                                                           38
           A.   Outstanding Issues and Recent Initiatives                                                   38
           B.   Lessons Learned                                                                             39
           C.   Follow-Up Actions                                                                           40



     The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding conflict of
     interest in its independent evaluations were observed in preparing this report. Mr. Rahul Raizada a
     national consultant assisted in preparation of the report . V. B. Tuladishar, Advisor, and Kapil Thukral,
     Senior Evaluation Specialist, IED, acted as peer reviewesr. To the knowledge of the management of
     IED, the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report had no conflict of interest.
APPENDIXES
1.   Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Performance Assessment (2000­2009)   42
2.   Updated Design and Monitoring Framework                          51
3.   Comparison of Appraisal and Actual Cost Estimates                57
4.   Compliance with Program Loan Tranche Release Conditionalities    58
5.   Compliance with Loan Covenants                                   61
6.   Ex Post Economic and Financial Analyses                          72
                                        BASIC DATA
                        Madhya Pradesh Sector Development Program
                    (Loan 1868-IND (Program) and Loan 1869-IND (Project))

Project Preparatory/Institution Building
TA     Technical Assistance Name                        Type        Person-    Amount         Approval
No.                                                                 Months        $             Date
2980 Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development             ADTA         13      1,000,000      7 Jan 1998

Key Project Data ($ million)                   Loan 1868                          Loan 1869
                                     Per ADB Loan                      Per ADB Loan
                                      Documents          Actual         Documents           Actual
Total program or project cost            150.0            150.0             318.9          260.0
Foreign exchange cost                    150.0            150.0             200.0          179.0
ADB loan amount/utilization              150.0            150.0             200.0          179.0
ADB loan amount/cancellation                                                                21.0

Key Dates                                              Expected                        Actual
Fact-finding mission                                                               19 Mar-9 Apr 2001
Appraisal mission                                  27 Aug-14 Sep 2001            27 Aug-18 Sep 2001
Loan negotiations                                        5-7 Nov 2001                  7-9 Nov 2001
Board approval                                             7 Dec 2001                     6 Dec 2001
Loan agreement                                                                          21 Mar 2002
Loan effectivity                                           22 Mar 2002                  22 Mar 2002
First disbursement
    Program                                                                                25 Mar 2002
    Project                                                                                31 Oct 2002
Project completion
    Program                                                30 Dec 2003                    28 Nov 2003
    Project                                                30 Jun 2006                     3 Apr 2007
Months (effectivity to completion)
    Program                                                                               21.3
    Project                                                                               61.8

                                                          Appraisal            PCR               PPER
Economic Internal Rates of Return (%)
    Component A                                              17.1              23.6               46.6
    Component B                                              16.8              15.1                8.5
    Component C                                              16.4              24.0               48.0
Financial Internal Rates of Return (%)
    Component A                                               9.8              14.5               32.8
    Component B                                              10.0              10.0               20.3
    Component C                                              16.3              11.1               36.6

                                    Loan 1868 (Program)                    Loan 1869 (Project)
Borrower                                    India                                 India
Executing Agency               Energy Department and Finance          Madhya Pradesh State Electricity
                               Department of the Government of                   Board
                                      Madhya Pradesh

Mission Data
Type of Mission                                              No. of Missions          No. of Person-Days
Contact                                                              3                        24
Fact-finding                                                         1                       110
Appraisal                                                            1                       195
Type of Mission                                                 No. of Missions   No. of Person-Days
Inception                                                               1                110
Review                                                                 12                 91
Loan disbursement                                                       4                 23
Project completion review mission                                       1                 16
Independent evaluation mission                                          1                 26
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       The sector development program (SDP) was designed to support the government of
Madhya Pradesh (MPG) in ensuring that the power sector was efficient, financially sustainable,
competitive, and capable of providing the required quantity and quality of power for the state's
economic and social development. Specifically, the SDP was to assist MPG in (i) improving the
policy environment and governance of the sector; (ii) initiating the establishment of a
commercial and competitive business environment to promote efficiency gains and loss
reduction; (iii) improving the financial position of the Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
(MPSEB) through financial restructuring; (iv) improving the quality and quantity of power supply
by reinforcing, modernizing, and rehabilitating the transmission and distribution systems to
promote economic growth; (v) setting up a computerized information and revenue management
system; and (vi) installing three-phase meters for large consumers.

        The SDP, which consisted of a policy-based program loan of $150 million and an
investment-based project loan of $200 million for a total of $350 million from ordinary capital
resources of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), was approved in November 2001. The
program loan was disbursed in three tranches between March 2002 and November 2003 and
the counterpart funds it generated were transferred to MPG by the Government of India to
support the financial restructuring of MPSEB and finance part of the adjustment cost associated
with the SDP. The investments to be financed by the project loan had six components with a
totaling $318.9 million: $200 million loan in foreign currency to be financed by the ADB loan and
$118.9 million in local currency to be financed by MPSEB and MPG. The actual project cost at
completion in 2007 including additional works approved in 2004 was $260 million, of which $179
million was financed by ADB.

Assessment of Performance

        Relevance. The SDP was prepared after a comprehensive assessment of key
constraints and barriers to improved performance of the Madhya Pradesh power sector. The
SDP was fully consistent with ADB's country assistance strategy for India, which focused on
state-level reforms to improve public resource management for better service delivery and
economic growth. The SDP took into account the overall strategy of the central government as
well as MPG for fixing the structural problems of the power sector and built on the reform road
map already formulated by MPG. It also leveraged the capacity building and technical
assistance provided by other bilateral aid agencies. Hence, the SDP is rated highly relevant.

         Effectiveness. The regulatory and legal reforms have been effective in establishing a
transparent regulatory environment for the power sector. However, the institutional reforms have
not been effective in establishing accountability of the management of the utilities; therefore, the
regulatory interventions have not resulted in the expected performance improvements. The
institutional and regulatory reforms have not also been effective in restoring the financial viability
of the sector. The investments financed by the project have been effective in improving the
performance of the transmission network, but the improvements in distribution are lower than
expected. Hence, the SDP is rated less effective in achieving its intended objectives. However,
the State Government has initiated several projects after the completion of SDP to improve the
performance of distribution network such as the deployment of HVDS (High Voltage Distribution
Systems) in urban areas and segregating agricultural and residential feeders in rural areas. It is
expected that there would be a considerable improvement in the performance of the distribution
network in next 3 years.
ii


        Efficiency. Given the relatively high economic benefits (compared with the economic
cost of investment of the three investment components) from reduced technical losses, the
investment loan (covering only components A, B, and C) is rated efficient. Although there are
marginal improvements in the overall efficiency of the power sector, these efficiency gains are
less than those required to make the power sector in Madhya Pradesh self-sustaining. The
program loan is rated less efficient. Given the importance given to sector reforms in the SDP is
rated less efficient. However, there is a strong possibility of efficiency gains in the distribution
systems with the completion of on-going initiatives.

         Sustainability. The legal reforms, regulatory regime, and the institutional reforms are
likely to be sustainable as the reforms enjoy broad support from stakeholders, and MPG and the
central government have the political will to address the structural problems of the power sector.
However, the sector has not yet reached financial sustainability and continues to depend on
extensive fiscal subsidies. The physical sustainability of the project-financed investments
critically depends on the availability of financial resources for operation and maintenance and
reinforcement. Physical sustainability cannot be guaranteed as the power sector is not yet in a
position to recover the full cost of supply. Hence, the SDP is less likely to be sustainable.
However, if the structural problems affecting the financial sustainability of the sector could be
addressed in next couple of years, the sustainability rating would be improved.

Overall Assessment:

        Although the investment component of the SDP had been efficient and effective, the
policy-based program loan has been less than effective in achieving the intended development
outcomes at the time of PPER mission. This result has impacted on the overall financial
sustainability of the sector and on the operational sustainability of the project-financed assets.
The overall performance of the SPD is rated partly successful on the basis of the ratings--highly
relevant, less effective, less efficient, and less likely sustainable. However, there is a strong
possibility of considerable improvement to the performance of power distribution sector by
2013­2014, as a result of on-going initiatives to deploy HVDS and feeder segregation through
out the State. If these improvements materialized as expected, the overall rating of SDP could
be improved as SDP set the preconditions for subsequent developments of the sector.
However, it is premature to take into account the expected improvements to the performance of
the sector in rating the SDP.

Other Assessments

         Impacts. The broader impacts in terms of improvement in the investment climate for
private sector participation in the power sector, promoting overall economic growth, and the
socio-economic impacts of power sector reforms are addressed here. Most of the recent
initiatives to attract private sector investments in the power sector in Madhya Pradesh can be
attributed to the provisions of the Government of India's Electricity Act of 2003. These included
soliciting private sector investments for power generation with over 60% of generation capacity
to be sold competitively in the power market, franchising power distribution, and promoting
private sector investments in transmission. The initial reforms undertaken under the SDP
enabled Madhya Pradesh power sector agencies to exploit the new provisions of the Electricity
Act of 2003.

        Madhya Pradesh continues to lag behind the rest of India in economic growth and
industrial investment, partly because of inadequate physical infrastructure including power. The
SDP has not fully achieved its objective of improving the investment climate and economic
                                                                                                iii


growth prospects of Madhya Pradesh. The socioeconomic impacts of the SDP are mixed. While
there has been a marginal improvement in the quality of supply, load shedding in excess of over
10 hours continues in rural areas. The tariff levied on residential and agricultural consumers was
gradually increased, with targeted subsidies for people below the poverty line. This is likely to
have adverse impacts on consumer welfare as the tariffs were increased with only a marginal
improvement in the quality of the supply. The impacts of the SDP have been rated moderate.

         ADB performance. The overall design of the reform program was based on sound
economic and sector work, as the report and recommendation of the President (RRP) contained
a thorough analysis of key problems and challenges to the power sector. The SDP was closely
aligned with ADB's program loan to India for public resource management in Madhya Pradesh
and ADB's overall country and state-level assistance strategy. The socioeconomic impacts of
likely tariff reforms were analyzed and protective measures were included to mitigate the
adverse impacts of tariff reforms on the poor. However, the project design did not include a
detailed monitoring and evaluation program to assess the socioeconomic impacts of the
institutional and tariff reforms.

        ADB had engaged MPG in policy dialogue with respect to the financial restructuring plan
and employee transfer to the successor companies of MPSEB during the implementation of the
SDP. Although MPG has not yet formally accepted the financial restructuring plan, it took over
most of the critical financial issues facing the sector such as outstanding liabilities to central
sector power utilities and domestic financial institutes and these liabilities have been converted
to MPG equity in MPSEB. ADB had played a key role in coordinating capacity development
and capacity building for implementing reforms provided by bilateral aid agencies (Canadian
International Development Agency [CIDA] and the United Kingdom's Department for
International Development [DFID]). In recognition of MPSEB's capacity for project management,
ADB agreed to do away with the project implementation consultants. ADB had anticipated the
cost savings due to the lower bid prices and cancellation of several components of the loan
such as project implementation consultants and revenue management systems. The savings
were reallocated to expansion of the scope of the transmission and distribution networks. The
performance of ADB is rated satisfactory.

         Borrower's performance. MPG had taken full ownership of the reform program, as it
realized the precarious situation of Madhya Pradesh's power sector and its adverse impact on
the fiscal situation and overall economic growth of the state. MPG had the political will to go
ahead with potentially unpopular measures such as tariff reforms, curtailment of free electricity
supply, and increasing metering of end users. MPG and MPSEB had put in place adequate
institutional arrangements for implementing the SDP. MPG had implemented most policy
reforms included in the policy matrix, but had been reluctant to approve a comprehensive debt
restructuring plan. MPG allowed MPSERC (MP State Electricity Regulation Commission) to act
as an independent economic regulator and did not interfere with tariff setting based on full cost
recovery. Through fiscal allocations, MPG has promptly paid the tariff subsidies that it provided
to residential consumers below the poverty line and for agricultural consumers. MPSEB
performed well in implementing the investment component of the project. The work for the
original scope of the project was implemented ahead of schedule with significant cost savings.
The borrower's performance is rated satisfactory.

Outstanding Issues

       Generation capacity shortages. The demand for electricity in the state has been rising
over the years and the average demand during the peak season was around 7,000 megawatts
iv


(MW) in fiscal year (FY) 2010. The total average available capacity for the state, including
central sector allocation to Madhya Pradesh, is around 5,600­6,000 megawatts (MW), resulting
in generation capacity shortage of around 1,000­1,400 MW. State authorities are compelled to
limit the power supply to rural areas to around 12 hours while providing over 22 hours of
electricity supply to urban areas. There are several projects having capacity allocations of over
5,000 MW to MP under construction and with the commissioning of these projects, the
generation capacity shortages are expected to be eliminated.

        Persistent distribution losses. The most critical issue facing the power sector in
Madhya Pradesh is the high distribution losses coupled with low collection efficiency. The
current aggregate technical and commercial (ATC) losses is of the order of 34%, with only West
Distribution Company (DISCOM) having ATC losses below 30% (29.3%), while East and
Central DISCOM have ATC losses of 36.8% and 34.2%, respectively. Although the transmission
and distribution losses have been reduced significantly from around 50% in 2002, the current
levels are still very high. Additional efforts are required to keep the loss levels within reasonable
limits. The on-going distribution improvement projects are expected to result in a considerable
reduction in the ATC losses.

         Financial deficit. The state power sector utilities have been running in deficit for over 20
years. The sector wide accumulated financial losses were Rs65.8 billion for the period FY2006­
2009, with Rs26.6 billion in FY2009 alone. Although MPG has financed the cash deficit and
investment needs in the past, the performance of the sector has to be significantly improved to
achieve financial sustainability. Given the already high tariffs in the state, there is little scope for
further increase in tariffs. Hence, it is imperative that the proposed measures for reducing
technical and commercial losses are carried out as planned, subject to technical and financial
viability. Until the sector achieves financial breakeven, fiscal subsidies will be necessary.

        Performance improvement of MPSEB successor entities. Another unfinished item in
the reform process is autonomy for financial and human resource management of the successor
companies of MPSEB as those functions are still retained by the residual MPSEB. The tariff
regime is designed in a manner that results in financial gains to regulated companies if they
manage to exceed the performance standards used in tariff setting. However, MPSEB
consolidates these financial gains at the sector level and better performing companies do not
gain any financial benefits. The State Government has recently taken action to transfer the
employees and cash management to successor companies and it is expected that these actions
would result in improved accountability for performance improvements.

Lessons Learned

Regulatory and institutional reforms are important, but they will not result in improved
performance in the absence of accountability and incentives. The SDP was based on the
premise that regulatory and institutional reforms would result in improved performance by the
sector entities. Although the regulatory and institutional reforms were implemented as intended,
there was no significant improvement in the performance of the sector entities with the possible
exception of Madhya Pradesh Transmission Company. The regulatory interventions were
limited to annual tariff settings based on progressively improving performance norms. Hence,
the reform program should have gone beyond institutional and regulatory reforms and
encouraged MPG and the regulator to set performance targets and ensure compliance with
these targets through an incentive and/or penalty mechanism. It is encouraging to note that the
MP State Government and MPSERC have set targets for loss reduction, revenue realization etc
in last 3- 4 years with periodic monitoring of compliance with the targets.
                                                                                                 v



        Restoring the financial viability of the power sector in the prevailing context of
Madhya Pradesh requires a holistic approach encompassing technical, institutional, and
governance measures. The improved operational efficiency of utilities and tariff adjustments
aimed at reducing the cross-subsidies to residential and agricultural consumers can address
part of the problem; however, the underlying issue in the power sector remains the high ATC
losses. Reducing ATC losses requires technical measures (reducing the overloading of
distribution feeders and having high-voltage distribution system [HVDS] and bundled conductors
to prevent electricity pilferage), institutional measures (improved metering, billing and bill
collection) as well as governance-related action (discouraging electricity theft by taking legal
action against pilferers). Underlying political economy issues such as affordability to Madhya
Pradesh agriculture sector in the event of full cost recovery for the supply of electricity to that
sector also needs to be taken into account. As some of these issues are beyond the mandate of
power sector entities, they have to be tackled as part of a broader fiscal reform initiative, given
the high fiscal burden resulting from the power sector cash deficit.

        Over reliance on the private sector for power generation investments when there
are structural issues in the distribution sector may not result in desired outcomes. Before
the setting up of a competitive Indian power market and open access to transmission systems,
it was difficult to attract private sector investments to power generation in Madhya Pradesh as
investors were concerned about MPSEB's ability to set aside adequate cash flows to meet
power purchase obligations (escrow cover). After the new provisions of India's Electricity Act of
2003 related to the setting up of a competitive power market and open access to transmission
networks were implemented, private investors have shown increased willingness to invest in
power generation in Madhya Pradesh as demonstrated by on-going private sector projects with
capacity allocations of more than 1,500 MW for the state.

Follow-Up Actions

      Although the original SDP was completed in 2004, ADB continues to be engaged in the
Madhya Pradesh power sector through the ongoing multitranche financing facility (MFF) facility
(Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program) approved in 2007. There is scope for
ADB to engage MPG in policy dialogue to address some of the remaining structural issues in
the sector.

       (i)     Restoring the financial viability of the power sector. It would be useful to
               prepare a time-bound road map for restoring the financial viability of the sector,
               taking into account the structural issues facing the sector and the projected
               efficiency gains of proposed investments. The multiyear tariff-setting framework
               could be coordinated with the financial restructuring road map to ensure that
               some efficiency gains were retained within the sector to improve its profitability.
               This would be a departure from the current practice where efficiency gains, if any,
               are passed on to the consumers through progressively stringent performance
               norms used in tariff setting. It is noted that the State Government is in the
               process of preparing a Financial Restructuring Plan which includes a road map
               for restoring the financial viability of the sector.

       (ii)    Accountability for improved operational performance. The management of
               the sector entities created after the unbundling of MPSEB is not held responsible
               for the operational and financial performance of the entities mainly because it
               lacks financial autonomy and the respective board of directors and regulators
vi


     have not set a performance target. As MPG covers the cash deficit of the sector
     and in the absence of performance targets set by either the regulator (the
     performance norms are used only for the purpose of tariff setting) or MPG as
     shareholder, the utility management does not have adequate incentives to strive
     for improved performance. ADB could engage MPG and MPSERC in
     establishing a framework for improving operational performance and a
     corresponding incentive scheme.



                                                H. Satish Rao
                                                Director General
                                                Independent Evaluation Department
                                     I.     INTRODUCTION

A.     Project Description and Expected Outcomes

1.      The sector development program (SDP) was to support the government of Madhya
Pradesh (MPG) in ensuring that the power sector was efficient, financially sustainable,
competitive, and capable of providing the required quantity and quality of power for the state's
economic and social development. Specifically, the SDP was to assist the state government in (i)
improving the policy environment and governance of the sector; (ii) initiating the establishment
of a commercial and competitive business environment to promote efficiency gains and loss
reduction; (iii) improving the financial position of the Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
(MPSEB) through financial restructuring; (iv) improving the quality and quantity of power supply
by reinforcing, modernizing, and rehabilitating the transmission and distribution systems; (v)
setting up a computerized information and revenue management system; and (vi) installing
three-phase meters for large consumers.

2.      The SDP consisted of program and project components: a program loan of $150 million
from the ordinary capital resources of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and a project
(investment loan) loan of $200 million. The program loan consisted of three tranches to be
disbursed on achievement of key policy and institutional reforms such as (i) establishing a
regulatory regime, (ii) functional unbundling of MPSEB, and (iii) initiating financial restructuring
of MPSEB. The project loan was to improve the quality and quantity of the power supply by
reinforcing, modernizing, and rehabilitating the transmission and distribution systems to promote
economic growth.

B.     Evaluation Purpose and Process

3.     ADB's lending operations to the energy sector during 1998­2005, especially in the South
Asian region, had focused on legal, regulatory, and institutional reforms; financial restructuring;
and financing critical investments in network infrastructure. It was also expected that legal and
regulatory reforms combined with improved network infrastructure would attract private sector
investments to bridge the prevailing shortages in generation capacity. The SDP modality for
power sector reforms in Madhya Pradesh, India, was considered as an appropriate and
representative case study for assessing the impacts and outcomes achieved in energy sector
reform programs supported by ADB in several South Asian countries.

4.      Although ADB's recent energy sector operations tend to focus on promoting clean
energy investments and creating an enabling environment for clean energy investments, some
of the underlying policy and institutional barriers and financial challenges still remain in the
power sectors of a number of developing member countries (DMCs). Hence, this project
performance evaluation report (PPER) is expected to provide useful insights into the impacts
and outcomes attributable to the ADB-supported SDP in one of the larger states in India and
useful lessons for designing similar programs in the future.

C.     Key Findings of the Project Completion Report

5.      The project completion report (PCR) rated the SDP efficacious (effective) because the
immediate objectives of the reform program and investment project had been achieved and the
expected outcomes were being realized. The PCR reported that MPSEB was unbundled into a
generation company, a transmission company, three distribution companies, and a power
trading company; and the power sector became more focused with better supervision through
2


decentralized decision making, improved accountability, and improved operational effectiveness
and efficiency. The PCR reported that the investment project had not only achieved the physical
scope of work established at appraisal but also increased the scope by utilizing loan savings for
additional works under the project. The PCR rated the SDP efficacious, but did not explain why
a higher rating was not given.

6.      The PCR noted that the reform program was efficiently managed and the investment
project was, on average, about 8 months late for all components. The financial internal rate of
return (FIRR) and the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for all components were lower at
completion than at appraisal, but all the FIRRs were still above the weighted average cost of
capital and all the EIRRs were all above the 12% threshold. The PCR rated both the reform
program and the investment project efficient.

7.     The PCR was of the opinion that the reliability of the program components will play a
major role in the long-term sustainability of the power sector in the state. The PCR rated the
SDP sustainable in both the short and long term. The new companies derived from unbundling
MPSEB were reported to have in-house capacity to operate and maintain the equipment and
systems effectively and efficiently. Hence, all components of the investment project are
expected to provide excellent service throughout their expected life.

D.     Key Evaluation Issues

8.      Relevance of ADB-supported reform program to the prevailing political economy.
Complex political economy issues underlay the structural weaknesses affecting the power
sector. Strong political will to confront vested interests at both central and state levels was
essential to successfully implement power sector reforms. ADB supported the power sector
reform program in Madhya Pradesh, which was conceived and implemented in support of a
Government of India-driven reform agenda to address the political and economic issues
associated with the power sector. The Government had entered into memoranda of
understanding (MOUs) with the states with regard to the reform measures that each state would
undertake. The measures included establishing regulatory commissions, feeder metering, timely
payment of subsidies and tariff adjustments. This incentive-driven systemwhich incorporates
concessionary financing for new investments, and penalties such as suspension of
concessionary funding from the central government for power sector investments if the reform
measures included in the MOU were not implementedhad transformed the political economy
for power sector reforms.

9.       Impact of tariff adjustments on the rural poor and agricultural consumers. The
tariff policy prevailing at the time of loan appraisal was meant to provide subsidies to agricultural
and domestic users of electricity as a means to help the poor. However, several structural
weaknesses with the prevailing tariff regime reduced the benefits of subsidies to the poor. They
included the high connection cost, a flat rate that favored the better-off farmers having bigger
pumps, and poor quality of electricity resulting in burnout of small pumps used by poorer
farmers. Several measures were included in the reform program to better target the subsidies to
the poor while increasing cost recovery in the agricultural and residential sectors.

10.     Effectiveness and impact of reforms on operational and managerial efficiency of
the power sector. The SDP has resulted in the functional unbundling of the power sector and
increased the accountability and transparency of the performance of the successor companies
of MPSEB. The reform program also supported the improvement of managerial efficiency in the
distribution sector through feeder metering, consumer metering, and increased focus on
                                                                                                         3


reducing technical and nontechnical losses. These efforts continued with special focus on
scaling up a high-voltage distribution system (HVDS) under the subsequent multitranche
financing facility (MFF)1 approved in 2007. The ability of the transmission system to meet the
increased power demand will also be assessed with special focus on the impact of the reforms
in attracting new investments and improving the performance of the power transmission and
generation subsectors.

11.     Effectiveness of the reform program in establishing the financial sustainability of
the sector and reducing the fiscal burden. The weak financial position caused by inadequate
cost recovery from agricultural and residential consumers, accompanied by a high level of
aggregate technical and commercial losses (ACT) (in excess of 45%), contributed to insufficient
investments in power generation capacity and network infrastructure. The results were
persistent power shortages and poor quality of power supply causing industrial consumers to
increasingly resort to captive power generation. This further affected the financial viability of
MPSEB as the industrial tariff structure was set at a level above the cost of supply to cross-
subsidize agricultural and residential consumption. The inadequate cost recovery forced
MPSEB to default on payments to fuel suppliers and central power generation utilities such as
the National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and loan repayments, and to increasingly
depend on fiscal subsidies from state governments. MPSEB also suffered from high levels of
account receivables, especially from public sector consumers. As the tariffs were set below cost
recovery levels, MPG was expected to provide tariff subsidies to ensure 3% return on assets
(ROA). However, the state government did not have fiscal space to provide these subsidies on
time and by the year 2000 the financial position of MPSEB had become unsustainable. The
SDP was expected to improve cost recovery and financial sustainability in the power sector in
Madhya Pradesh.

                               II.     DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A.        Rationale

          1.      National Context

12.     After growing strongly during 1991­1996, due to the liberalization of the external trade
and delicensing of the domestic sector, the Indian economy experienced a slowdown during
1997­1999. One contributory factor for the slowdown was the persistent and structural deficits
at the state level. The weak fiscal situation of Indian states also adversely affected the vital
infrastructure and social service delivery for which states were responsible under India's federal
constitution. In recognition of the vital role played by Indian states in service delivery to the poor
and the precarious fiscal situation of most Indian states, ADB's country strategy of 1996 2
advocated a shift toward more interventions at the state level to support efforts to improve public
resource management and to create an enabling environment for enhanced efficiency of public
sector enterprises.

13.    The initial policy response from the central government to the persistent capacity
shortages in the power sector in the early 1990s was to encourage private investments in the
generation sector from foreign investors by providing special incentives such as guaranteed
return on equity. However, the underlying problems in the power distribution sector had not

1
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multtitranche
    Financing Facility Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program. Manila. .
2
    ADB. 1996. Country Operational Strategy: India. Manila.
4


been addressed and the weak capacity of state electricity boards to absorb power generated by
the proposed independent power producers (IPPs) made it difficult to attract sufficient
investments from the private sector to meet the generation shortfall.

14. Several attempts to reform the power sector in several states during the period 1995­2000
had varying degrees of success. The reform process that included the privatization of
distribution and generation in the state of Orissa supported by the World Bank was unsuccessful
because baseline data on transmission and distribution (T&D) losses was inaccurate. Thus the
business plans of the privatized distribution companies (DISCOMs) became nonviable with
inadequate tariff increases and nonpayment of subsidies by the state government to cover the
unexpectedly high T&D losses. In Andhra Pradesh, the reform program was more successful; it
did not attempt to privatize, but it improved the efficiency of DISCOMs through regulatory
oversight and incentives in the form of tariff adjustments and timely payment of subsidies
against improved performance indicators.

15.    The Government of India initiated the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act of 1998,
which provided a consistent legal basis for state electricity regulatory commissions (SERCs)
and for the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) to be established to regulate
state and central electricity utilities, respectively. In 2000, the central government initiated the
Accelerated Power Development and Reform Program (APDRP) to reward the state that
performed best in implementing reforms and improving efficiencies, with low-interest investment
loans and matching grants for loss reduction.

       2.      State-Level Context

16.     Madhya Pradesh was the largest state in India and fourth in population until it was
divided into two states, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, on 1 November 2000, on the basis
of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganization Act of 2000. The power demand of undivided Madhya
Pradesh at an annual rate of 7.3% reached 6,600 megawatts (MW) in 2000 from 4,300 MW in
1993. However, the available generation capacity increased from 3,500 MW in 1993 to 5,500
MW in 2000, resulting in an average load shedding of about 1,100 MW. The quality of the
supply also suffered as a result of overloaded transmission and distribution facilities. The
system had been operating at lower than normal frequency and voltage about 55% of the time.
Transmission, distribution, and generation limitations were thus preventing the system from
meeting demand. In direct response to the deficient quantity and quality of power supply and the
high tariffs, major industrial consumers set up their own captive power generation plants. From
FY1996 to FY2000, captive generation grew at an average 8.7% a year, and amounted to over
1,400 MW.

17.     With the division of Madhya Pradesh in November 2000, the erstwhile Madhya Pradesh
Electricity Board (MPEB) was divided into MPSEB and Chhatisgarh State Electricity Board
(CSEB). The division resulted in inequitable division of generation capacity and demand as well
as assets and liabilities between MPSEB and CSEB. While MPSEB had most of the electricity
sales (78%), its revenue base amounted to only 64% of the erstwhile MPEB as it inherited more
than 90% of heavily subsidized agricultural consumers. MPSEB also obtained only 68% of the
generation assets of MPEB. MPEB's annual loss of about Rs11 billion and power shortage of
1,070 MW were divided, resulting in MPSEB's power deficit and annual loss increasing to about
1,700 MW and over Rs21 billion, respectively, while CSEB had surplus generation capacity of
750 MW and a profit of Rs9.5 billion. MPSEB experienced severe financial difficulties for it was
also required to assume 78% of MPEB's liabilities. At the time the SDP was approved, there
                                                                                                        5


remained unresolved issues and litigation regarding the distribution of liabilities between
MPSEB and CSEB.

18.     Major parts of the transmission systems were overloaded, causing suboptimal operation
of the network coupled with poor voltage profile in numerous pockets and weak power delivery
system. MPSEB suffered from severe handicaps in preventive maintenance because critical
testing and maintenance equipment and needed spare parts were not available. Total losses
were estimated at 47%­22% technical and 25% commercial. Technical losses of 22% are very
high and reducing them generally requires significant investment. Because of the financial
constraint of MPSEB, technical losses were not reduced. Estimating the precise loss was
hampered because currently only about 38% of energy input into the distribution system is
measured due to the policy of free supply for designated agricultural and unmetered domestic
consumers, at a flat rate. In addition, a significant number of meters were defective and
consumption by the involved customers also needed to be estimated. A detailed analysis of the
performance of the power sector in Madhya Pradesh during 2000­2009 is in Appendix 1.

19.      In response to the National Development Council's recommendation for restoring the
financial sustainability of the power sector at the state level, MPG appointed a high-level
committee in 1996, the Tata Rao Committee, to review the existing power sector situation and
to suggest measures for its restructuring in the context of economic liberalization and
introduction of private capital into the sector. The major recommendations of the report were to
(i) divide MPEB along functional lines, (ii) maintain MPEB as a holding company, (iii) establish a
regulatory authority, (iv) allow private sector investment in all functional areas, and (v) improve
the financial and operational efficiency of the distribution segment before inviting private sector
investment. The report recommended fundamental changes in the free supply of power to
certain consumer segments, and that any subsidy must be transparent and reimbursed to the
utility on time. The recommendations formed the basis of the power sector reforms implemented
in Madhya Pradesh since 1998.

20.     The central and state governments had recognized the urgent need for undertaking
sector reforms to address the structural problems facing the power sector in Madhya Pradesh.
However, there was a need for external support in formulating a reform road map taking into
account the specific circumstances of the state, achieving a consensus among the key
stakeholders on such a reform road map, and support for implementing the reform road map,
taking into account the complex political economy issues. Due to the weak fiscal position of
Madhya Pradesh, the adjustment cost of financially restructuring the sector had to be financed
from external sources, which could also provide an added incentive for policymakers to
implement the reforms. The power transmission and distribution networks had not been
adequately expanded to meet the increasing power consumption despite shortages in
generation capacity and severe network constraints. ADB's engagement through the SDP and
the technical assistance (TA) provided by ADB and other bilateral aid agencies (Canadian
International Development Agency [CIDA] and the UK Department for International
Development [DFID]) were conceived to address some of those needs.

        3.      Project Formulation

21.     MPG adopted the recommendations of the Tata Rao reports as the road map for sector
reforms, namely, (i) functional unbundling of MPSEB, (ii) retaining MPSEB as a holding
company, (iii) establishing a regulatory authority, and (iv) improving operational and financial
efficiency of the distribution utility before inviting private sector participation in power distribution.
In May 2000, the central government and MPG signed a memorandum of agreement (MOU),
6


affirming the commitment of both parties to reform the power sector and set out time-bound
reform measures to be implemented by MPG. The reforms would be implemented in two
phases. A detailed plan for reforms in phase 1 was formulated, with inputs from ADB and CIDA.
The phase I reforms were to
           (i) establish an independent sector Regulator,
           (ii) establish new sector companies and gradually make them operational,
           (iii) decide the configuration and geographical demarcation of the distribution sector,
           (iv) improve managerial and operational efficiencies of the sector, and
           (v) improve the financial viability of and cost recovery in the sector.

22.    The SDP supported by ADB and CIDA and, subsequently, by DFID consisted of the
noted policy interventions, and physical investments to reduce technical losses and network
constraints and increase the delivery capacity of the network so that the stakeholders can reap
the benefits offered by sector restructuring. The SDP was also intended to progressively restore
the financial performance of the sector through efficiency improvements, reduction in both
technical and commercial losses, and tariff adjustments to reduce fiscal transfers to the sector.
ADB adopted the mixed-modality approach consisting of a program loan to support the policy
reforms and the adjustment cost of implementing the reforms, complemented by a project loan
to support the urgent physical investments. CIDA and, subsequently, DFID financed the
technical assistance required for implementing the reform road map and building the capacity of
newly formed power sector entities.

23.    The immediate objectives of the SDP were to (i) improve the policy environment and the
governance of the sector with the establishment of an independent regulatory body, (ii) initiate
the establishment of a commercial and competitive environment for the successor companies of
MPSEB, (iii) improve the financial viability of the sector, (iv) improve the quality and quantity of
power supply by rehabilitating the T&D systems, and (v) introduce a computerized revenue
management system and promote 100% consumer metering. Appendix 2 gives the updated
design and monitoring framework.

B.     Cost, Financing, and Executing/Implementing Arrangements

24.     The SDP approved in November 2001 consisted of a policy-based program loan of $150
million to be disbursed in three tranches and an investment-based project loan of $200 million
for a total of $350 million from the ordinary capital resources of ADB to support the restructuring
of the Madhya Pradesh power sector.

       1.      Program Loan

25.     The Madhya Pradesh Department of Finance was the executing agency for the program
loan. The state government set up an institutional framework for managing the power sector
reforms process under a steering committee chaired by the chief secretary of MPG. The
members of the committee were the MPG principal secretaries for power, finance, law, and
planning, and the chairman of MPSEB. To ensure better coordination between state and central
government departments, the joint secretary of sector reform of the central Ministry of Power,
and the director of the Department of Economic Affairs were included as members. The
establishment of the steering committee and regular monitoring of the implementation of
reforms at the highest level by the chief secretary helped the state government to meet the
tranche conditions very close to the envisaged dates and facilitated the timely approval of
tranche releases. This institutional arrangement for overseeing the sector reforms progress was
                                                                                                         7


supported by consultants financed by CIDA and DFID and helped MPG in taking timely actions
and meeting the tranche release conditions.

26.      The central government transferred to MPG the counterpart funds generated by the
program loan to support the financial restructuring of MPSEB and finance part of the adjustment
cost associated with the SDP. The adjustment costs were expected to include (i) payment of
outstanding dues of municipalities and other local and state bodies owed to MPSEB (Rs7.423
billion); (ii) rationalization of the electricity tax (Rs350 million); (iii) setoff of dues of MGP and
MPSEB (Rs620 million); and (v) reduction of debt obligations of MPSEB (i.e., unspecified). The
estimated cost at appraisal and actual cost incurred by MPG for these adjustments during
2002­2006 are compared in Table 1.

     Table 1: Comparison Appraisal Estimates and Actual Adjustment Costs Incurred

 Item                                                           Appraisal Estimate        Actual Cost
                                                                   ( Rs billion)           incurred
                                                                                          (Rs billion)
 Setoff of municipality electricity dues                                 7.42                 7.40
 Rationalization of electricity tax                                      0.35
 Setoff of overdue interest on market borrowings of                      6.75                   7.50
 MPSEB
 Setoff of cross-liabilities between MPG and MPSEB                       0.62                  0.62
 Tariff subsidies (2002­2006)                                                                 32.30
 Reduction of debt obligations of MPSEB
     - Issuance of tax-free bonds to CSU                                                      27.50

     -  Issuance of bonds for settling REC debts                        17.50                 14.15
     -  Conversion of MGP loans to MPSEB to                                                   32.90
        equity
 Total adjustment cost ( 2002­2006)                                     32.64                122.37
 CAPEX support                                                          41.00
    - CAPEX grants                                                                             1.55
    - Equity injections for CAPEX                                                              8.90
    - MPG Loans for CAPEX                                                                     42.80

 Total fiscal support to power sector ( 2002­ 006)                      73.64                 175.6
CAPEX = capital expenditure, CSU = central sector undertaking, MPG = government of Madhya Pradesh, MPSEB =
Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, REC = Rural Electrification Corporation.
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

27.       At appraisal the adjustment cost related to debt restructuring and tariff subsidies were
not estimated as there were uncertainties regarding the actual level of debt overhang of MPSEB
due to unresolved debt allocation between MPSEB and CSEB after the bifurcation of MPEB in
2001. The required level of tariff subsidies was also not known at the time of appraisal as there
was uncertainty regarding the tariff levels to be stipulated by MPSERC and the actual tariff
regime to be notified by MPG. The original intention at the time of appraisal was to increase the
tariff to achieve 75% recovery of the cost of supply by 2002.

28.     During the implementation of the program loan, a draft financial restructuring plan was
prepare. It was also expected that due to tariff increases and improved billing and collection
efficiency, MPSEB would recover (i) all expenses excluding depreciation and debt service by
8


2004, (ii) all expenses excluding debt service but including depreciation by 2006, and (iii) all
expenses by 2010. The total cash deficit including the cash requirement for 2002­2005 capital
expenses (part of which was to be financed through debt financing) was estimated to be Rs73.8
billion.

29.     However, the financial assistance MPG provided to the power sector during 2002­2005
when the institutional restructuring and unbundling of MPSEB were completed amounted to
Rs175.6 billion because the expected efficiency gains and tariff adjustments had not been
realized. A major share of the adjustment cost (Rs74.6 billion) was related to the debt
restructuring undertaken before the unbundling of MPSEB, when MPG absorbed outstanding
debts of MPSEB to domestic financial institutions and central sector power utilities and issued
MPG bonds to those entities in lieu of the debts to MPSEB. In addition to the debt adjustment,
MPG also provided tariff subsidies of Rs32.3 billion to MPSEB for providing electricity at
subsidized rates below the regulated tariff for low-income agricultural and residential
consumers. Furthermore, Rs53.3 billion was provided as MPG loans, equity, and grants for
capital investment projects including power generation plants. However, the Madhya Pradesh
power sector has not yet reached financial sustainability and required further Rs111.4 billion
during 2007­2009, and the annual cash deficit and accounting loss exceeded Rs34 billion and
Rs28 billion (excluding the tariff subsidies of Rs9.4 billion), respectively, in 2009.

       2.      Project Loan

30.    MPSEB was the executing agency for the project loan. The implementation
arrangements were the same as envisaged at appraisal. Overall responsibility for project
implementation was with the chairman of MPSEB, who was assisted by the project
management unit (PMU). The PMU, which was established in May 2001, was headed by the
superintending engineer, who was assisted by a team of professionals consisting of five
executive engineers and associated support staff. Consulting services were envisaged to
support the PMU in project implementation, but they were not utilized. A thorough review of the
PMU staff qualifications and expertise showed no need for external consulting services and that
MPSEB staff were capable of implementing the project. A member (transmission) was in charge
of overall coordination with ADB. The chief engineer in each zone or circle was in charge of civil
works and erection and commissioning of distribution works in the respective zones. MPSEB's
board regularly reviewed implementation progress. Forest clearances and land acquisition for
substations were planned and executed well in advance to avoid delays.

31.     The project loan had six components estimated to cost $318.9 million, comprising $200
million in foreign currency and $118.9 million in local currency. The ADB loan of $200 million
was expected to cover the foreign currency expenses. During project implementation in 2004, it
was realized that there was going to be significant savings of $136.2 million, comprising $78.8
million in foreign currency savings (ADB loan savings) and $57.4 million equivalent in local
currency financing. The loan savings were mainly due to lower than expected contract prices
and cancellation of components D and F from ADB financing. MPSEB proposed to ADB to add
additional works to the original scope of the project amounting to $103.4 million, and requested
ADB to finance the foreign currency expenses of the additional works. The revised estimated
project cost including the additional works amounted to $338.8 million. However, the project
cost at project completion including additional works amounted to $260 million. ADB financed
$179 million of the project cost and $21 million of the ADB loan was cancelled. Cost savings of
$78.8 million consisted of $21 million in foreign currency and $57.8 million in local currency. The
actual project costs vis-à-vis the estimated project cost for the six components of the project
loan are described in Appendix 3 and summarized in Table 2.
                                                                                                           9




                          Table 2: Actual and Estimated Costs ($ million),
                                           by Component

                                                                Estimates                        Actual
              Project Components                         Appraisal       Revised                 Costs
A.   33 kV and 11 kV systems improvement                   82.9            81.0                   67.5
B.   Conversion of LT lines to 11 kV                        7.1             5.7                    5.1
C.   Transmission system reinforcement                    118.7           153.5                  133.1
     Computerized information and revenue
D.                                                           9.8                 9.8                 0.0
     management system

E.   Metering                                                1.1                 0.7                0.6
F    Consulting services                                     1.8                 0.0                0.0
G.   Subtotal (A-F)                                        221.4               250.7              206.3
H    Contingencies
        Physical                                            21.9                16.6                0.0
        Price                                               13.7                19.2                0.0
I.   Front-end fee                                           2.0                 2.0               2.0
J.   Taxes and duties                                       30.5                13.0               16.0
K.   Interest and commitment charges during                 29.4                37.3               35.7
     Grand   Total
     construction                                          318.9               338.8              260.0
kV = kilovolt, LT = low tension.
Sources: Independent Evaluation Mission, project completion report and recommendation of the President.

C.      Application of Counterpart Funds

32.    Although the program loan was expected to finance part of the adjustment cost, the
disbursement of the loan was related to specific policy actions, which included the settlement of
municipal dues in installments. The setoff of cross liabilities and overdue interest on market
borrowings, rationalization of electricity tax, and reduction of debt obligations were not included
as conditions for disbursement of the program loan. The fiscal cost of complying with the
tranche release conditions pertained only to the settlement of overdue municipal electricity dues
amounting to over Rs7,423 million ($164 million) as the debt restructuring of MPSEB was
carried out after the completion of the program loan. Hence, it can be deduced that the
counterpart funds generated by the program loans were utilized primarily to finance the payment
of overdue municipality and other state government electricity dues.

D.      Consultants

33.     The power sector reform program in Madhya Pradesh required substantial technical
assistance resources during the preparatory as well as the implementation phase. After MPG
accepted the recommendations of the Tata Rao Committee in 1997, ADB, the Government of
India, and MPG identified the following set of studies as prerequisites for implementing the
reform program:

       (i)      preparing the power sector master plan,
       (ii)     preparing a framework for rationalizing tariffs,
       (iii)    reviewing electricity legislation and regulations,
       (iv)     soliciting private sector investments for power generation,
       (v)      building technical and managerial capacity for the distribution sector, and
        (vi)    managing demand
10


34.      CIDA had collaborated with ADB in providing the technical assistance (TA) for
implementing the reform program. It was agreed that ADB would provide TA for items (iii) and
(iv), and CIDA would finance the consultants for items (i), (ii), (v), and (vi). In 1998 ADB
approved TA for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development 3 consisting of two separate
components for items (iii), and (iv). The TA consultants had important contributions in drafting
and finalizing the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Reform Act, which was enacted in 2001 as a
precondition for the SDP. However, the second component of the TA was not implemented
because of the difficulties encountered in finalizing private sector power generation projects
initiated by several Indian states including Madhya Pradesh due to the poor financial status of
the power sector. The TA savings due to the cancellation of the second component were utilized
for exploring the possibility of franchising the Gwalior distribution circle to NTPC (National
Thermal Power Corporation). However, this was not successful because of significant subsidies
required by NTPC from MPG for rehabilitating and operating the power distribution system in
Gwalior.

34.    The consultants that CIDA financed under the Energy Infrastructure Services Project
(EISP) in 2000 provided useful inputs during the preparation and early implementation of the
reform program in the following areas:
       (i)    coordinating the reform process,
       (ii)   planning system expansion and investment,
       (iii)  financial and tariff analyses,
       (iv)   building the capacity for demand side management,
       (v)    preparing a financial restructuring plan for the Madhya Pradesh power sector to
              address issues arising from the bifurcation of MPEB into MPSEB and CSEB, and
       (vi)   advising on how to configure the distribution sector after unbundling.

35.    The CIDA-financed consultants provided valuable input for the policy dialogue
conducted by ADB during the preparatory phase of the SDP, especially with regard to tariff
reforms, financial restructuring, and reconfiguration of distribution. In 2002, DFID took over from
CIDA as the main TA provider for the power sector reform program in Madhya Pradesh. DFID
engaged in extensive discussions with ADB and MGP and they reached agreement on the
scope of the TA to be provided by DFID. This included the following;
       (i)     supporting the strategic policy unit of MGP responsible for overall implementation
               of reform and providing high-level policy advice for discussions with the
               government of India and ADB;
       (ii)    advising MPG and MPSEB on human resource needs of the restructured power
               sector and preparing strategies for meeting the human resource needs;
       (iii)   identifying measures for addressing the critical financial problems of the sector
               and making recommendations for the financial restructuring necessary to start
               the new sector entities as financially viable entities;
       (iv)    advising on management information systems, accounting systems, financial
               controls and revenue management systems for each successor company;
       (v)     developing grid, metering and distribution codes, security and safety regulations,
               power procurement guidelines, and building MPSERC capacity for economic
               regulation and tariff setting; and
       (vi)    developing the capacity of MPSEB and its successor entities for making tariff
               filings with the regulator and compliance with other regulatory requirements.


3
    ADB. 1998. Technical Assistance to Madhya Pradesh for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development. Manila.
    (TA 2980-IND).
                                                                                                        11


36.     During appraisal of the SDP, it was recognized that additional TA to complement the
TAs from CIDA and DFID was required to (i) recommend personnel transfer to successor
entities, taking into account the human resource needs of the successor companies through a
consultative process with the relevant labor unions; and (ii) develop a communication strategy
with key stakeholders and consumer groups for the reform process. In November 2002, ADB
approved two TAs: legal support for the sector reform 4 and consumer and stakeholder
communication on sector reform.5 However, there was much overlap between the two TAs and
the assistance provided by DFID. ADB could have waited until DFID had finalized the scope of
its TA before approving the two TAs.

E.       Outputs

         1.       Program Loan

37.     The program loan was designed to support MPG to (i) implement key policy reforms and
establish a policy framework, including a fully operational independent state regulatory
commission; (ii) unbundle MPSEB into companies; (iii) improve sector governance through
more functional independence of the companies; and (iv) meet part of the adjustment cost of
financial restructuring of the power sector, which was to be financed by MPG during the reform
period. MPG had adopted several policy measures in 2001, which were considered prior actions
for the approval of the program loan. They included
        (i)     enacting and notification of the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Reform Act,
        (ii)    establishing the Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Regulatory Commission
                (MPSERC),
        (iii)   authorizing MPSEB to disconnect municipalities with electricity dues of more than
                1 year, and
        (iv)    restricting free electricity supply only to (i) scheduled castes/scheduled tribes and
                (ii) consumers below the poverty line consuming less than 25 kilowatt-hours
                (kWh) in the case of residential consumers and 5 horsepower (hp) for agricultural
                consumers.

38.    The specific policy measures that MPG fulfilled before the first tranche of the program
loan was disbursed in March 2002 included
       (i)    payment of Rs3 billion to MPSEB as settlement of the outstanding electricity
              receivables from municipalities and other local bodies,
       (ii)   first tariff award by MPSERC to ensure 75% cost recovery, and
       (iii)  incorporation and registration of Madhya Pradesh Power Generation Company
              (MPGenco), Madhya Pradesh Power Transmission Company (MPTransco), and
              Madhya Pradesh Power Distribution Company.

39.     The reform momentum was maintained after the disbursement of the first tranche, and
further progress was made to comply with conditions for disbursement of the second tranche in
October 2002. The reform measures achieved were the following;
        (i)    finalized the configuration of the distribution sector by establishing three
               distribution companies to take over the distribution function of MPSEB;



4
    ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to Madhya Pradesh for the Legal Support for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector
    Reform. Manila. (TA 3883-IND).
5
    ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to Madhya Pradesh for the Strengthening Consumer and Stakeholder
    Communication for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform. Manila. (TA 3972-IND).
12


       (ii)    appointed directors for MPGenco and MPTransco in an open and transparent
               manner, ensuring adequate representation of non-government directors and
               appropriate skills mix;
       (iii)   finalized an operation and management agreement between MPSEB and five
               successor companies to enable the successor companies to exercise a
               substantial level of autonomy pending the final of transfer of assets, liabilities,
               and personnel;
       (iv)    MPG payment of Rs2 billion to MPSEB in settlement of the outstanding
               electricity receivables from municipalities and other local bodies;
       (v)     MPSEB preparation of a debt restructuring plan;
       (vi)    built on the first tariff award, which raised cost recovery to 76%; filed second tariff
               revision with MPSEB for an average tariff increase of 24%; and
       (vii)   installed over 7,500 energy meters in 33 kilovolt (kV) and 11 kV feeders to
               enable energy audit at feeder level and undertook targeted loss reduction
               measures in feeders with high losses.

40.      As a result of the efficiency improvement measures and tariff adjustments carried out in
2002, the monthly cash collection of MPSEB reached Rs3.614 billion in 2003 from Rs2.778
billion in 2002, and the cash deficit was reduced from Rs18.4 billion in 2002 to Rs11.6 billion in
2003. More reforms were undertaken in July 2003 to further improve the performance of
Madhya Pradesh power sector and to meet the disbursement conditions of the third tranche.
The reforms included the following:
         (i)    registered the three distribution companies formed to take over the distribution
                function of MPSEB;
         (ii)   finalized scheme to transfer assets and allocate liabilities and personnel to five
                successor companies in a fair and equitable manner;
         (iii)  paid Rs2.423 billion to completely settle the outstanding electricity dues of
                municipalities as of 31 March 2001;
         (iv)   increased the average tariff by 15% with the second tariff award of MPSEB in
                November 2002. The third tariff petition was filed in July 2003.
         (v)    finalization by MPSEB board of the financial restructuring plan (FRP), which was
                expected to achieve cash breakeven by 2006 and profitability by 2010. The full
                fiscal cost of implementing the FRP during 2004­2010 was estimated to be
                Rs23.9 billion, excluding the unfunded pension liability of Rs18.5 billion.
                However, when the third tranche was released, only the draft FRP was available.
                The draft was extensively discussed with MPG, MPSEB, and ADB and only
                certain parts of the FRP had been implemented by the time MPSEB was
                unbundled. A comprehensive FRP is yet to be approved by MPG.

       2.      Project Loan

41.    Component A. This component was for improvement of the 33 kV and 11 kV systems in
Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Khargone, Mandau, and Ujjian areas. At appraisal,
component A comprised construction of (i) 170 33/11 kV substations and 7,600 11/0.4 kV
substations; and (ii) 1,800 kilometers (km) of 33 kV lines and 2,095 km of 11 kV lines in Bhopal,
Gwalior, Indore, Jabalpur, Khargone, Mandsaur, and Ujjain areas. Subsequently, to utilize loan
savings, additional works consisting of (i) 112 33/11 kV substations and 1,050 11/0.4 kV
substations, and (ii) 1,071 km of 33 kV lines and 858 km of 11 kV lines, were included in
October 2004. Component A (including additional works) was completed in March 2007 and
operations since then have been satisfactory.
                                                                                                  13




42.      Component B. This component provided for the conversion to HVDS of selected low-
voltage (LV) feeders supplying agricultural pumps in selected divisions in Mandsaur and Ujjian
districts. Component B comprised (i) conversion of 927 km of LV lines to 11 kV lines; (ii)
construction of 58 km of new 11 kV lines; and (iii) installation of 5,842 transformers of 10
kilovolt-ampere (kVA) and 5 kVA capacity in Mandsaur and Ujjain districts. Component B was
completed in May 2006 as envisaged, without any deviations. MPSEB carried out component B
on a pilot basis to reduce the commercial losses in Mandsaur and Ujjain, where the number of
connected agricultural pumps was highest, and, as MPSEB reported, the incidence of theft due
to illegal tapping of power at 0.4 kV had been high.

43.     Since the completion of component B, the illegal tapping of power has been practically
eliminated. MPSEB estimates that commercial losses have been reduced from 25% to 8%, and
actual losses recorded in the feeders have gone down from 40­45% to 12­18%. Given the
benefits accrued under this pilot scheme, MPSEB is now implementing a similar system across
the state, part of which is being financed under the ongoing MFF ADB loan facility.

44.      Component C. This component covered the reinforcement and augmentation of the
transmission system in selected priority areas. At appraisal, component C comprised (i)
installation of three 315 megavolt-ampere (MVA) 400/220 kV transformers and five 160 MVA
220/132 kV additional transformers; (ii) establishment of 222 km of 220 kV lines and 634 km of
132 kV lines; (iii) construction of five new 220 kV substations and 25 132 kV substations; (iv)
construction of four 220 kV feeder bays; and (v) augmentation of 71 132/33 kV substations. To
utilize the loan savings, additional works consisting of (i) construction of four 220/132 kV
substations and 13 132/33 kV substations, (ii) augmentation of 132/33 kV substations, and (iii)
establishment of 647 km of 220 kV lines and 446 km of 132 kV lines were included. Component
C (including additional works) was completed in April 2007 as envisaged and without any
deviations.

45.    Component C helped (i) enhance transformation capacity in the state from (a) 2,940
MVA in 2002 to 3,885 MVA in 2007 at 400 kV level, (b) 6,770 MVA in 2002 to 9,650 MVA in
2007 at 220 kV level, and (c) 6,950 MVA in 2002 to 11,299.5 MVA in 2007 at 132 kV level; (ii)
meet peak demand of 6,107 MW in 2007 without any grid disturbances in the system and
maintaining the grid frequency within the 49.0­50.5 hertz (Hz) range for 89.83% of the time in
FY2007; and (iii) increase the availability of the transmission system from below 90% in 2002 to
98.96% in 2007. In addition, component C also contributed to reducing transmission system
losses (technical) from 7.93% in FY2003 to 5% in FY2007.

46.      With the completion of components A, B and C, the state was able to (i) meet 6,107 MW
of peak demand during FY2007; (ii) transmit and distribute 32,600 million kWh of energy during
FY2007; (iii) enhance the stability and reliability of the distribution system; (iv) reduce the rate
of distribution transformers failure from about 22% to 13% in the west and eastern zones, and
from about 25% to 17% in the central zone; (v) achieve substantial improvement in the voltage
profile of the distribution system (voltage profiles at low-tension level are maintained within a +/-
6% range); and (vi) reduce scheduled and unscheduled power cuts.

47.    Component D. This component was to set up a computerized information and revenue
management system. In October 2005 MPSEB requested and ADB approved to delete this
component from ADB financing as MPSEB intended to finance it from its own resources. ADB
deleted component D from ADB financing and reallocated the funds allocated to component D
to components A and C. MPSEB has since implemented a decentralized revenue management
14


system in 66 of 136 divisions. In the remaining 70 divisions, MPSEB is now implementing a
revenue management system including other features such as payroll, materials management,
financial accounting, project management, and human resources. This component is being
implemented with MPSEB's own resources and technical assistance from DFID.

48.    Component E. This component was to provide three-phase meters. MPSEB procured
35,273 three-phase meters which were installed by November 2003.

49.   Component F. This component to provide consulting services for project
implementation was later deleted as MPSEB had adequate capacity and experienced staff to
implement the project. The amount earmarked for consulting services was reallocated to
components A and C when additional works under the project were approved.
F.     Design Changes

       1.      Program Loan

50.     The main objectives of the program loan were for MPG to (i) improve the regulatory and
policy framework of and governance in the sector;, (ii) initiate corporate restructuring to enhance
the sector's commercial orientation and accountability; (iii) improve its financial viability through
efficiency improvement, tariff adjustment and debt restructuring; and (iv) introduce a
computerized information and revenue management system. The program loan was disbursed
after compliance with specific actions (described in para. 56) that were required to achieve the
policy objectives. The policy reform program was implemented as intended, except for the full
implementation of the financial restructuring of the sector and the employee transfer to
successor companies during 2002­2003.

       2.      Project Loan

51.    The investment project originally had six components with a total investment cost of
$318.9 million. The ADB loan of $200.0 million was to finance the foreign currency cost that
included $160.9 million for base cost, $20.9 million for contingencies $2.0 million for front-end
fee, and $16.2 million for interest and commitment charges during construction. During the initial
phase of implementation, it was decided to drop component E (consulting services) as MPSEB
had the requisite expertise to implement the project.
52.     As of 30 June 2004, MPSEB had awarded contracts amounting to $104.6 million and
with $13.4 million to be awarded to complete the original scope of work in components A, B, and
C. The remaining $54 million of loan proceed was unutilized: (i) $41.5 million due to lower than
expected contract prices, (ii) $1.8 million savings when component F was cancelled, and (iii)
estimated savings in price and physical contingencies of $10.7 million. In July 2004, ADB
agreed with MPSEB and the Government of India to utilize the uncommitted amount to expand
the scope of component A (increase medium-voltage lines and 33/11 KV substations) and of
component C (add 220 kV and 132 kV lines and 220/132 kV and 132/33/11 kV substations).
The cost of the additional works amounted to $103.4 million ($54 million foreign currency cost
and $49.4 million of local currency cost), and the total project cost increased to $338 million
compared with the original estimate of $318 million. ADB funded the foreign currency cost of
additional works and MPSEB financed the local currency cost.
53.    In October 2005, ADB removed component D from ADB financing as MPSEB intended
to finance the component from internal sources, with technical assistance from DFID
consultants. The Government of India had also decided to make cash payments for interest
                                                                                                   15


during construction (IDC) instead of capitalizing the IDC. As a result, the total disbursements for
the project loan amounted to $179 million and $21 million was cancelled in two stages ($13.6
million in April 2005 and $7.4 million in April 2007 at loan closing).
G.     Procurement and Scheduling

54.    Because of the initial delay in finalizing the bid documents for components A and B, the
award of the first contract in March 2003 was late against the scheduled award date of June
2002. The contract award in component A took 24 months as against the originally scheduled
period of 12 months. As a result, component A was completed in May 2006 as against the
scheduled completion date of May 2005. For component C, however, the first contract award
was in October 2002, 6 months ahead of the original schedule. Component C was completed 6
months ahead of schedule in February 2005. The original work under the project was completed
in May 2006 before the original closing date of June 2006. The additional work approved in July
2004 was expected to be completed before the original closing date of June 2006 but was
completed in April 2007. As a result, the loan closing date had to be extended by 6 months to
December 2006.

H.     Loan Covenants

55.      The 6 specific prior actions and 14 tranche release conditions in the program loan are
listed in Appendix 4. Most of the tranche release conditions were fulfilled before the release of
the tranches except for following conditions.
         (i)   The program loan tranche release conditions required MPG to settle in three
               installments the outstanding dues as of March 2001 of municipalities and other
               local bodies and maintain the account receivables from municipalities and other
               local bodies to less than 1 month equivalent of sales. When that fails, MPSEB is
               allowed to disconnect the defaulting municipalities. Although the outstanding
               dues were settled as required before each tranche was released, the account
               receivables were allowed to exceed the 1 month sales and the defaulting
               municipalities were not disconnected.
         (ii)  Another condition for the release of the second tranche was to have a financial
               restructuring plan agreed upon by MPG, MPSEB, and ADB. However, at the time
               the second tranche was to be disbursed only a draft financial restructuring plan
               prepared by CIDA consultants was available. MPG did not fully accept or
               implement the financial restructuring plan, and only certain aspects such as the
               partial restructuring of outstanding payments to central sector power utilities and
               domestic financial institutions were carried out during 2002­2006. The recurrent
               cash deficit in the sector is financed through working capital loans and grants
               extended by MPG.
         (iii) The release of the third tranche also required the finalization of assets, liabilities,
               and human resources among MPSEB's successor companies. Although the
               assets were allocated to successor companies, the liabilities were not and are
               still held and serviced by MPSEB as MPSEB is responsible for cash
               management on behalf of the successor companies. Although the human
               resources are allocated to successor companies for functional activities, they are
               still considered as staff of MPSEB from the point of view of human resource
               management.
56.   Compliance with loan covenants for the project and program loans is described in
Appendix 5. Several loan covenants that were not fully complied with are listed below.
16


       (i)     The program loan covenants required MPG to maintain the prior actions taken
               before loan approval as stated in the Policy Letter and Policy Matrix submitted to
               ADB in November 2001. The government has maintained the prior actions
               except the restriction of free power supply only to residential and agricultural
               consumers belonging scheduled castes and/or tribes (SC/ST)                   whose
               consumption was below 25 kWh and 5 hp pumping capacity, respectively. Many
               poor agricultural consumers not belonging to SC/ST were disconnected as a
               result of this action in 2002. In 2003 MPG decided to reconnect them and provide
               electricity to those below the poverty line and those whose monthly consumption
               was less than 25 kWh or pumping capacity was below 5 hp. The outstanding
               dues were waived on condition that the consumers agree to a metered
               connection. MPG absorbed MPSEB's overdue liabilities to REC (Rural
               Electrification Corporation) amounting to Rs6.75 billion as compensation for write
               off of overdue payments from those consumers who had been reconnected at
               the request of MPG.
       (ii)    There was a loan covenant to ensure metering of all end users within 4 years of
               loan approval. Although the number of consumers with electricity meters
               increased, the great majority of agricultural consumers are still not metered.
       (iii)   MPSEB was also required to submit the audited financial statements for project
               accounts within 9 months of the end of the financial year. Due to the disputes
               regarding the allocation of assets and liabilities between MPSEB and CSEB after
               the bifurcation, the audited financial statements (AFS) for MPSEB and audited
               project accounts (APA) for FY2002 and FY2003 were delayed and not completed
               until December 2004. Therefore, ADB suspended the replenishment of imprest
               accounts while continuing with the approval of contract awards. By March 2005,
               AFS for FY2002 and APA for FY2003 were submitted but AFS for FY2003 and
               FY2004 and APA for FY2004 had not been submitted. At this point, ADB notified
               the central government that no further contract awards and disbursements would
               be approved. ADB resumed disbursements upon receipt of AFS for FY2003 and
               APA for FY2004 in May 2005,. The AFS for FY2004 and APA for FY2005 were
               submitted in May 2006 and September 2006, respectively.
       (iv)    As noted in para. 56, the loan covenants related to employee transfer to
               successor companies and maintaining account receivables from municipalities
               and other local government bodies at less than 1 month equivalent of electricity
               sales have not been fully complied with.
I.     Power Sector Policy Framework

57.     The SDP focused on introducing policy changes in the power sector to improve its
overall performance. The policy interventions that were undertaken in implementing the SDP
(2001­2005) are integral to the SDP. It is appropriate to describe and assess these policy
interventions with respect to the expected outcomes of the SDP. These are explained in relation
to assessing the efficacy of SDP in paras. 75­85. This section focuses on the policy
interventions that were introduced after the completion of the SDP (2006­2009) to enable
provisions of India's Electricity Act of 2003 to take effect in Madhya Pradesh.
58.     Open access. Open access to the transmission system is allowed in Madhya Pradesh
for consumers who have contracted demand of more than 1 MW from Oct 2007, which is much
earlier than the January 2009 target envisaged in the National Tariff Policy. This allows the
larger consumers connected to medium-voltage or HV network to enter into commercial
contracts with generators and power suppliers other than the regional DISCOM. It also enables
                                                                                                               17


the embedded generators in the Madhya Pradesh power system to sell their output to a buyer
other than the regional DISCOM. MPSERC has already notified wheeling charges for
transmission and distribution of power as well as a cross-subsidy surcharge for open access.
The cross-subsidy surcharge is meant to compensate the relevant DISCOM for losing an
industrial consumer (with above average tariff) due to open access. Presently, Special
Economic Zone (SEZ) Indore and 28 non conventional generators and captive customers are
availing themselves of long-term open access facility.
59.     Public-private partnership in distribution. MPG has taken several initiatives to
promote public-private partnership (PPP) in power distribution. The initial efforts involved limited
engagement of the private sector through outsourcing and/or management contracts for meter
reading and bill collection. Recently the government decided to initiate PPP by granting
concessions to the private sector to manage a fairly large area (distribution circle) with at least
500,000 consumers. The concessionaire will be responsible for capital investments and
operation and maintenance (O&M) and will be required to levy the regulated tariffs. The
concessionaire will be selected using a competitive process based on the price at which the
electricity is sold by DISCOM to the concessionaire. Recently, MPG approved the overall policy
on franchising of distribution and concessionaires are currently being selected.
60.     Attracting private sector investments to power generation. To address the
persistent generation capacity shortage of around 1,500 MW (about 20% of the peak demand)
and Madhya Pradesh's relative lack of success in attracting private sector investments to power
generation, MPG recently launched a policy on IPPs consisting of both the negotiated MOU and
competitive routes. In the MOU route, proposals are requested from credible and financially
strong private sector parties to invest in power plants, with the condition that that the selected
private developers would have to supply 10% of power output to state at variable cost of
generation and 30% of the plant output at a price stipulated by MPSERC.. In addition to the
MOU route, MPG also followed the competitive bidding guidelines of the Ministry of Power
(case 1 and case 2). Under case 1 bidding guidelines, MPG floated tenders inviting bids for a
certain capacity at a particular injection point irrespective of the location and technology of the
plant. Under case 2, MPG developed the site for erection of a power plant and provided all the
clearances for, e.g., land acquisition, water linkage, fuel linkage, environment clearance.
        (i)    MPG entered into MOUs with private investors to develop 43 power projects, 7 of
               which amount to 12,400 MW with capacity allocation of 4,450 MW for Madhya
               Pradesh. The projects are in advanced stages of implementation.
        (ii)   MPG has invited competitive bids for new generation capacity for 2,000 MW
               following case I bidding guidelines.
        (iii)  MPG is also facilitating a 4,000 MW power plant under the Government of India's
               Ultra Mega Power Program (UMPP) in Madhya Pradesh with capacity allocation
               of 1,485 MW for Madhya Pradesh, following case 2 bidding guidelines.

                                  III.    PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT

A.        Overall Assessment

61.    The overall performance of the SDP (Table 3) is rated partly successful on the basis of
the PPER guidelines'6 four-category evaluation criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency,
and sustainability. The SDP is highly relevant as it was designed to address the key
development challenges through legal and institutional reforms and by financing the urgent
investment needs. However, it is less effective as it failed to achieve significant improvement in
6
    ADB. 2006. Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
18


the overall performance of the sector although the investment component of the SDP is efficient.
Although the economic benefits exceed the economic costs, there are structural inefficiencies in
the sector such as a high degree of ACT losses and prevalence of tariff subsidies that lead to
inefficient use of electricity. Inasmuch as these inefficiencies have not been satisfactorily
addressed, the SDP is rated less efficient. Even if the institutional and regulatory reforms are
likely to be sustainable, the overall sustainability of the SDP is rated less likely due to a
significant financial gap and the continued dependence on fiscal transfers.
                                Table 3: Overall Performance Assessment
          Item                         Weight                  Rating                       Score
                                        (%)
          Relevance                      20              Highly relevant                        3
          Effectiveness                  30               Less effective                        1
          Efficiency                     30               Less efficient                           1
          Sustainability                 20                 Less likely                         1
          Overall Ratinga                               Partly successful                       1.4
      a
       Highly successful > 2.7, Successful 2.7 > S > 1.6, Partly successful 1.6 > PS > 0.8, Unsuccessful < 0.8.
      Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

B.          Relevance

            1.     Consistency and Adequacy of Program Coverage to Address Key
                   Constraints and Challenges

62.     ADB decided in 1996 to address the public finance management reforms at state level
as states are responsible for delivering most of the public services in India. ADB also
recognized that state governments do not have the capacity and financial resources to
adequately address the challenges they face. In 1997, Madhya Pradesh was selected as one of
the states to be supported in undertaking far-reaching public finance reforms. The criteria for
selection, which were specified in the 1996 Country Operational Strategy, 7 included the
willingness and commitment of MPG to undertake structural reforms, its sizable need for
infrastructure, and its social needs. The main constraints to improved macroeconomic
performance of Madhya Pradesh were identified as ((i) inefficiency of public sector undertakings
(PSUs), (ii) structural weaknesses in public finance due to budget support for loss-incurring
PSUs including MPEB, and (iii) inadequate development of physical infrastructure due to under-
investments brought about by poor financial performance and fiscal constraints. ADB assisted
MPG in addressing these macro level issues through the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource
Management Program,8 approved in 1999.

63.      The Madhya Pradesh power sector suffered from (i) inadequate generation capacity
resulting in load shedding, (ii) poor quality of electricity supply due to overloading of
transmission and distribution infrastructure, (iii) ATC losses in excess of 45%, (iv) low staff
morale and poor performance incentives, and (v) inadequate electricity tariffs and poorly
targeted subsidies to agricultural consumers. The weak operational performance and excessive
tariff subsidies resulted in inadequate cost recovery, financial losses, and buildup of liabilities to
MPG, fuel suppliers, financial institutions, and central government power utilities.



7
    ADB. 1996. Country Operational Strategy Study. Manila.
8
    ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the
    Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management. Manila. (Loan 1717-IND).
                                                                                                   19


64.     Although MPG was expected to bear the cost of tariff subsidies to agricultural
consumers, the subsidies were not paid in cash on time because of fiscal constraints MPG
faced. As a result MPG resorted to periodic debt write-offs, debt equity conversions, and
payment of outstanding subsidies in an ad hoc manner. The financial crisis in the sector
resulted in inadequate generation capacity and overloading of the transmission and distribution
network due to decades of underinvestment and continued reluctance of private investors to
invest in new generation capacity. The division of Madhya Pradesh in 2001 adversely affected
the already deteriorating status of the power sector as most of the generation assets and
lucrative industrial consumers were allocated to the newly created state of Chattisgarh. Madhya
Pradesh, on the other hand, was saddled with highly subsidized agricultural consumers and
most of the liabilities.

65.     The SDP was designed to address several aspects of the structural challenges faced by
the power sector. The prevailing governance and the legal and regulatory framework were
considered inappropriate for establishing a commercially viable power sector. Hence, the SDP
supported the enactment of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Act of 2001, which clearly delineated
the responsibilities for overall sector formulation, economic regulation, and utility function among
MPG, MPSERC, and MPSEB and its successor entities, respectively. It was pointed out that the
prevailing institutional mechanism for tariff setting was highly politicized and, because of political
considerations, the tariff was set significantly below cost recovery. It was recognized that the
cross-subsidies from industrial consumers to agricultural and residential consumers were no
longer sustainable as industrial consumers were increasingly resorting to captive power
generation. Therefore, the program loan had specific conditions to institute a transparent tariff-
setting mechanism through the newly established MPSERC, with specific targets to increase the
level of cost recovery. The vertically integrated utility structure lacked accountability and did not
provide performance incentives to utility managers to improve operational performance. Thus,
the program loan encouraged institutional reforms and unbundling of MPSEB along functional
lines and optimal geographical reconfiguration of distribution operations.

66.    Although the financial restructuring of MPSEB was identified as the critical issue to be
addressed during implementation of the SDP, a comprehensive financial restructuring plan was
not prepared at the time the SDP was approved. This was partly due to the uncertainty over the
unresolved issues pertaining to the allocation of liabilities of the former MPEB between MPSEB
and CSEB. However, some limited measures such as settlement of outstanding electricity dues
from municipalities and local bodies, and settlement of cross-liabilities between MPG and
MPSEB were included in the program loan and MPG gave the assurance that the liabilities
would not be allowed to build up again. It was expected that a comprehensive debt restructuring
plan acceptable to ADB, MPG, and the central government would be prepared during the
implementation of SDP.

67.     The inadequate generation and network infrastructure was one of the main constraints to
industrial growth in the state. An improved institutional framework and improved financial
performance of the sector were expected to encourage private sector investments in power
generation. The investment loan supported by the project focused on addressing the constraints
and the overloading of the distribution and transmission network. In retrospect, mobilizing
private sector investments in power generation was delayed as the investors were concerned
about the ability of MPSEB to honor the payments for power purchase and the fact that there
had not been any significant additions to generation capacity in Madhya Pradesh through
private investments. Weak revenue management, lack of energy auditing at feeder level, and
lack of metering of agricultural consumers were also identified as contributory factors to the ATC
20


losses in the power sector. Specific components of the project loan were included to address
these weaknesses through targeted investments and capacity building.


        2.      Consideration of Political Economy Issues, Government Support, and
                Stakeholder Support at Project Approval

68.      At the time of project approval, there was increasing recognition at the central and state
government levels of the need for major structural reforms in the power sector. The National
Development Council (NDC) on the power sector recommended (i) organizational reforms
including vertical and horizontal unbundling, (ii) private sector participation in generation and
distribution, (iii) depoliticizing electricity tariff setting by establishing regulatory bodies, and (iv)
progressive phasing out of agricultural subsidies. In response to the NDC recommendations,
MPG appointed a high-level committee, which recommended (i) functional unbundling of
MPSEB, (ii) establishing a regulatory body, (iii) improving the operational and financial efficiency
of the distribution subsector, (iv) curtailing the free supply of power to certain consumer groups,
and (v) payment by MPG of tariff subsidies to utilities in a transparent and timely manner. MPG
also implemented several policy actions prior to the approval of the project, such as (i)
establishing MPSERC in 1998, (ii) enacting Madhya Pradesh Electricity Act in 2001, and (iii)
restricting free electricity supply only to scheduled caste and/or scheduled tribe consumers
below the poverty line. Thus, the SDP program is fully consistent with the government strategy
and policy for the power sector in Madhya Pradesh at the time of project approval.

69.     Consumer groups and employees generally accepted that the prevailing institutional
structure and regulatory regime were not sustainable and a fundamental restructuring of the
sector was needed. The stakeholders recognized that the quality of power supply and staff
morale had been low due to decades of poor performance. Stopping the free electricity supply
resulted in the large-scale disconnection of agricultural consumers, prompting the government
to write off past dues and restore the supply to disconnected consumers with subsidized tariffs.
Nevertheless, there have not been major policy reversals or opposition from affected parties.

        3.      Choice of Modality and Instrument

70.      The power sector in Madhya Pradesh suffered from structural issues pertaining to (i) an
institutional and regulatory framework; (ii) inadequate tariff, high degree of electricity theft, and
poorly targeted subsidies; (iii) poor financial performance of the sector; and (iv) generation
capacity and network constraints. It was necessary to address those issues in a holistic manner
to achieve the expected sector outcomes and impacts. It was recognized that project
investments in the absence of regulatory and institutional reforms would not be sufficient as
such investments would not be sustainable if the underlying problems were not addressed.
Similarly policy interventions alone in the absence of urgent investments in generation capacity
and network infrastructure would not provide immediate benefits to the stakeholders. In such a
scenario, the political will to continue with the reforms may be affected. The immediate benefits
to the stakeholders due to the project-financed investments in network infrastructure were
limited due to inadequate investments in generation capacity. The choice of modality and
instrument with a combined program and project loan was appropriate in the context of
circumstances that prevailed in Madhya Pradesh at the time of loan approval.
                                                                                               21


       4.      Aid Agency Coordination

71.     During the lead-up to the approval of the SDP in 2001, ADB closely coordinated with
CIDA in providing technical assistance and capacity building for implementing the power sector
reform program. The SDP was originally designed as a joint effort of ADB and CIDA. ADB was
to provide financial resources to cover the adjustment cost of policy reforms and investments in
network infrastructure. CIDA was to provide technical assistance in implementing the reform
and strategic advice to the government on key policy issues such as tariff setting, financial
restructuring, and institutional structure for the reformed sector entities. ADB provided TA for
drafting the electricity law and mobilizing investments in power generation from the private
sector. This was an appropriate and effective division of responsibilities between ADB and CIDA,
as it had taken into account the institutional strengths and strategies of two development
partners.

72.      During the implementation of the SDP, the governments of India and Canada agreed to
phase out CIDA assistance to India. Subsequently, ADB, together with MPG, engaged DFID to
take over CIDA's role as the key development partner for financing the technical assistance
requirements for implementing the reform and building capacity. ADB was instrumental in
ensuring the smooth transfer of these roles from CIDA to DFID, taking into account the
institutional preferences and strengths of DFID while meeting the overall requirements for
reform implementation. ADB also provided additional TA grants (footnotes 4 and 5) in 2002 for
employee transfer and stakeholder consideration due to the uncertainty over the availability of
TA resources from DFID at the time. Overall, ADB performed well as the lead development
partner in coordinating assistance from bilateral development partners in close collaboration
with MPG.

       5.      Relevance Rating of the SDP

73.     The SDP was based on a comprehensive assessment of key constraints and barriers to
improved performance of the power sector. It is consistent with the ADB strategy for India,
which focused on state-level reforms to improve public resource management for better service
delivery and economic growth. The SDP took into account the overall strategy of the central
government and MPG for fixing the structural problems of the power sector and built on the
reform road map formulated by MPG. It also leveraged the capacity building and technical
assistance provided by other bilateral aid agencies. The SDP is rated highly relevant.

C.     Effectiveness

74.    The expected outcomes of the SDP are (i) improved policy environment and governance
of the sector, (ii) establishment of a commercial and competitive business environment to
promote efficiency gains, (iii) improved financial viability of the power sector in Madhya Pradesh
through financial restructuring, (iv) enhanced capacity in the transmission and distribution
network to meet the growth in demand, and (v) introduction of modern utility management
systems to reduce ATC losses. The effectiveness of the SDP is assessed in terms of the
achievement or nonachievement of the above development outcomes.

       1.      Improved Legal Framework, Policy Environment, and Governance of the
               Sector

75.    The state government formed the MPERC, a statutory independent regulatory authority
for the electricity sector in Madhya Pradesh in 1998 under the Electricity Regulatory
22


Commission Act of 1998. In 2001, the state government enacted the Madhya Pradesh Vidyut
Sudhar Adhiniyam (Madhya Pradesh Electricity Act of 2001). The state act provides for (i)
establishing an independent regulatory body with wide-ranging powers to regulate the power
sector, (ii) unbundling of MPSEB, and (iii) development of a competitive business environment.
However, the legal framework established by the state act was superseded by India's Electricity
Act of 2003, which provided for open access to transmission and distribution networks, power
trading and power exchanges, and franchising of distribution.

76.     As the sole shareholder of MPSEB and its successor companies, MPG is responsible for
corporate governance of the sector as well as the formulation of sector policy. MPSEB was
satisfactorily restructured and reorganized. Initially, it was unbundled into five successor
companies, namely, MPGenco, MPTransco, Madhya Pradesh East DISCOM, Madhya Pradesh
West DISCOM, and Madhya Pradesh Central DISCOM. Even after the unbundling, MPSEB
continues to exist, with responsibility for (i) cash management in the power sector including
servicing of liabilities and payments, and (ii) human resource management. In 2006, a power
trading company was also established. The distribution system was reconfigured into three
distribution companies on a geographical basis with consultancy support from CIDA. The
transfer of assets was completed and provisional balance sheets for the three distribution
companies were ready by 2005 with notional transfer of liabilities. All the successor entities are
functioning independently subject to limitations due to incomplete delegation of cash
management and human resource management. The majority of the directors of the successor
entities are serving public servants with nominal representation of independent directors..

77.     MPSERC has been constituted as an independent regulatory agency for the sector. Its
three commissioners are retired public servants. MPSERC has instituted a transparent tariff-
setting mechanism where the tariffs are set on the basis of the tariff applications submitted by
each regulated entity and taking into account the reasonable cost of supply and future
investment requirement. Tariffs have been gradually increased to achieve 100% cost of the
supply. In 2007, MPSERC instituted a multiyear tariff-setting framework with the aim of
gradually phasing out the cross-subsidies in the sector. MPSERC has also assumed
progressively stringent performance norms for tariff setting to encourage operational efficiency
improvements in the sector. MPSERC has recently revised the loss reduction norms set for
distribution companies taking into account the constraints faced by the distribution companies.
MPSERC also set technical performance standards and service quality standards and
encouraged the distribution companies to increase consumer metering, especially for
agricultural consumers.

       2.      Establishing a Commercial and Competitive Business Environment for the
               Power Sector

78.    The successor companies of MPSEB were established in 2005, with the management of
each company accountable for its operational performance. The companies are subject to
regulatory oversight through the licenses and tariff setting. However, they are not fully
autonomous, especially with regard to financial management and human resource management.
These functions are still retained by the residual MPSEB, which allocates the power sector
revenues as payment for fuel and power, and for debt service. Each company is allocated an
operational and maintenance allowance to cover its administrative and maintenance expenses.
MPSEB also manages the human resources, taking into account the overall seniority of the staff
concerned. However, the company management has the flexibility to assign functional
responsibilities without taking into account the overall seniority of the person.
                                                                                                 23


79.       MPERC has consistently focused on tariff rationalization, which includes aligning the
tariffs with cost of supply, reducing cross-subsidies, and improving coverage of cost. The
commission has finalized a cross-subsidy reduction plan, which was notified by the state
government in October 2007. The commission has assumed increasingly stringent targets for
loss reduction and collection efficiency in formulating the multiyear tariff rulings. That gave the
utilities incentives to improve their performance. Since its inception, MPERC has issued four
tariff orders for the composite MPSEB (up to 2006) and two each for MPGenco, MPTransco,
and the distribution companies. A multiyear tariff framework for a 3-year control period is also in
place and is the basis for the tariff orders issued for MPGenco and MPTransco for 2007. The
adoption of a multiyear tariff framework provides better regulatory certainty and an improved
investment environment to the utilities.

80.     Since 2006, MPSERC have stipulated the tariffs based on normative performance
standards and 100% cost recovery. The performance standards relate to ACT losses, collection
efficiency, and consumer metering. This policy has given incentives to utilities to achieve
normative performance standards if they are to achieve full cost recovery. The normative
performance standards have been gradually tightened to provide incentives for further
improvements. The difference between the tariffs stipulated by the regulator and the tariffs
notified by MPG is directly paid by the MPG to utilities through fiscal allocation. The other
regulatory interventions include the tariff incentives for metering previously unmetered
consumers, seasonal tariffs, determination of open access charges to transmission and/or
distribution system, telescopic tariffs to smoothen the transition from one tariff block to another,
incentives for improvements in the power factor and load factor to industrial consumers. There
are special tariffs for residential consumers below the poverty line and consuming less than 30
kWh, and agricultural consumers with a capacity of 5 hp.

81.     The adoption of a multiyear tariff framework provides better regulatory certainty and an
improved investment environment to the utilities. Based on the tariff regulations stipulated by
MPSERC, the average domestic tariff increased from Rs2.36/kWh in 2003 to Rs3.50/kWh in
2010 and the agricultural tariff increased from Rs0.90/kWh in 2003 to Rs2.62/kWh in 2010. Cost
recovery as a percent of the average cost of supply improved from 27% in 2004 to 69% in 2010
for agricultural consumers. The cross-subsidy from HV consumers (mainly industrial) to LV
consumers (mainly residential and agricultural) has been significantly reduced from Rs1.73/kWh
in 2004 to Rs0.7/kWh in 2010. However, the tariffs are still below the cost recovery levels.

82.    The institutional reforms had limited impact in attracting private investments to power
generation. This was partly due to the inability to set aside an adequate share of power sector
revenues (escrow cover) for power purchase obligations from IPPs. Due to the difficulties
encountered in mobilizing private sector investments, MPG supported MPGenco in adding new
generation capacity (700 MW of thermal capacity and 130 MW of hydropower capacity) during
2002­2009. MPG also invested in several large multipurpose hydropower projects with a
combined capacity of over 2,400 MW during this period. The allocation for Madhya Pradesh
from central power generation utilities also increased by over 1,000 MW during 2002­2009. As
a result of these investments, the installed and allocated generation capacity for Madhya
Pradesh increased from 4,130 MW in 2002 to over 8,350 MW in 2009. As of 2010, Madhya
Pradesh depends mostly on self-generation and power purchase from central public sector
generators (NTPC) and to a limited extent on power purchase from neighboring states.
However, this situation is likely to change by 2013, when privately financed power plants with
over 4,000 MW and with capacity allocations for Madhya Pradesh are commissioned.
24


83.      There has been no significant improvement in the technical performance of MPGenco as
a result of the institutional reforms. MPGenco generating plants have not achieved the
benchmark norms of operating efficiency and plant factors. Its efficiency indicators, plant
utilization, station heat rate, specific fuel consumption, and auxiliary consumption of the thermal
plants are much below the desired level. Some of MPGenco's plants need renovation and
modernization, not only to extend their life, but also to improve the performance parameters.
Availability of funds is, however, the main constraint as MPGenco does not have financial
autonomy and depends on the cash allocations from residual MPSEB, which is responsible for
cash management in the sector. In spite of the financial constraints faced by MPGenco, the
rehabilitation and maintenance (R&M) of 120 MW Amarkantak thermal power station (TPS) was
recently completed and the R&M of second unit is in under progress. MPGenco has also
secured Rs. 4,500 million from Power Finance Corporation for R&M of two units amounting to
410 MW of Satpura TPS.

84.    Due to the low plant factor of MPGenco thermal plants and the seasonal nature of
hydropower, the available generation capacity is in the range of 5,600 MW­6,000 MW and
Madhya Pradesh continues to suffer from peak generation capacity of around 1,000­1,500 MW
and energy shortage in excess of 10% of annual unconstrained energy demand. Recently, MPG
was able to enter into agreements with several private sector investors to add new generation
capacity of over 12,000 MW with over 4,500 MW capacity allocations for Madhya Pradesh. The
new provisions of the central government's Electricity Act of 2003 have encouraged investment
in power generation as the act provides flexibility to sell power outside the state if MPSEB's
cash flow constraints prevent it from honoring its commitments to purchase power. The
generation capacity shortage is expected to be eliminated by 2013.

       3.      Improved Financial Viability of the Power Sector in Madhya Pradesh
               through Financial Restructuring

85.     MPG adopted several measures to restructure the debt overhang of MPSEB before
establishing successor companies with separate balance sheets in 2005. The measures
included (i) the settlement of outstanding dues of municipalities and other local bodies to the
power sector as of March 2001, (ii) set-off of cross-liabilities between MGP and MPSEB, (iii)
issuance of MPG bonds to central sector power utilities to settle outstanding debts of MPSEB,
and (iv) absorbing MPSEB's debts to REC as compensation for writing off outstanding dues
from unmetered agricultural consumers and single-point residential consumers who were
reconnected at the request of MPG.

86.      At the time of the notification of the opening balance sheets of MPSEB's successor
entities in 2005, MPG had (i) converted Rs32.3 billion of MPG loans to MPSEB to equity in the
newly created entities; (ii) taken over Rs27.5 billion worth of outstanding liabilities of MPSEB to
central sector power entities and the corresponding amount was treated as MPG equity injection
in MPSEB (MPG bonds were issued to the central sector utilities for this amount); (iii) taken over
Rs14.1 billion worth of outstanding dues of MPSEB to REC, in lieu of writing off unpaid
electricity bills of agricultural consumers (MPG bonds were issued to REC for this amount); (iv)
settled overdue interests of MPSEB's market borrowings amounting to Rs7.5 billion; and (v)
paid the unpaid electricity bills of municipalities amounting to Rs7.4 billion. In addition, MPG
provided annual fiscal support comprising (i) Rs28.8 billion of tariff subsidies, and (ii) Rs8.9
billion of equity injections, Rs1.5 billion of capital grants, and loans of Rs28.9 billion to finance
capital investments during 2002­2005. The total fiscal support for the power sector during
2002­2005 amounted to Rs175.5 billion or 4.57% of Madhya Pradesh's gross domestic product
(GDP) during that period.
                                                                                                 25




87.      Since the institutional reforms undertaken in 2005, MPG has continued to support the
power sector as the sector has not yet reached financial sustainability. The support comprised (i)
taking over the commercial liabilities of the sector, amounting to Rs13.7 billion and converting
the corresponding amount to MPG equity; (ii) converting to equity Rs14.8 billion of penal interest
on liabilities to government dues and loans; (iii) injecting working capital loans amounting to
Rs25 billion; and (iv) tariff subsidies of Rs22.8 billion. In addition, MPG has provided additional
equity investments of Rs41.6 billion and loans of Rs41.2 billion to finance new capital
investment in the sector. The total fiscal assistance that MPG provided during 2006­2009
amounted to Rs145.4 billion or 2.5% of the state GDP during this period. Although the overall
fiscal burden remains roughly the same as before the reforms, as a percentage of the state
GDP it has decreased after the reforms. It is also noted that, before the reforms, only 22.5% of
fiscal transfers was spent on capital expenditure; this has increased to over 57% after the
reforms.

88.     MPSEB and its successor companies continue to suffer from cash flow shortfalls as a
result of the high ATC losses, which remained above the norms stipulated by MPSERC for the
purpose of tariff setting. The cash deficit of the power sector in 2009 exceeded Rs25 billion
excluding the tariff subsidies. Although MPG has financed the cash deficit and investment
needs in the past, the performance of the sector has to be significantly improved to achieve
financial sustainability. It can be concluded that the SDP has not fully achieved the expected
outcome of financial sustainability of the sector.

       4.      Enhanced Capacity in the Transmission and Distribution Network

89.     The investments undertaken have significantly improved the technical performance of
the transmission system. The voltage profile of the network significantly improved, with all 400
kV and 220 kV substations maintaining a voltage deviation of not more than 7.5% and the
voltage deviations exceeding the stipulated 10% at 132 kV substations was limited to less than
couple of substations. Transmission system availability has been above the target set by the
regulator and has exceeded 98% since 2005­2006. This indicates that Madhya Pradesh
Transco has been maintaining its lines and substations properly and managing outages
promptly. The availability of the five major critical lines in Madhya Pradesh has been over 99%.
Loss reduction is an important technical consideration for a transmission company.
Transmission losses have come down significantly since the inception of the company. The
transmission loss of 7.93% in July 2002 came down to 4.09% in FY2009 as against the
regulatory target of 4.9%. Due to the higher level of energy transmitted by the company in
FY2009 than in FY2002, the transmission losses would have exceeded 11% in the absence of
transmission investments and capacity augmentation.

90.      The number of consumers and electricity consumption by the residential, agricultural,
and other commercial consumers connected to the LV network of three distribution companies
significantly increased during 2002­2009. The number of residential consumers rose from 4.48
million in 2002 to 5.77 million in 2009, and the number of agricultural consumers rose from 1.15
million in 2002 to 1.21 million in 2009. Electricity sales to residential and agricultural consumers
increased by 85% and 117%, respectively, from 2002 to 2009.

91.     New 33/11 kV substations and high-tension lines have been constructed to reduce
technical loss and improve the quality of supply, including voltage levels. To reduce commercial
losses, an energy audit has started to identify the areas with high levels of ATC losses. This has
enabled the DISCOMs to prioritize loss reduction efforts in theft-prone areas. Feeder metering
26


has been provided in most of the 11 kV feeders and regular energy audits have begun. To
improve metering at consumer ends, more than 3,400,000 electronic meters were installed.
Metering of LV consumers has significantly increased, and in 2009, 92% of residential and 22%
of agricultural consumers had been provided with meters compared with 87% and 11%,
respectively, in 2002.


92. The HVDS pilot-tested by the project is being widely deployed under the ongoing ADB
MFF project in theft-prone urban areas, With these efforts and special drives to regularize the
unauthorized connections, ATC loss levels of 43.6% when power sector reforms began in 2002
went down to 34% by 2009. DISCOM Central and DISCOM West have managed to reduce ATC
lossesfrom 52.9% to 37.1% for DISCOM Central, and from 41.2% to 29.3% for DISCOM
West. However, ATC losses in DISCOM East have not been reduced; they remained at 37%
mainly because the rural agricultural consumers in DISCOM East's franchise area are widely
dispersed and, to a certain degree, DISCOM East's management lack focus (the position of
CMD ( Chief Managing Director) of DISCOM East was vacant for more than 2 years before it
was filled recently). There has been an improvement in the loss reduction efforts in recent times
and ATC losses of 3.72% had been reduced in FY 2009 ­ 10.

93. It was also noted that SDP had allocated relatively small amount to the distribution sector
and most of the improvements to distribution sector were implemented after the completion of
SDP program. These included $ 360 million for distribution sector from ADB through the
Multitranche Financing Facility (MFF) that followed the SPD. Under the MFF program, low
voltage lines (LT) in theft prone areas were converted high voltage (HT) or aerial bundled
conductors to reduce the technical and commercial losses. Apart from this all the cities /towns
with a population exceeding 30,000 are covered under GOI supported R APDRP program which
has the objective bringing down ATC (Aggregate Technical and Commercial) losses to 15%.
The state government has also launched an ambitious program of feeder segregation under
which 11 kV feeders for rural households and agriculture pumps would be separated with the
objective of providing 24 hours of power supply to rural households and 8 hours of power supply
to agriculture pumps. This program is under implementation in two phases with the phase I
supported by Rural Electrification Company (REC) with a loan of Rs. 18.3 billion and the state
government has applied a loan from ADB for the second phase.

94. The State Assembly has adopted a resolution to achieve an ATC loss reduction of 3% per
year and Rs. 100 billion of investments in distribution sector has been lined up. The state
government is also in the process of selecting distribution franchisees on long term basis for
distribution circles having high levels of ATC losses. It is expected that with these efforts, the
ATC losses in distribution sector would be significantly reduced by 2013 ­ 14.

       5.      Effectiveness Rating of the SDP

95.     The regulatory and legal reforms have been effective in establishing a transparent
regulatory environment for the power sector. However, the institutional reforms have not been
effective in establishing accountability of the utility management. As a result, the regulatory
interventions have not produced the expected performance improvements. The institutional and
regulatory reforms have also not been effective in restoring the financial viability of the sector.
The investments financed by the project have been effective in improving the performance of
the transmission network, but the improvements in distribution are less than expected. Although
the performance of distribution sector is expected to be improved as a result of on going efforts
                                                                                                     27


by around 2013­2014, these improvements have not yet materialized. Hence, the SDP is rated
less effective (Table 4).

                              Table 4: Effectiveness Rating of the SDP

Item                                                                                  Rating
Improved legal framework, policy environment, and governance of the                  Effective
sector
Establishment of a commercial and competitive business environment
                                                                                   Less effective
for the sector
Improved financial viability of power sector in Madhya Pradesh
                                                                                    Ineffective
through financial restructuring
Enhanced capacity in the transmission and distribution network                       Effective
Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program                                   Less effective
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

D.      Efficiency

        1.      Efficiency of Investments Financed by the Project Loan

96.       The economic efficiency of the investments in network infrastructure financed by the
project loan (components A, B, and C) is assessed using the economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of the investment components. Although there are economic benefits arising from the
improved quality of supply and increased electricity sales attributable to improved network
capacity, only the economic benefits attributable to reduction in technical losses are considered
for ex post economic analysis as a conservative way of estimating the economic benefits. The
increased network capacity will not result in economic benefits in the absence of a
corresponding increase in generation capacity (the project did not finance any addition to the
generation capacity), and economic benefits associated with improved quality of supply are
difficult to quantify.

97.     As Madhya Pradesh had been suffering from electricity shortages, any electricity saved
due to reduction in technical losses will result in reduction in unserved electricity. It is likely that
part of the reduction in unserved energy would have resulted in non-incremental energy
consumption to replace captive power generation by industries and use of diesel generators by
commercial consumers. The remainder would be incremental energy consumption by industrial
and commercial consumers as well as by residential consumers due to increased availability of
electricity and increased household connections due to the expanded distribution network.

98.     ADB's guidelines for economic analysis suggest that incremental benefits be valued at
the consumer's willingness to pay and the non-incremental benefits by the replacement cost.
The consumer's willingness to pay is likely to be much higher than the prevailing tariff as proven
by several studies undertaken in India and elsewhere. The cost of generating electricity using
captive power plants and small diesel generators is also in the range of Rs10­12 per kWh and
higher than the prevailing electricity tariffs. As a conservative measure, the economic benefits
due to reduced transmission and distribution losses are valued at the average electricity tariff of
2007. As a further conservative measure, it is assumed that there will be no increase in
electricity tariff in real terms after 2007 and the tariff will remain constant in real terms.
28


99.     Appendix 6 shows the ex post economic analysis of components A, B, and C of the
project loan. The results of the economic analysis are summarized in Table 5
.
                  Table 5: Recalculated Economic Internal Rates of Return

                                                                                     EIRR (%)
            Component A : 33 kV and 11 kV network rehabilitation                       46.6
            Component B : Conversion of selected LV feeders to 11                       8.5
            kV
            Component C: Reinforcing and augmenting 220 kV and                         48.0
            132 kV transmission system
         EIRR = economic internal rate of return, kV = kilovolt, LV = low voltage.
         Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

100. The recalculated EIRR implies a high degree of economic efficiency in the project
investments, especially in components A and C due to the high ATC losses (in excess of 40%)
before the project and further increase in technical losses in the absence of network investment.
The EIRR also implies that a relatively modest investment can significantly reduce energy
losses. However, the economic analysis does not take into account the structural inefficiencies
in the sector, including the persistent levels of high ATC losses (around 34%) although lower
than that at the initial condition. The persistent financial deficit in the sector may also cause
underinvestment and poor maintenance in the future and may affect future economic benefits
and the EIRR. On the basis of the foregoing, the investment component of the SDP is rated
efficient.

       2.       Efficiency of the Policy-Based Program Loan

101. The program loan component of the SDP was expected to improve the overall efficiency
of the Madhya Pradesh power sector and its overall public resource management by (i)
reducing the fiscal burden of the power sector on the state budget, (ii) improving cost recovery
in the sector, (iii) gaining efficiency through improvement of the technical performance of the
power sector entities, and (iv) encouraging more efficient use of electricity by end users
because of the application of cost-reflective tariffs and reduction in cross-subsidies as well as
other measures such as curtailment of free electricity and metering of consumer connections.

102. Although cross-subsidies from HV consumers to LV consumers have been reduced, the
tariff regime is still significantly distorted due to subsidies to agricultural consumers for whom
metering increased from only 11% in 2002 to only 22% by 2009. Lack of improvement in the
operational efficiencies of the power sector entities is due to the persistently high level of ATC
losses in the distribution sector as well as the low plant factors and thermal efficiencies of
MPGenco thermal power plants, which lack investment to rehabilitate older power plants. The
continued shortages in generation capacity and the resultant load shedding have contributed to
the use of relatively inefficient captive power generation by industrial consumers.

103. MPG efficiently managed and implemented the reform program, with technical
assistance and capacity building provided by CIDA, DFID, and ADB through policy dialogue and
targeted TA. The tranche release conditions had been largely met within the envisaged time
frame. The counterpart funds generated by the program loan were used to settle outstanding
liabilities of municipalities to the power sector.
                                                                                                29


104. Since the completion of the SDP, the State Government has taken several measures to
improve the efficiency of power distribution system as outlined in para. 94­95 consisting of
rolling out of HVDS systems and feeder segregation and introduction of Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) at utility level with the support of ongoing ADB MFF Tranche VI. Hence it is
likely that the efficiency of the distribution network would improve once the expected outcomes
of on-going initiatives are realized. However, as these efficiency gains have not yet been
achieved, the efficiency of the policy reform component of SDP has been rated as less efficient.

       3.      Efficiency Rating of the SDP

105. Given the relatively high economic benefits (compared with the economic cost of
investment and technical losses realized), the project loan is rated efficient. Although there are
marginal improvements to the overall efficiency of the power sector, the efficiency gains are less
than those needed to make the power sector in Madhya Pradesh self-sustainable. The policy-
based program loan is rated less efficient. Given the importance of overall improvement in
sector efficiency to the success of the SDP, the overall efficiency of the SDP is rated less
efficient.

E.     Sustainability

106.     The outcomes achieved were assessed with respect to the presence or absence of
contributory factors for ensuring sustainability of each outcome.

       1.      Sustainability of Improvement in the Legal and Policy Environment and
               Sector Governance

107. Legal framework. The program loan supported the enactment of the Electricity Reform
Act of 2001. India's Electricity Act of 2003 superseded the provisions of Madhya Pradesh
Electricity Reform Act. The Electricity Act of 2003 further strengthened the regulatory and legal
framework and opened up possibilities for further deregulation of the power sector. There were
provisions for open access to transmission and distribution networks in a nondiscriminatory
manner, private sector participation in power distribution through franchising, and establishment
of a power market in India, which, in turn, provided for merchant power plants and opportunities
for diversifying the sources of generation capacity for capacity-constrained states such as
Madhya Pradesh. The concIusion is that subsequent actions by the central government further
advanced the legal and regulatory framework established in the program loan.

108. Regulatory regime. MPSERC continues to discharge its responsibility as the economic
regulator for the electricity sector in Madhya Pradesh. Its role in incentive-based tariff setting
with the objective of improving technical performance such as voltage and frequency stability
and commercial efficiency of electricity distribution including the reduction of ATC losses has
increased with the introduction of multiyear tariff setting in 2007. The technical assistance
provided by DFID has enhanced the institutional and human resource capacity of MPSERC and
the capacity of regulated entities to comply with the regulatory requirements including the
periodic tariff fillings. The regulatory regime in Madhya Pradesh is likely to be sustainable.

109. Political will and stakeholder support. The major stakeholders including consumer
groups, trade unions, and politicians have generally accepted the merit of institutional and tariff
reforms. At the time of the reforms, the consensus was that the Madhya Pradesh power sector
was in serious difficulty, the quality of supply was poor with persistent load shedding, the sector
was a major drain on the state budget, and ATC losses were excessive. MPG had disconnected
30


unmetered agriculture consumers with overdue electricity bills in 2002­2003. But on the eve of
state elections, it reversed the action by providing electricity to agriculture at a subsidized rate.
The other reform measures continued or were further strengthened since the completion of the
SDP. MPG continues to honor its commitment to provide upfront subsidies to compensate
power utilities for the lower electricity tariffs levied to residential consumers below the poverty
line and agricultural consumers. MPG intends to launch the next round of reforms to attract
private sector participation in managing the distribution networks in selected areas through
franchising arrangements. The SDP's outcomes are likely to be sustainable in view of
stakeholder acceptance and political will on the part of the government.

       2.      Sustainability    of   Institutional   Reforms      for   Enhanced      Commercial
               Performance

110. Institutional reforms. Although the unbundling process has not advanced beyond the
initial establishment of successor companies with limited autonomy, there have not been any
major policy reversals to the institutional reforms undertaken in 2005. However, the rest of the
institutional reforms brought about in 2005 with the support of the program loan remain an
unfinished agenda. The human resource management function and financial management are
still controlled by residual MPSEB; to a certain extent this has constrained the managerial
flexibility of MPSEB's successor companies. Although limited by lack of financial autonomy and
autonomy over senior management appointments, the successor entities enjoy an adequate
degree of managerial autonomy with regard to operational aspects and such autonomy has
gradually increased.

111. Human resources. There has been no major change in the skills mix available in the
power sector at the senior level since the reforms were implemented in 2005. This is a concern
for these reasons: (i) there was no recruitment in the sector during 1990­2005, (ii) most of the
senior management staff are expected to retire in the next 5 years, and (iii) the recent recruits
are too inexpereienced to assume management responsibilities. Another issue is lack of
financial and business management expertise within the power sector as it continues to be
dominated by engineering professionals, except for the managing directors of DISCOMs who
are seconded from Indian Administration Service (IAS) for a fixed term. The conclusion is that
the sustainability of institutional reforms is less likely without significant changes to the human
resource practices and delegation of human resource management to successor companies.

       3.      Financial Sustainability

112. The Madhya Pradesh power sector has depended heavily on fiscal support as it is yet to
achieve financial sustainability. Although the revenues had increased from Rs33.4 billion in
2002 to Rs68.1 billion in 2009, they did not keep pace with the increase in power purchase and
fuel costs. As a result, accounting loss rose from Rs9.6 billion in 2002 to Rs26.6 billion in 2009,
and the cash flow deficit from Rs7.9 billion in 2002 to Rs20.7 billion in 2009.
                                                                                                              31


      Table 6: Consolidated Financial Performance of Madhya Pradesh Power Sector
                                        (Rs billion)
 Item                                     2002     2003     2004     2005      2006      2007     2008     2009
 Revenues billed                           37.07   42.00    46.92    50.32     58.90      62.57    65.91   69.41
 Revenues collected                        33.36   38.09    39.09    45.77     57.12      60.39    63.62   68.12
 Government tariff subsidies                5.43    6.68     8.90     7.78      3.52       4.19     5.69    9.44
 Cost of power purchase                    25.58   25.18    27.21    30.13     30.02      32.49    43.42   49.27
 Fuel cost                                 11.08   12.40    12.51    14.43     14.74      16.45    16.30   20.35
 Depreciation                               5.34    4.85     4.76     5.33      5.99       7.22     6.55    7.23
 O & M expenses                            10.52   10.04    12.15    14.12     16.00      17.30    20.91   23.93
 Interest cost                             11.32    4.88     6.61     4.73      6.10       4.84     5.65    5.56
 Write-offs/prior period
 Expenses and taxes                        -2.90    0.98    -1.50     0.24      0.24       2.98     4.42     3.99
 Profit/ Loss                              -9.56   -7.40    -1.76    -7.51     -8.04     -10.13   -20.96   -26.63
 Cash flows from operations
 excluding government
 subsidies                                 -7.93   -6.46    -4.83    -6.73     -3.83      -5.09   -16.70   -20.69
O&M = operation and maintenance.
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

113. The main reason for the increase in the cost of supply was the cost of power from
central agencies and other utilities. While the fuel cost for self-generation of MPGenco
increased from Rs0.79/kWh in 2002 to Rs1.14/kWh in 2009, the cost of power purchased from
third parties including MPG's joint-venture hydro plants increased from Rs1.87/kWh in 2002 to
Rs2.79/kWh in 2009. In addition to the high purchase cost of power, expenses for operation and
maintenance also increased from Rs0.76/kWh in 2002 to Rs1.16/kWh in 2009.

                  Table 7: Cost Recovery in the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector

 Item                                   2002        2003     2004      2005      2006     2007     2008     2009
 Cost of supply (Rs/kWh)                 3.38        3.26     3.24      3.41      3.90     4.11    4.39      4.98
 Avg. tariff award (Rs/kWh)              2.90        3.12     3.74      3.39      3.61     3.62    3.73      3.80
 Avg. subsidy (Rs/kWh)                   0.39        0.44     0.56      0.45      0.20     0.22    0.28      0.46
 Avg. revenue billed (Rs/kWh)            2.67        2.77     2.93      2.94      3.27     3.24    3.21      3.37
 Avg. revenue collected (Rs/kWh)         2.41        2.52     2.44      2.68      3.17     3.13    3.10      3.31
 Avg. tariff as % of cost of supply      85.7        95.6   115.3       99.4      92.6     88.1    85.0      76.3
 Avg. tariff billed + subsidy (as %
 of tariff award)                      105.7       103.2     93.4      100.2      95.9     95.5     93.6    100.8
 Revenue collected (as % of
 revenue billed)                         90.0        90.7    83.3       91.0      97.0     96.5     96.5     98.1
 Avg. revenue collected (as % of
 cost of supply)                         71.2        77.2    75.4       78.5      81.3     76.1     70.6     66.4
 Avg. revenue + subsidy(as % of
 cost of supply)                         82.8        90.8    92.6       91.8      86.4     81.5     77.0     75.7
avg. = average, kWh = kilowatt-hour, Rs = Indian rupees.
Source: ADB staff estimates

114. The revenue realized has not increased at the same rate despite the increase in average
tariff from Rs2.90/kWh in 2002 to Rs3.80/kWh in 2009 stipulated by MPSERC (Table 7).
          (i)   Although the average tariff awarded by MPSERC is expected to ensure 100%
                cost recovery, the actual tariff award is less than the cost of supply. In setting
                tariff, MPSERC has assumed progressively stringent performance standards with
                respect to operational efficiency (ATC losses, plant factor, and heat rates) as the
                means of providing performance incentives to power sector entities. However,
                the actual performance efficiency of the power sector has fallen short of the
32


                  standards assumed by MPSERC. Thus, the tariff levels awarded by MPSERC
                  are less than the actual cost of supply. The gap between the cost of supply and
                  average tariff awarded by MPSERC has been widening since 2006.
         (ii)     MPG has notified tariffs for certain categories of consumers such as single-point
                  residential consumers below the poverty line (subsidized), those belonging to
                  scheduled castes and/or scheduled tribes (free), and agricultural consumers
                  (subsidized). MPG usually pays the difference between the regulated tariff and
                  the notified tariff as an up-front tariff subsidy through the annual budget allocation.
         (iii)    The revenue that the power sector collects has been less than the revenue billed.
                  However, collection efficiency improved from 90% in 2002 to over 98% in 2009.

115. MPG pays to the power sector as a direct subsidy the difference between regulated tariff
and notified tariff, but this is not a major cause for concern. The Madhya Pradesh DISCOMs
improved their collection efficiency to collect over 98% of billed revenue in 2009. It is clear that
the main reason for the power sector's inability to achieve 100% cost recovery is its failure to
abide by the performance norms assumed by MPSERC in tariff setting. The difference between
regulated tariff and cost of supply after taking into account the subsidy had continuously
increased and reached over 24% in 2009. Table 8 shows the targets set by the regulator for
distribution loss reduction and the actual achievement.

                 Table 8: Achievement (%) of Targets to Reduce Distribution Loss

Distribution                2006                   2007                  2008                  2009
Company            Target     Achieved    Target     Achieved   Target     Achieved   Target     Achieved
  West                          31.91     30.00        30.73    28.50        33.99    27.00        33.76
  Central                       43.39     43.00        42.67    40.00        41.43    37.00        38.93
  East                          36.30     34.50        35.39    32.50        37.72    29.50        37.23
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

116. MPSERC had been setting increasingly stringent targets for reducing distribution losses
in tariff setting. But DISCOM West and DISCOM East showed increasing levels of distribution
losses from 2007 to 2009. As a result, the cost of supply increased (as distribution losses are
included in the cost base) and the revenue deficit for the sector widened. Neither MPSERC nor
MPG had taken the DISCOMs to task for noncompliance with regulatory norms used in tariff
setting. MPG continued to provide working capital loans to bridge the resulting cash gap;
however, the power sector has not repaid the loans.

117. The MP state government expects that the power sector financial viability would improve
considerably in the coming years as a result of improvements to distribution network and
management practices outlined in para 94, 95 and 105. It was noted that during FY 2010 / 11,
the total revenue realization up to Nov. 2010 has increased by 25% to Rs. 60.4 billion from Rs.
48.5 billion in the previous year for the corresponding period. It is also expected that the
generation capacity deficit would also be eliminated by 2013­2014 when the generation projects
under development are commissioned.

118. The general consensus among the policymakers is that distribution losses (electricity
theft and pilferage) which is mainly a governance and management problem,, should be
addressed through a technical solution (conversion of LV feeders to 11 kV, feeder segregation,
increasing the metered connections). MPG is in the process of preparing a large investment
program in the power distribution sector, which is leveraging India's Revised Accelerated Power
Distribution Rehabilitation Project (RAPDRP) to bring down distribution losses to below 20% by
                                                                                                                  33


2014. The financial sustainability of Madhya Pradesh's power sector critically depends on the
success of this initiative, but it is too early to make a definitive assessment of its likely success.
On the basis of current performance, the financial sustainability of the power sector and the
reform program supported by the SDP is rated less likely.

        4.       Physical Sustainability of Project-Financed Assets

119. The investment project that ADB financed as part of the SDP was to support the urgent
needs of the transmission and distribution network of Madhya Pradesh. The network had
become heavily overloaded and dilapidated by 2000 due to underinvestment in the preceding
decade caused by the financial crisis in the power sector. Although the operation and
maintenance of project-financed assets do not require significant financial resources (assumed
to be about 1% per annum of capital cost), in the absence of continued investments to expand
network capacity, the project-financed assets could become overloaded and their useful lifetime
shortened.

120. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) is compared with the weighted average cost
of capital (WACC) to ascertain the financial viability of the project. The project was financed by
an ADB loan and domestic debt. The ADB loan to MPSEB was in the form of a local currency
loan to the Government of India at an interest rate of 10.6%, and the domestic debt was raised
at an interest rate of 11%.

                            Table 9: Financial Internal Rate of Return (%)

 Item                                                   Appraisal                PCR                PPER
 Component A: 33 kV and 11 kV                             15.5                   14.5               32.8
 network rehabilitation
 Component B: Conversion of selected                       10.3                  10.0                20.3
 LV feeders to 11 kV
 Component C: Reinforcing and                              23.8                  11.1                36.6
 augmenting 220 kV and 132 kV
 transmission system
kV = kilovolt, PCR = project completion report, PPER = project performance evaluation report.
Sources: Independent Evaluation Mission, project completion report, report and recommendation of the President.

121. The MFF facility that ADB provided in 2007 (footnote 1) further financed the
augmentation of the transmission and distribution network's capacity to cater to the rising
demand for electricity in Madhya Pradesh. The MFF facility also had several components to
scale up the HVDS technology, which was pilot-tested in the SDP. To upgrade the distribution
network in urban areas, the Government of India also launched the RAPDRP, which now covers
over 80 urban centers in Madhya Pradesh. As a result of these investments, the loading of the
network was maintained within the prescribed limits and the overall sustainability of the network
assets was ensured. The challenge is to maintain regular investments in network capacity as
the electricity demand in Madhya Pradesh grows in the context of severe financial shortfall in
the power sector.

        5.       Sustainability Rating of the SDP

122. The legal reforms, regulatory regime, and institutional reforms are likely to be
sustainable as they enjoy broad support from the stakeholders, and MPG and the central
government have the political will to address the structural problems of the power sector.
34


Although the state government expects the financial viability to considerably improve in next 3-
4 years, the sector, however, has not yet reached financial sustainability and continues to
depend on extensive fiscal subsidies. The physical sustainability of the project-financed
investments critically depends on the availability of financial resources for operation and
maintenance and reinforcement. The resources cannot be guaranteed as the power sector is
not yet in a position to recover the full cost of supply. Hence, the SDP is less likely to be
sustainable based on the prevailing financial situation of power sector in the State. However, if
the financial performance is to improve, then the sustainability rating could be improved.

                               IV.     OTHER ASSESSMENTS

A.     Impacts

123. The development outcomes included improved institutional structure and regulatory
regime for the power sector as the SDP had specific components that targeted those outcomes.
They are considered outcomes rather than impacts and are discussed under the effectiveness
of the SDP. The broader impacts such as improved investment climate for private sector
investment in the power sector, promoting overall economic growth, and the socioeconomic
impacts of power sector reforms are addressed here. The impacts of the SDP were rated
moderate, and the reasons are discussed in the following paragraphs.

       1.     Investment Climate for Private Sector Investments in the Power Sector

124. The institutional and regulatory reforms undertaken in the SDP were limited and aimed
at addressing the immediate concerns of Madhya Pradesh's power such as introducing
transparent regulation of the power sector and creating managerial accountability by functional
unbundling of the sector. The legal and regulatory framework in the power sector of India
underwent a major change in 2003 with the enactment of India's Electricity Act of 2003. The
new provisions of the Electricity Act superseded the limited objectives of the SDP. The primary
objective of the Electricity Act was to open up the power sector to private sector investments
and establish competitive electricity markets.

125. Most of the recent initiatives to attract private sector investments to Madhya Pradesh's
power sector can be attributed to the provisions of the Electricity Act. They included soliciting
private sector investments for power generation with over 60% of generation capacity to be sold
competitively in the Indian power market outside Madhya Pradesh, franchising distribution, and
private sector investments in transmission. The initial reforms undertaken in the SDP enabled
Madhya Pradesh power sector agencies to exploit the new provisions of the Electricity Act. The
conclusion is that the SDP contributed to a certain extent to the subsequent improvements in
the climate for private sector investments in the power sector.

       2.     Overall Economic Growth

126. The per capita income of Madhya Pradesh remains below the Indian national average.
The state's average economic growth has not matched the high economic growth achieved by
India as a whole. Lack of industrialization and poor infrastructure including power are some of
the key reasons for the relative underperformance of Madhya Pradesh. Although, the installed
generation capacity allocated to Madhya Pradesh had been increased from 4,100 MW in 2002
to over 8,000 MW in 2009, the available generation capacity had been in the range of 5,600­
6,000 MW and Madhya Pradesh continues to suffer from load shedding. The increased
transmission capacity and improved distribution network achieved in the SDP could not be
                                                                                                35


effectively utilized to provide electricity to industrial consumers. The agricultural consumers who
use electricity for water pumping also suffer from curtailed electricity supply during the cropping
season, which affects the farm outputs.

127. MPG has managed to secure new investments for power generation from the private
sector as well as from central sector utilities. The investments are expected to eliminate the
generation capacity shortages by 2014 and could result in increased industrial investment in
Madhya Pradesh. MPG is also investing in segregating the agricultural feeders to ensure
adequate electricity supply to agricultural consumers during the cropping season.

       3.      Socioeconomic Impacts

128. The primary aim of the SDP was to improve the institutional arrangements and
commercial performance of power sector entities. Two of the main reasons for the poor
performance of the power sector were the high level of commercial losses in power distribution
and poorly targeted tariff subsidies. Improving the quality of the power supply was expected to
benefit the poorer farmers who tend to use smaller water pumps (below 5 hp), which were more
likely to be damaged by electricity of poor quality

129. The SDP had also required the restriction of free electricity supply only to scheduled cast
/ schedule tribe consumers below poverty line and having a demand below 25 kWh in the case
of residential consumers and below 5 hp for agricultural consumers). Thus, large numbers of
poor farmers were disconnected during the drought of 2002 (para. 57(i)), but MPG had to
restore electricity supply to those consumers in 2003 before the state elections. Since then, the
non SC/ST residential consumers below poverty line with single-point connections and
agricultural consumers using pumps with less than 10 hp receive a tariff subsidy, while the
SC/ST consumers with single-point connections continue to get free electricity. Despite load
shedding (more than 12­14 hours in rural areas per day), the quality of the supply (voltage and
frequency stability) has significantly improved since 2002, resulting in less damage to water
pumps used by farmers.

130. The number of residential consumers slightly increased (4.5 million in 2002 to 5.8 million
in 2009), and the overall electrification rate of Madhya Pradesh remains below 50%. This is
expected to be addressed through the Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidutkarana Yojana (RGGVY)
scheme financed by the central government. The reduction in cross-subsidy from industrial
consumers to residential and agricultural consumers would have an adverse impact on the
welfare of the latter categories. As a result of the improvement to transmission and distribution
network undertaken since 2002, there has been a significant improvement in quality of supply to
rural areas. Hence the welfare adverse impacts due to increased tariffs would have been
mitigated to a certain extent due to welfare gains attributable to improved quality of supply.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

       1.      Quality of Program Design at Entry

131. During program design, ADB engaged MPG in policy dialogue, especially with respect to
the provisions of the Electricity Reform Act of 2001, functional unbundling of MPSEB, and tariff
reforms to ensure improved cost recovery in the sector. The policy measures included in the
reform matrix and the actions MPG took before loan approval were the essential steps to initiate
the reform program. The policy conditions were set, taking into account MPG's capacity to
implement the reform and the time frame for implementing the program loan. The overall design
36


of the reform program was based on sound economic and sector work. The report and
recommendation of the President (RRP) gives a thorough analysis of key problems and
challenges of the power sector. The SDP is closely aligned with ADB's Madhya Pradesh Public
Resource Management Program (footnote 8) and ADB's overall country and state-level
assistance strategy to Madhya Pradesh.

132. The weak financial status of the power sector and the inadequate cost recovery due to
poorly designed tariff structure and high degree of commercial losses from unmetered end user
connections were identified as major issues in the sector. Although the SDP envisaged an
increase in cost recovery to 75% of the cost of supply to all consumer categories and 100%
metering of end users, there were no specific loan covenants to achieve those targets. ADB was
not in a position to engage MPG on restructuring MPSEB's balance sheet during program
approval because there were unresolved issues with respect to the allocation of liabilities after
the bifurcation of MPSEB (para. 17).

133. The socioeconomic impacts of tariff reforms were analyzed and safety nets were
designed to mitigate the adverse impacts on the poor. However, the project design did not have
a detailed monitoring and evaluation program to assess the socioeconomic impacts of the
institutional and tariff reforms. The mixed modality of program loan for policy reforms combined
with a project loan was appropriate at the time of entry as the power sector was suffering from
decades of underinvestment, and gave early benefits in terms of increased network capacity.

       2.      Quality of ADB Supervision

134. ADB effectively engaged MPG in policy dialogue during program implementation to
ensure that intended reforms are implemented. ADB prepared detailed tranche release reports
clearly describing the progress achieved and the policy actions to be taken to comply with the
tranche release conditions. ADB had engaged MPG in policy dialogue with respect to the
financial restructuring plan and employee transfer to the successor companies of MPSEB.
Although MPG has not yet formally accepted the financial restructuring plan, it has taken over
most of the critical financial liabilities the sector such as issuing MPG bonds to outstanding
liabilities to central sector power utilities and domestic financial institutions. The corresponding
liabilities were converted MPG equity in MPSEB.

135. ADB played a key role in coordinating the TA for capacity building and reform
implementation financed by CIDA and DFID (para. 22). During the preparation of the SDP, it
was envisaged that CIDA would provide the TA required for reform implementation while ADB
would provide the financial resources to cover the adjustment cost and investment cost. When
CIDA had to withdraw from the sector as per the agreement between the governments of India
and Canada, ADB played a proactive role in smoothly transferring the TA financing from CIDA
to DFID (para. 73). ADB also provided additional TA to bridge any gaps in the TA resources
provided by CIDA and DFID. ADB encouraged MPG to explore the possibility of franchising part
of the distribution network (Gwalior City circle) to central sector power utility (National Thermal
Power Corporation). However, that did not materialize because MPG was not able to provide a
guarantee on capital and working capital subsidies. ADB realized the importance of stakeholder
consultation during project implementation and provided a TA for the purpose.

136. MPSEB and its successor agencies implemented the investment component of the
project smoothly. Recognizing MPSEB's capacity for project management, ADB agreed to do
away with the project implementation consultants (paras. 50 and 53). ADB had anticipated the
cost savings due to the lower bid prices and cancellation of several components of the loan
                                                                                                       37


such as project implementation consultants and revenue management systems. The savings
were reallocated to widening the expansion of the transmission and distribution network. ADB's
performance is rated satisfactory.
C.     Performance of the Borrower

        1.      Quality of Project Preparation

137. MPG took full ownership of the reform program because it realized the precarious
situation of the power sector and its adverse impact on the fiscal situation and overall economic
growth of the state. MPG appointed the Tata Rao Committee (para. 19) to recommend sector
reforms and initiate several actions such as establishing MPSERC through India's 1998
Electricity Regulatory Commission Act. MPG had the political will to go ahead with potentially
unpopular measures such as tariff reforms, curtailment of free electricity supply, and intensifying
the metering of end users connections. MPG and MPSEB put in place adequate institutional
arrangements for implementing the SDP. A high-level committee headed by the chief secretary
of MPG coordinated the policy reforms. MPSEB established a project management unit at its
corporate office to coordinate and manage the procurement of goods and works.

        2.      Quality of Reform Implementation

138. MPG implemented most of the policy reforms in the policy matrix; however, it was
reluctant to approve a comprehensive debt restructuring plan. Instead, it resorted to periodic
debt write-offs, equity injections, and working capital loans. MPG's actions are creating a degree
of uncertainty about overall fiscal management as well as financial management of the power
sector. MPG has maintained the reform momentum by adopting several provisions of the
Electricity Act of 2003 such as initiating franchising of distribution. However, the institutional
reforms of the power sector including the full delegation of financial and human resource
management are yet to be achieved.

139. MPG has allocated significant amounts of resources to invest in power generation,
especially in public sector hydropower projects. As these investments were inadequate to meet
the deficit in generation capacity, MPG recently took several steps to attract private investments
to power generation. It allowed MPSERC to act as an independent economic regulator and did
not interfere with tariff setting. It promptly paid through fiscal allocation the tariff subsidies that it
provided to residential consumers below the poverty line and for agricultural consumers.
However, it could not yet come up with an effective strategy to address the substantial
commercial losses in power distribution (electricity theft), which is at the root of the financial
deficit of the sector.

140. MPSEB has performed well in implementing the investment component of the project.
The original work for the project was implemented ahead of schedule with significant cost
savings. The services of project implementation consultants were not required as MPSEB had
adequate capacity for project management. MPSEB and its successor entities initiated an
energy audit program at feeder level to identify theft-prone areas. This initiative has enabled the
selective application of HVDS and aerial bundled conductors to minimize losses. MPSEB also
maintained the support of stakeholdersemployees and consumersto the reform program.
The performance of the borrower is rated satisfactory.
38


                  V.      ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.     Outstanding Issues and Recent Initiatives

141. Shortages in generation capacity. The demand for electricity in Madhya Pradesh has
been rising over the years. The average demand during the peak season was around 7,000 MW
in FY2010. The total average available capacity for the state including central sector allocation
to Madhya Pradesh is around 5,600­6,000 MW. The state authorities were compelled to supply
power to rural areas for around 12 hours while supplying urban areas for over 22 hours. Given
the persistent deficit scenario, MPG adopted several measures to attract investment to power
generation (para. 61). This has resulted in doubling the generation capacity during last six years
and the state plans to increase the generation capacity by 5,000 MW during next three years
including capacity additions of 1,500 MW by MPGenco. It is critical that projects are
implemented as scheduled to alleviate the power shortages by 2014.

142. Persistent distribution losses. The most critical issue facing the power sector in
Madhya Pradesh is the high distribution losses coupled with low collection efficiency. The
current ATC losses are about 34%, with only DISCOM West having ATC losses below 30%.,
ATC losses are 37% for DISCOM East and 34.2% for DISCOM Central. Although the T&D
losses have significantly gone down from around 50% in 2002, the current levels are still very
high and additional efforts are required to keep the levels within reasonable limits. In
consultation with MPG, the distribution companies have set loss reduction targets for the next 3
years, and have scaled up their efforts to achieve those targets.

143. One of the major initiatives undertaken by the Madhya Pradesh DISCOMs is the
RAPDRP scheme (paras. 115, 118). The scheme financed by the central government as a loan
to state power utilities is implemented in two phases. The first phase aims to measure and
record all baseline data in selected town areas, and the second is focused on implementing
efforts to strengthen systems including aerial bundled conductors (ABC) and HVDS and
effective consumer metering to bring the losses down to 20%. The RAPDRP scheme provides
for converting part of the loan to grant if the companies are able to bring down the losses and
maintain the losses at 15% for another 3 years.

144. Another major initiative that MPG is promoting is the feeder segregation scheme in rural
areas. The scheme aims to segregate the domestic and the agricultural feeders to enable the
DISCOMs to control the power supply to agricultural and residential consumers by making
power available to agricultural consumers for 8­10 hours while ensuring 24-hour supply to rural
residential consumers. It is also envisaged that HVDS will be deployed for agricultural feeders
due to higher power demand and to reduce the thermal losses as well potential for electricity
theft from agricultural feeders as well as to increase the metering of agricultural consumers.
This step is expected to significantly reduce both technical and commercial losses in agricultural
feeders while encouraging more efficient use of electricity for water pumping. The first phase of
the scheme is to be financed by REC. For the second phase, MPG expects financing from
external sources.

145. The feeder segregation program would amount to redesigning the entire rural distribution
network of Madhya Pradesh. The present level of human resources available in the sector may
not be adequate for implementing this ambitious plan. Therefore, it will be necessary to obtain
the services of consultants to design and supervise as well as monitor the results of this
program. It may be useful to obtain inputs from a panel of agronomists to achieve the optimum
design for agricultural feeders, for the water requirements of different crops are not the same.
                                                                                                        39


The investments required for RAPDRP and the feeder segregation program are in the range of
Rs22 billion and Rs50 billion, respectively. It is critical that these investments give adequate
financial returns for them to have a positive impact on the financial performance of the sector.

146. Financial deficit. The state power sector utilities have been running in deficit in the last
several years. Currently, the sectorwide accumulated financial losses are Rs65.8 billion for the
period FY2006­2009, with Rs26.6 billion in FY2009 alone. The major portion of the financial
losses is borne by the distribution companies (close to 87% of the total losses). Madhya
Pradesh Genco has accumulated financial losses of over Rs8.3 billion. Madhya Pradesh
Transco has close to Rs0.14 billion of losses, while the three distribution companies have
accumulated losses of Rs57.8 billion for 2006­2009. The huge losses could be attributed to the
inability of Madhya Pradesh DISCOMs and Madhya Pradesh Genco to meet the performance
standards stipulated by MPERC for ATC losses and plant load factor/heat rates, respectively.
When the low collection ratios (96%) are considered, the cash deficits in the distribution
subsector are even higher than the accounting losses.

147. Although MPG has financed the cash deficit and investment needs in the past, the
performance of the sector has to be significantly improved to achieve financial sustainability.
Given the already high tariffs in the state, there is little scope for a further increase in tariffs. It is
imperative that the proposed measures for reducing technical and commercial losses are
carried out as planned, subject to technical and financial viability. Until the sector achieves
financial breakeven, it will require fiscal subsidies. MPG can better target these subsidies by
making them conditional upon progressive improved performance in reducing distribution loss,
and other performance indicators.

148. Institutional incentives. Another unfinished item in the reform process is the lack of
autonomy in financial and human resource management in MPSEB's successor companies as
MPSEB still retains those functions. The tariff regime is designed in a manner that results in
financial gains to regulated companies if they manage to exceed the performance standards
used in tariff setting. However, MPSEB consolidates the financial gains at the sector level and
better performing companies do not gain any financial benefits as a result of improved
performance. The financial management of the sector needs to be revised to give the
management of utilities better targeted incentives to improve performance. In this regard, the
State Government has recently transferred the employees from MPSEB to the successor
companies vide notification dated 30th November 2010, The State Government has also initiated
the termination of centralized cash management system and it is expected to be implemented
by April 2011.

B.      Lessons Learned

149. Regulatory and institutional reforms alone are important, but they will not result in
improved performance in the absence of accountability and incentives. The SDP was
based on the premise that regulatory and institutional reforms will improve the performance of
sector entities. Although the regulatory and institutional reforms were implemented as intended,
the sector entities except for MPTransco showed no significant improvement in performance.
Although there are several reasons for this such as the underlying political economy issues
constraining the measures that can be taken to reduce the ATC losses, the lack of financial
autonomy, financial incentives, and managerial accountability could have contributed to under-
achievement of this important development outcome. The management of a utility is not
responsible for financial performance and MPG has regularly stepped in to finance the cash
deficit. The regulatory interventions were limited to annual tariff settings based on progressively
40


improving performance norms. The reform program should have gone beyond the institutional
reforms and encouraged MPG and the regulator to set performance targets and ensure
compliance with those targets through an incentive and/or penalty mechanism.        It is
encouraging to note that the MP State Government and MPSERC have set targets for loss
reduction , revenue realization etc in last 3­4 years and the reporting requirements to
periodically monitor the performance of DISCOMs with respect to these targets have been
initiated.

150. Restoring financial viability of the power sector in Madhya Pradesh requires a
holistic approach encompassing technical, institutional, and governance measures. The
Madhya Pradesh power sector has been suffering from structural problems such as persistently
high level of ATC losses, increasing cost of generation and power purchase, and limited scope
of tariff increase as industrial tariffs have already reached the cost of captive power generation.
Improving the operational efficiency of utilities and tariff adjustments aimed at reducing the
cross-subsidies to residential and agricultural consumers can help, but the underlying problem
in the power sector remains the high ATC losses. The reduction of ATC losses requires
technical measures (reducing the overloading of distribution feeders and measures such as
HVDS and bundled conductors to prevent electricity pilferage), institutional measures (improved
metering, billing and bill collection) as well as governance-related actions (discouraging
electricity theft by taking legal action against the pilferers). However, the underlying political
economy such as affordability and competitiveness of Madhya Pradesh's agriculture sector in
the event of full cost recovery of supply of electricity to agriculture needs to be addressed.

151. Overreliance on the private sector for power generation investments when there
are structural issues in the distribution sector that may not result in desired outcomes.
Financial viability and cost recovery in the sector are important considerations for private sector
investments in power generation in the absence of opportunities to sell electricity outside the
state. Before India's Electricity Act of 2003 was enacted, it was difficult to attract private sector
investments to power generation in Madhya Pradesh, for investors were concerned about
MPSEB's ability to set aside adequate cash flows to meet power purchase obligations (escrow
cover). After the provisions of the Electricity Act related to the setting up of a competitive power
market and open access to a transmission network were implemented, private investors have
shown increased willingness to invest in power generation in Madhya Pradesh as demonstrated
by the recent success in initiating several private sector investments with likely capacity
additions of more than 1,500 MW from private sector projects in next 2­3 years.

C.     Follow-Up Actions

152. Although the original SDP had been completed in 2004, ADB continues to be engaged in
the Madhya Pradesh power sector through the ongoing Madhya Pradesh Power Sector
Investment Program (footnote 1) approved in 2007. ADB therefore has the opportunity to
engage the government in policy dialogue with respect to the following points.
       (i)   Restoring the financial viability of the power sector. It would be desirable to
             have a time-bound road map for restoring the financial viability of the sector,
             taking into account the structural issues facing the sector and the projected
             efficiency gains of proposed investments. It is noted that DIFID consultants are
             assisting the State Government in preparation of Financial Restructuring Plan
             which includes a road map for restoring the financial viability of the sector. The
             multiyear tariff-setting framework can be coordinated with the financial
             restructuring road map to ensure that some efficiency gains are retained in the
             sector to improve its profitability. This will be a departure from the current
                                                                                        41


       practice where efficiency gains, if any, are passed on to the consumers through
       progressively stringent performance norms used in tariff setting.
(ii)   Accountability for improved operational performance. The management of
       the sector entities created after the unbundling of MPSEB is not held responsible
       for the operational and financial performance of the sector entities. This is mainly
       due to lack of financial autonomy and lack of performance target set by the
       respective boards of directors and regulator to comply with. As MPG covers the
       cash deficit of the sector and in the absence of performance targets set by either
       the regulator (the performance norms are used only for the purpose of tariff
       setting) or MPG as the shareholder, the utility management lacks incentives to
       strive for improved performance. ADB could engage MPG and MPSERC in
       establishing a framework for improving operational performance and a
       corresponding incentive scheme.
                                                                              Appendix 1       42


     MADHYRA PRADESH POWER SECTOR PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT (2000­2009)

A.      Sector Overview

1.      The Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (MPEB) was constituted in 1952 under the
Electricity (Supply) Act of 1948. MPEB was a vertically integrated utility responsible for power
generation, transmission, and distribution in the state of Madhya Pradesh. As of 2000, MPEB
was suffering financially due to high transmission and distribution (T&D) losses (49%), high level
of agricultural consumption (41% of total consumption), and low level of tariffs for agricultural
and domestic consumers. Although MPEB was entitled for revenue subsidies from the
government of Madhya Pradesh (MPG) for setting the tariffs for agricultural and residential
consumers below cost recovery levels, these subsidies were not being paid in a timely manner.
MPEB also had high levels of receivables from municipalities and other state-owned agencies.
As a result MPEB had defaulted on its loan and tax payments to MPG. MPEB was also
defaulting its payment obligations to the National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) for power
purchase and to Coal India for coal purchase.

 2.     After the division of the state of Madhya Pradesh in 2001, the Madhya Pradesh State
Electricity Board (MPSEB), the successor entity to MPEB, inherited most of the agricultural
consumers but lost most of the industrial consumers and power generation capacity to the
newly created state of Chhattisgarh. The reconstituted state of Madhya Pradesh had 73% of the
population and 78% of energy consumed in the undivided Madhya Pradesh. Being responsible
for power supply in the reconstituted Madhya Pradesh, MPSEB was allocated only 68% of the
installed generation capacity and 64% of the revenues of the former MPEB. As a result, MPSEB
suffered from generation capacity deficit (1,700 megawatts [MW]), higher cost of supply, and
higher financial deficit, whereas the newly created Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (CSEB)
had surplus generation capacity (750 MW) and lower cost of supply. MPSEB was also allocated
78% of the outstanding liabilities and 78% of the staff of MPEB.

3.      The reforms initiated in the state of Madhya Pradesh since 2002 aimed to develop a
financially and economically sustainable power sector that does not rely on subsidy or support
from MPG and operates autonomously. Since 2002, the generation, transmission, and
distribution companies have been operating independently under an operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement with MPSEB. The companies were granted partial functional and financial
autonomy, but MPSEB retained financial management and human resource management for
the entire power sector. In the initial phase of unbundling, five companies were formed: one
generation company (Madhya Pradesh Power Generation Company [MPGenco]), one
transmission company (Madhya Pradesh Power Transmission Company Limited [MPTransco]),
and three distribution companies (DISCOMs). In 2006 Madhya Pradesh Trading Company
Limited (Tradeco) was formed with responsibility for the bulk purchase and supply of electricity.

B.      Power Generation

4.      The installed power generation capacity of the reconstituted MPSEB reached 2,900 MW
(2,150 MW of thermal generation capacity and 750 MW of hydro capacity) as of 2001. In
addition to its -own generation capacity, MPSEB also had an allocation of 1,120 MW from the
central sector. The total available generation capacity was about 4,000 MW in 2001; however,
the unconstrained peak demand was in the range of 5,700 MW during the farming season,
resulting in extensive load shedding. The average age of 60% of the thermal plants in the state
was 25 years and only 867 MW of capacity was added during 1993­2001. As a result, the plant
load factor (a measure of availability of generation stations) was around 65%.
                                                                                            43




5.      Given the national policy of encouraging private sector investments for power
generation, MPG signed 22 memoranda of understanding (MOU) with independent power
producers (IPPs) for an additional 8,230 MW. However, only 13 projects with a total generation
capacity of 5,340 MW received techno-economic clearance from the Central Electricity
Authority. Since MPEB had limited financial capacity to provide escrow cover (earmarking
revenues of MPSEB for meeting the power purchase payments to IPPs), it was decided by
MPG to allocate escrow cover on a competitive basis to IPPs. This process got embroiled in
protracted litigation. Finally, the Supreme Court directed MPG to allocate escrow cover to four
projects (400 MW Maheswar hydropower project, 1,070 MW Korba coal power project, 580 MW
Bina coal power project, and 330 MW gas power project). The Korba coal power project is now
with Chhattisgarh after the division of the state. Most of the work on Maheswar hydropower is
complete and commissioning is expected in December 2010. The Bina power project has been
restructured and is now under construction as an IPP with a capacity of 1,280 MW.

6.      Due to difficulties in attracting private sector investments to power generation, MPG
instructed MPSEB to initiate several power generation projects including 500 MW Brisinghpur
coal power plant, 210 MW Amarkantak coal power plant. 1,000 MW Indira Sagar Hydropower
Project (HPP), 520 MW Omkareshwar HPP, and 825 MW Sardar Sarovar hydropower projects
were commissioned by the state government as joint ventures with National Hydropower
Corporation.(NHPC). All these projects were successfully commissioned. The Indira Sagar
project and Sardar Sarovar were commissioned in 2006, and Omkareshwar was commissioned
in August 2007. The Brisinghpur plant was commissioned in September 2008 and Amarkantak
in October 2009. In addition, NTPC initiated several projects with capacity allocations for
Madhya Pradesh (Table A1.1).

                       Table A1.1: Installed Generation Capacity (MW)
                              in Madhya Pradesh, 2002­2009

Item                 2002       2003      2004       2005    2006    2007     2008      2009
State Sector
  - Thermal           2,147      2,147     2,147     2,147   2,147   2,147     2,647     2,857
  - Hydro               793        843       843       843     843     903       923       923
MPG joint
ventures
  - Hydro               0.00      0.00       500     1,256   1,598   1,836     2,411     2,411
Central Sector
  - Thermal           1,193      1,250     1,697     1,770   1,716   1,941     2,035     2,160
      Total           4,133      4,240     5,188     6,017   6,304   6,827     8,016     8,351
MPG = government of Madhya Pradesh, MW = megawatt.
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.


7.      As a company registered under the Companies' Act, MPGenco began independent
operations on 1 June 2005. The company has been operating since 2002 under an O&M
agreement with the former MPSEB. However, the cash flows are still being managed by
residual MPSEB, MPGenco faces the challenge to gear up to meet market competition through
efficiency improvement programs. The generating plants have not achieved the benchmark
norms of operating efficiency. The efficiency indicators, plant utilization, station heat rate,
specific fuel consumption, and auxiliary consumption of the thermal plants are much below the
desired level. Some plants of MPGenco need renovation and modernization, not only to extend
    44       Appendix 1


    their life, but also to improve the performance parameters. Availability of funds is, however, the
    main constraint in this regard.

    8.       One of the most prominent reasons for the low plant factor of MPGenco plants is the age
    of the plants. Of the 16 thermal generating units that MPGenco operates, 10 units constituting
    about 43% of the thermal generating capacity have already completed the economic life of 25
    years. The average age of all the five units in Indira Gandhi Sagar Hydro Generating Station is
    above 46 years. These five units together constitute 12.57% of the total hydro generating
    capacity of MPGenco. Several thermal power plants such as Satpura and Amarkantak TPS
    urgently need rehabilitation requiring an investment of over $150 million. During the period
    2008­2009, coal supply to the power stations of MPGenco was inadequate, thereby affecting
    power generation. Due to the acute shortage of coal, MPGenco's units were forced to run on
    partial load. For this reason, MPGenco's plant load factor (PLF)1 was lower by about 7.5% for
    the period 2008­2009 and the resultant decrease in electricity generation amounted to over
    1,600 gigawatt-hours (GWh).

    9.     The generation loss due to the coal shortfall in 2009­2010 was estimated at 497.82
    GWh. The coal supplies were delayed because of the persistent delay in paying for the supply.
    This has also led to poor quality of coal being supplied to MPGenco. The coal linkage for fiscal
    year (FY) 2009­2010 was further reduced to 15 million tons.

                                    Table A1.2: Energy Balance in Madhya Pradesh
                                                      2002­2009
                                                                                                               (GWh)
                        FY2001­       FY2002­       FY2003­       FY2004­        FY2005­       FY2006­       FY2007­        FY2008­
                        FY2002        FY2003        FY2004        FY2005         FY2006        FY2007        FY2008         FY2009
MPSEB Thermal
availability               10,575        12,366        11,865        12,225           9456        12,096         11,780       12,034
(GWh)
MPSEB Hydro                 2,277         1,764         2,658          2,139         2,394          2,968         2,831        2,344
availability
Central sector
allocations to MP          10,873         9,177         8,866          9,552        11,347        12,072         13,668       12,708
JV Hydro                                                  193          1,393         3,648         4,609          5,885        3,561
Additional power
purchases                   2,207         2,798         4,160          3,213           0.00          0.00          0.00        1,335
Energy trading                603         1,027           816          1,529            344           413           487           45
Total MPSEB
supply                     26,535        27,132        28,558        30,051         27,188        32,157         34,654       32,027
Peak deficit MW                                                                        954         1,005            631         1195
(%)                                        24.5           17.0          14.0         (14.2)        (14.1)          (8.8)       (14.7)
Energy deficit                                                                       4,846         5,269          5,533         4199
GWh (%)                                    14.0           13.0          12.5         (13.1)        (13.6)         (13.3)        (9.3)
FY = fiscal year, GWh = gigawatt hour, JV = joint venture, MPSEB = Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, MW = megawatt.
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.


    10.    MPGenco is currently constructing two large thermal power plants (1,200 MW Shri
    Singhaji TPS. 500 MW Satpura TPS Extension); they are expected to be commissioned before
    2013. MPG provided the equity capital for these projects and debt financing was sourced
    against MPG guarantees. In addition to these plants, several other power plants promoted by


    1
        PLF is a measure of the utilization of generation capacity; 100% PLF implies the installed capacity has been utilized
         to the maximum extent.
                                                                                                  45


central agencies have allocated over 2,700 MW to Madhya Pradesh. For example, 4,000 MW
Sasan Ultra Mega private sector power plant allocated 1,500 MW to Madhya Pradesh.

11.       MPG had notified a policy inviting private sector participation in the power sector through
the memorandum of agreement (MOU) route. Under the policy, MPG assists the private
developers in land acquisition, fuel and water linkages, aside from other administrative
facilitation. The policy has 35 active MOUs; 7 projects are at advanced stage of construction
and have a combined allocation of 440 MW for Madhya Pradesh (Table A1.3).

                      Table A1.3: Added Private Sector Generation Capacity
                            Expected in Madhya Pradesh before 2013

Plant                                Status           Aggregate Capacity     Capacity Allocated to
                                                            (MW)             Madhya Pradesh (MW)
Bina Power Supply           Construction started             1,250                     525
Company
Essar Power                 Construction started             2,000                       750
Jaiprakash Ventures         Construction started             1,320                       462
BLA Power                   Construction started               626                       219
Jhabua Power                Obtained all clearances          1,200                       420
M.B. Power                  Obtained all clearances          2,000                       700
Reliance Power              Obtained all clearances          4,000                     1,400
Total                                                       12,396                     4,476
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.
MW = megawatt.

12.     In addition to the foregoing IPP projects promoted under the MOU arrangement, MPG
also followed the competitive bidding guidelines of the Ministry of Power (case 1 and case 2). In
case 1 bidding guidelines, MPG needs to float a tender inviting bids for a certain capacity at a
particular injection point, irrespective of the location and technology of the plant. In case 2, MPG
needs to develop a site for erection of a power plant and provide all the clearances for land
acquisition, water linkage, fuel linkage, environment, etc. Bids are than invited from interested
parties for developing the project. MPG conducted bidding for the procurement of 2,000 MW of
power under case 1. The bids were received on 27th November 2007. However, the transaction
has not been completed to date because of several regulatory bottlenecks. For power
procurement under case 2, MPG provided all the support for developing the 4,000 MW Sasan
ultra Mega Power Plant initiated by the central government.

13.     The demand during the peak season is currently close to 7,000 MW and the average
peak is about 6,500 MW. The available generation capacity is around 5,600­6,000 MW. The
average deficit is around 500­1,000 MW which increases to 1,300­1,500 MW during peak
season. The peak demand is expected to increase by over 50% to 10,500 MW by 2013. The
installed generation capacity in Madhya Pradesh including allocations from the central sector is
expected to increase by 5,150 MW to reach 14,000 MW, and the available generation capacity
at 70% plant factor would be in the region of 10,000 MW. Hence, the tight capacity demand-
supply balance is likely to continue in the medium term, and it is important to increase the
availability of thermal plants by reducing the maintenance outages and increasing the coal
allocations.
46      Appendix 1


C.        Power Transmission System

14.     At the time of unbundling and the establishment of MPTransco, the transmission system
in Madhya Pradesh was suffering from severe overloading, poor voltage regulation, instability
and frequent network tripping as a result of underinvestment in the preceding decade. The
extensive investments that MPTransco made during 2002­2008 enabled the company to
increase its transmission capacity from 3,890 MW in 2002 to 7,620 MW in 2009. The total
transformation capacity of MPTransco as of May 2010 was 32,474 megavolt-ampere (MVA),
with 141 substations. Further additions to the transmission network are being installed under the
ongoing Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program approved in April 2007 for $106
million2 and $144 million approved in August 20073 under a multitranche financing facility (MFF)
for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program. The first loan was to finance the
expansion of 400 kilovolt (kV) and 220 kV network and substations (315 MVA of 400/220 kV
substations and 3,120 MVA of transformation capacity at 220 kV level and 1,435 kilometers
(km) of 220 kV lines. The second loan was to finance the expansion of 132 kV network with
1,020 MVA of transformation capacity and 1,450 km of 132 kV lines. Table A1.4 is a snapshot of
transmission capacity additions from June 2002 to May 2010.

                       Table A1.4: Transmission Capacity in Madhya Pradesh
                                          2002 and 2010

                                                             Status as of          Addition from June
                                                                                    2002 to May 2010
                Particulars                           June 2002        May 2010
          400 kV substations              Units                4               5             1
                                          MVA              2,940           4,200         1,260
          220 kV substations              Units               26              49            23
                                          MVA              6,770          13,610         6,840
          132 kV substations              Units              110             175            65
                                          MVA              6,950          14,644         7,694
          Total substations               Units              141             230            89
                                          MVA             16,680          32,474        15,794
          400 kV lines                    c-km             1,706           2,343           637
          220 kV lines                    c-km             6,496           9,860         3,364
          132 kV lines                    c-km             9,230          12,432         3,202
                 Total lines              c-km            17,493          24,696         7,203
         c-km = circuit kilometers, kV = kilovolt, MVA = megavolt-ampere.
         Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

15.     The technical performance of the transmission system significantly improved as a result
of the investments undertaken (about Rs20 billion). The voltage profile of the network
significantly improved with all 400 kV and 220 kV substations maintaining a voltage deviation of
not more than 7.5%. Voltage deviations exceeding the stipulated 10% at 132 kV substations
were limited to less than two substations. Transmission system availability has been above the
target set by the regulator and has been exceeding 98% since 2005­2006. This indicates that
MPTransco has been maintaining its lines and substations properly and managing outages
promptly. The higher availability has entitled the company to incentive as per the regulations.
The availability of the five major critical lines in Madhya Pradesh has been over 99%.



2
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Madhya
    Pradesh for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program ­ Tranche 1. Manila. (Loan 2323-IND).
3
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Madhya
    Pradesh for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program ­ Tranche 1. Manila. (Loan 2346-IND).
                                                                                                     47


16. A portion of the electrical energy transmitted through a transmission system is lost on
account of the resistance of the conductor and losses in transformers and other equipment.
Loss reduction is an important technical consideration of a transmission company. Transmission
losses have come down significantly since the inception of the company. The transmission loss
of 7.93% in July 2002 dropped to 4.09% in FY2009 as against the regulatory target of 4.90%.
Without transmission investments and capacity augmentation, transmission losses would have
exceeded 11% in FY2009.

D.      Power Distribution

17.    There was a significant increase in the number of consumers and electricity
consumption by residential, agricultural, and other commercial consumers connected to the low-
voltage network of the three distribution companies during 2002­2009. Residential consumers
increased from 4.48 million in 2002 to 5.77 million in 2009, and agricultural consumers from
1.15 million in 2002 to 1.21 million in 2009. Electricity sales to residential and agricultural users
increased by 85% and 117%, respectively, from 2002 to 2009. Metering of low-voltage
consumers significantly increased. In 2009, 92% of residential and 22% of agricultural
consumers were metered compared with 87% residential and 11% agricultural consumers in
2002.

18.    New 33/11 kV substations and high-tension lines were constructed to reduce technical
losses and to improve the quality of the supply in low-voltage pockets. To reduce commercial
losses, energy audit started in the state to identify areas incurring high losses. Metering was
100% up to the 11 kV feeders and regular energy audits were started. To improve metering at
consumer ends, more than 3,400,000 electronic meters were installed. Through these efforts
and special drives to regularize unauthorized connections, aggregate technical and commercial
(ATC) loss levels of 43.6% at the time power sector reforms began in 2002 went down to 34%
in 2010. Distribution company (DISCOM) Central managed to reduce ATC losses from 52.9% in
2002 to 37.1% in 2009, and DISCOM West from 41.2% in 2002 to 29.3% in 2009. ATC losses in
DISCOM East remained unchanged at around 37% (Table A1.5).

                    Table A1.5: Distribution Losses and Collection Efficiency
                                               (%)

     Fiscal                   Distribution Losses                    Collection Efficiency
      Year
                     East       West      Central   State    East      West      Central     State

     2003           33.77       36.79     45.09     38.61    90.94     89.23      85.23      88.64
     2004           37.27       34.77     44.88     38.83    83.92     83.25      79.86      82.48
     2005           37.08       34.24     43.03     37.91    87.18     89.34      83.10      86.71
     2006           36.46       31.91     43.39     36.96    90.05     92.67      91.72      91.50
     2007           35.81       30.73     42.64     36.13    91.19     91.69      89.27      90.79
     2008           37.72       33.99     41.44     37.53    92.01     92.30      89.97      91.49
     2009           37.23       33.76     38.93     36.47    92.03     97.61      95.66      95.20
     2010           33.45       28.62     35.15     32.13    90.84     97.65      94.87      94.60
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.

19.  The Madhya Pradesh distribution subsector has undertaken massive capacity
augmentation in the last 5 years. A detailed physical network addition is shown in Table A1.6.
48      Appendix 1


                    Table A1.6: Capacity Additions in the Distribution Network
                                           2003­2009

                                            Fiscal            Addition
                                                                                                     Increase
 Item                         Unit           Year              during                 2009
                                                                                                        (%)
                                           2003/04            5 years
 33 kV line                   km            29,990              5,936                35,926               20
 11 kV line                   km           163,186            14,351                177,537                9
 LT line                      km           325,832              4,672               330,504                1
 33/11 kV S/S                 no.            1,731                739                 2,470               43
 33/LT and 11/LT
                              no.          181,322             33,016               214,338               18
 S/S
 HT/LT line ratio                               0.59                                     0.64             9
Source: Independent Evaluation Mission.
H/T = high tension, Km = kilometers, kV = kilovolt, L/T = low tension, no. = number, S/S = Substations.

20.      The Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidutkarana Yojana (RGGVY) scheme aimed to electrify
all villages. It would give all households access to electricity by extending the rural electricity
distribution backbone with at least one distribution transformer in each village, with an
associated last mile low-tension (LT) connectivity. The RGVY scheme was to accelerate rural
development, generate employment and eliminate poverty through irrigation, small-scale
industries and providing improved access to health care, education, and information technology.
Available RGGVY data as of 23 April 2010 indicate that the total project cost approved for
Madhya Pradesh was Rs17.53 billion, of which Rs9.08 billion had been released. A total of 806
villages without electricity or underserved were identified, and 89 (11%) have been electrified.
Furthermore, 34,094 electrified villages 5,445 villages were covered for intensive electrification. .
In these 34,094 villages, 2.65 million rural households (8.1%) have been electrified.

21.    The Accelerated Power Development Program (APDP) was undertaken in 2000­2001 to
restore the commercial viability of the distribution subsector in the urban areas. The original
APDP was renamed Accelerated Power Development and Reform Program (APDRP) during
FY2003 for the 10th Five-Year Plan with increased focus on supporting the sector reforms and
reduction of distribution loss. The objectives of APDRP were to
       (i)      improve the financial viability of state power utilities,
       (ii)     reduce aggregate technical and commercial (ATC) losses,
       (iii)    improve customer satisfaction, and
       (iv)     increase the reliability and quality of the power supply.

22.     The APDRP scheme had two components. As part of the investment component the
Government of India was to provide additional assistance to strengthen and upgrade the sub-
transmission and distribution networks. Of the project cost, 25% was to be provided as
additional central plan assistance in the form of a grant to the state utilities. The central
government was to finance 25% of the project cost in the form of a loan. However, in
accordance with the recommendation of the 12th finance commission, the loan component was
discontinued starting in FY2006. Utilities now have to make other arrangements for the
remaining 75% of the project cost from domestic financing institutions like Power Finance
Corporation (PFC) and/or Rural Electricity Corporation (REC). The approved total cost of the
project was Rs68.7 billion, of which the APDRP component was Rs34.4 billion, and the
approved counterpart funding was Rs33.9 billion. However, only Rs13 billion was released, and
the total funds utilized including the counterpart funding amounted to Rs13.1 billion.
                                                                                                         49




23.     The ongoing Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program approved in April 2007
for $45 million,4 and the component in August 2007 (footnote 2) and tranche 5 of the same
program 5 approved in May 2009 for $166 million are financing further improvements to the
distribution network. The works under the program include
        (i)     conversion of about 7,400 km of LV lines to high-voltage distribution systems
                (HVDS), remote metering of 2,000 industrial consumers, and metering of
                250,000 residential consumers;
        (ii)    for DISCOM East, feeder segregation as a pilot project by installing 751 km of 11
                kV lines and 70,000 single-phase meters and 12,500 three-phase meters; for
                DISCOM Center, installation of 11 KV 1200 KVR capacitor bank, construction of
                High Voltage Distribution System in theft prone areas of Bhopal, Gwailor and
                Morena with conversion of LV line to 11 KV Line 125 km and installation of
                remote meters at 8394 in industrial and commercial consumers; and for DISCOM
                West, HVDS systems by converting 870 km LV lines to 11 kV, feeder
                segregation by constructing 1,100 km of new 11 kV lines and renovating the
                existing 33/11 kV substations.
        (iii)   for DISCOM Central, Construction of HVDS in 2 circles, including conversions of
                3198 km of LT lines to HT and construction of 1555 km of new 11 KV lines and
                renovation of 33/11 KV 443 substations; for DISCOM East, 7,580 km of HVDS
                lines and 1,250 km of 11 kV lines for feeder segregation; and for DISCOM West,
                installation of 2,100 km of 11 kV lines and renovation and construction of 65
                33/11 kV substations.

24.     Taking into account the lessons learned in implementing the APDRP, the Ministry of
Power of the central government launched the Revised APDRP in 2007. The Revised
Accelerated Power Distribution Rehabilitation Project (RAPDRP) is part of the sustained efforts
of the central government to make the power sector more financially viable and to improve the
quality of the power supply in urban areas. The RAPDRP is a scheme that the central
government launched for towns with a population of more than 30,000.
The entire RAPDRP scheme has two parts.
.
        (i)     Part A has projects for establishing baseline data and applying information
                technology (IT) for energy accounting and consumer services.
        (ii)    Part B is to improve, strengthen, and augment systems.

 All three DISCOMs in Madhya Pradesh have submitted proposals for 82 towns to the PFC for
upgrading the distribution network under RAPDRP. PFC approved a loan of Rs2.28 billion for
part A and Rs19.66 billion for part B.




4
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Madhya
    Pradesh for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program ­ Tranche 1. Manila. (Loan 2324-IND).
5
    ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Madhya
    Pradesh for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program ­ Tranche 5. Manila. (Loan 2520-IND).
50   Appendix 1


25. The DISCOMs are focusing on implementing HVDS so as to reduce technical and
commercial losses. Companies have also planned to separate agriculture and domestic
categories of connections in rural areas by feeder separation with HVDS system. During 2008­
2009, MPG had provided the DISCOMs with Rs1.0 billion for feeder segregation. DISCOMs
have already covered about 471 feeders with this funding. The feeder segregation program will
help improve supply hours and quality of supply in rural areas while reducing losses. However, it
requires investment of about Rs5.0 billion over the next 2­3 years, and support from debt
financing institutions like PFC and REC has been sought. Financial support from the central
government/external financing in the form of a soft loan/grant would also be needed to roll out
the feeder segregation program to cover the entire state.

E.     Renewable Energy

26.    Madhya Pradesh is endowed with good renewable energy potential and the same can
be harnessed not only to meet the domestic demand but also to contribute to the sustainable
development of the energy sector in the state. The state has technical potential of around 1,200
MW for wind-based power generation. The installed capacity of wind projects in Madhya
Pradesh is around 212 MW and around 800 MW of capacity is being considered for
development.

27.     In India, hydropower projects with capacity of up to 25 MW are classified as renewable
energy. Madhya Pradesh has an estimated potential of 410 MW for small hydro-based
generation. The installed capacity of a small hydropower plant is 71 MW and around 20 MW is
under construction. One small hydropower project of 2.20 MW had been set up by the private
sector in Madhya Pradesh as of 31 March 2009.

28.     Biomass resources can also be used to generate electricity for a supply to the grid. The
gross potential for biomass-based power in Madhya Pradesh is around 1,040 MW. However,
the installed capacity of biomass-based power projects is only 1 MW. Biomass-based projects
with capacity of around 401 MW are going through the approval process and around 99.5 MW
of capacity has been approved for different biomass project developers. Around 10 villages
have been electrified under the Village Energy Security Program and work is in progress in 27
villages. The state of Madhya Pradesh is endowed with good solar intensity. Certain regions
have potential of more than 5.5 kWh per square meter and thus offer good sites for solar-based
power projects.
                                                                          Appendix 2     51


                  UPDATED DESIGN AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK

Design Summary            Performance Targets Achieved         Validity of Assumptions
                                                               and Risk Assumption at
                                                                       Appraisal
Desired Impacts: Program Loan
Financially sustainable    The GDP of Madhya Pradesh has      The regulatory improvement
power sector to            grown at an average of 4.89% per   and improved institutional
promote economic           annum since 2005 compared with     accountability as well as
growth of the state        the national average of 8.49%      enhanced network capacity
                           during the same period.            did not result in elimination
                           Industrial consumption has grown   of fiscal subsidies to the
                           close to 4.3% in 7 years           sector. The commercial
                           compared with the 5.8% overall     performance of the sector
                           increase in electricity            especially in reducing
                           consumption.                       distribution loss was less
                           Power sector loss in a year        than expected. Hence, the
                           increased from Rs9.5 billion in    reforms supported by the
                           FY2002 to Rs25.9 billion in        program loan did not
                           FY2009.                            eliminate the fiscal burden.
                           Fiscal subsidies to the sector
                           increased to Rs280 billion over    The overall performance of
                           2002­2009, and the trend in the    the power sector in terms of
                           amount of subsidies required is    adequate and reliable
                           not declining.                     power supply was not
                           The average generation capacity    achieved because
                           shortage remains at around 1,000   generation capacity was
                           MW and 4,000 GWh. However,         inadequate. The poor
                           as a share of unconstrained        financial status of the sector
                           demand, it has dropped from        may have contributed to the
                           around 25% to about 10%.           relatively lower level of
                                                              private investments in
                                                              power generation.

                                                              Although the industrial
                                                              consumers were provided
                                                              with 24 hours of power
                                                              supply since 2004, the high
                                                              industrial tariffs may have
                                                              contributed to the relatively
                                                              lower growth rate in
                                                              electricity consumption in
                                                              the industry sector and the
                                                              relatively lower economic
                                                              growth of Madhya Pradesh
                                                              compared with the rest of
                                                              India.
Desired Impacts: Project Loan
Improved performance        Transmission capacity increased   The outcomes achieved
of power transmission       from 16,480 MVA in 2002 to        (increased transmission
52   Appendix 2



and distribution           32,475 MVA in 2010, at a CAGR         capacity and transmission
systems to provide         of over 10% per annum.                network performance) have
reliable power supply      Met 7,786 MW of peak demand           enabled the transmission
to promote economic        during FY2010;                        network to support the
growth                     Transmitted and distributed           growth of demand by more
                           32,600 GWh of energy during           than 35% during 2002 to
                           FY2007;                               2009 and enabled the
                           Achieved substantial                  evacuation of power from
                           improvement in the voltage profile    newly commissioned
                           of the distribution system (the       generating plants.
                           voltage profiles at low-tension
                           level are maintained within a +/-     The over 1.25 million new
                           6% range); and                        residential consumers
                           Reduced scheduled and                 increased the rate of rural
                           unscheduled power cuts.               electrification. But because
                           The number of residential             of the increased demand,
                           consumers increased from 4.48         the state continued to suffer
                           million in 2002 to 5.77 million in    from persistent power
                           2009, and the number of               shortages despite the
                           agricultural consumers increased      increase in installed
                           from 1.15 million in 2002 to 1.21     generation capacity to over
                           million in 2009                       8,000 MW by 2009
                           The metering of low-voltage           compared with about 4,000
                           consumers significantly               MW in 2002. Hence, the
                           increased. In 2009, 92% of            improvement in the
                           residential and 22% of agricultural   transmission network and
                           consumers were metered                removal of overloading of
                           compared with 87% of residential      the distribution network did
                           and 11% of agricultural               not translate into improved
                           consumers in 2002.                    power supply to the end
                           Based on the benefits accrued in      consumers. While the urban
                           pilot HVDS schemes, MPSEB is          areas had electricity on
                           now implementing a similar            average about 22 -23 hours
                           system across the state, part of      per day, the supply to rural
                           which is being financed under the     areas is currently limited to
                           ongoing MFF ADB loan facility.        around 10­12 hours per
                                                                 day.
Desired Outcomes: Program Loan
Improved regulatory       Madhya Pradesh signed 35               The institutional reforms
oversight, financial      MOUs with private generating           supported by the program
performance, and          companies, and 7 projects with a       loan were backed up by
accountability of the     combined capacity of over 12,000       consulting services funded
sector through            MW and 4,500 MW capacity               by CIDA and DFID and
institutional and legal   allocations for Madhya Pradesh         strong political support from
reforms                   are under construction.                MPG. This has enabled
                          Six companies were formed from         MPSERC to effectively
                          the former MPSEB (1 generation,        discharge its responsibilities
                          1 transmission, 3 generation and       as the economic regulator
                          1 trading company).                    of the sector and institute a
                          Since its inception, MPERC has         multiyear tariff framework.
                                                                                 Appendix 2       53


                              so far issued four tariff orders for   MPG has honored its
                              the composite MPSEB (up to             commitment to provide up-
                              2006) and two each for                 front subsidies to bridge any
                              MPGenco, MPTransco, and the            gap between the notified
                              distribution companies.                tariff and the tariff stipulated
                              A multiyear tariff framework for a     by the Madhya Pradesh
                              3-year control period is also in       State Electricity Regulatory
                              place and the tariff orders issued     Commission (MPSERC).
                              for MPGenco and MPTransco for
                              2007 are based on that.                 However, the regular tariff
                              The tariff regulations stipulated by   adjustments awarded by
                              MPSERC raised the average              MPSERC and the timely
                              domestic tariff from Rs2.36 /kWh       payment of tariff subsidies
                              in 2003 to Rs3.50/kWh in 2010,         by MPG have not resulted
                              and the agricultural tariff from       in cash breakeven in the
                              Rs0.90/kWh in 2003 to                  power sector. This was due
                              Rs2.62/kWh in 2010.                    to the inability of distribution
                              Cost recovery as a percentage of       companies to maintain the
                              average cost of supply improved        ATC losses at the norms
                              from 27% in 2004 to 69% in 2010        used for the purpose of tariff
                              for agricultural consumers. The        setting.
                              cross-subsidy from high-voltage        The improving cost
                              consumers (mainly industrial) to       recovery of the power
                              low-voltage consumers (mainly          sector has not increased
                              residential and agricultural) was      installed generation
                              significantly reduced from             capacity with private
                              Rs1.73/kWh in 2004 to Rs0.7            investment. However,
                              /kWh in 2010.                          several large privately
                              Aggregate technical and                financed thermal power
                              commercial losses had marginal         plants are under
                              improvement, from over 50% in          construction and MPG is
                              2002 to around 38% in 2009.            aggressively pursuing
                              Collection efficiency rose from        private investments for
                              95% in 2003 to 99% in 2009.            power generation and
                                                                     distribution franchising.
Desired Outcomes: Project Loan
Enhanced capacity for      Transmission losses dropped               The investments made in
power transmission         from 7.9% in 2002 to 4.1% in              the transmission network
and improved quality       2009.                                     during 2002­2006
of power supply            The voltage profile of the network        contributed significantly to
through improvement        significantly improved with all 400       the improved performance
to the distribution        kV and 220 kV substations                 of the transmission system
network                    maintaining a voltage deviation of        in terms of transmission
                           not more than 7.5%, and the               loss reduction, overall
                           voltage deviations exceeding the          network capacity, and
                           stipulated 10% at 132 kV                  voltage and frequency
                           substations limited to less than          stability.
                           two substations.
                           Enhanced the transformation               The new corporate structure
                           capacity in the state from (i) 2,940      for Madhya Pradesh
                                                                     Transco provided
54   Appendix 2



                            MVA in 2002 to 3,885 MVA in          managerial flexibility and
                            2007 at 400 kV level, (ii) 6,770     accountability to enable the
                            MVA in 2002 to 9,650 MVA in          company to effectively
                            2007 at 220 kV level, and (iii)      implement the project and
                            6,950 MVA in 2002 to 11,299.5        achieve significant
                            MVA in 2007 at 132 kV level.         improvement in the
                            Met peak demand of 6,107 MW in       performance of the
                            2007 without any grid                transmission system.
                            disturbances in the system and
                            maintaining the grid frequency       However, improvement in
                            within the 49.0­50.5 hertz (Hz)      the distribution subsector
                            range for 89.83% of FY2007.          was not as significant as
                            Increased transmission system        that in power transmission.
                            availability from below 90% in       Although the investments
                            2002 to 98.96% in 2007.              funded by ADB helped the
                            Aggregate technical and              DISCOMs remove the
                            commercial (ATC) loss levels of      bottlenecks and constraints
                            43.6% at the start of power sector   in the distribution network
                            reforms in 2002 dropped to 34%       caused by under
                            in 2010.                             investments in the
                            DISCOM Central and DISCOM            preceding decade (1990­
                            West have managed to reduce          2000), the investments did
                            ATC losses from 52.9% to 37.1%,      not translate into improved
                            and from 41.2% to 29.3%. ATC         commercial performance in
                            losses in DISCOM East have           terms of significant
                            remained at around 37%.              reduction in ATC losses.
                            The failure rate of distribution     However, commercial
                            transformers dropped from about      losses in the pilot areas
                            22% to 13% in the west and           where the HVDS systems
                            eastern zones, and from about        were installed were virtually
                            25% to 17% in the central zone.      eliminated.
                            The illegal tapping of power has
                            been practically eliminated in the
                            distribution zones where HVDS
                            systems were deployed.
                            As per MPSEB estimates,
                            commercial losses have been
                            reduced from 25% to 8%, and
                            actual losses recorded in the
                            feeders have dropped from about
                            40­45% to 12­18% in the
                            distribution feeders where HVDS
                            was deployed.

Desired Outputs: Program Loan
     Establishment of      Establishment of MPSERC               The financial support
     regulatory            Annual tariff awards by MPSERC        provided by the ADB
     agency and            using transparent mechanism           program in terms of budget
     institution of        Restructuring and reorganization      support provided additional
     regulatory            of MPSEB were satisfactorily          incentives to MPG to
                                                                               Appendix 2      55


     oversight over           completed. Initially MPSEB was       implement the key reform
     tariff setting           unbundled into five successor        measures within the
                              companies consisting of a            agreed-upon time frame.
     Unbundling of            generation company, a                The additional fiscal space
     power sector in          transmission company, and three      provided by the
     Madhya Pradesh           distribution companies.              disbursement of program
                              Payment of Rs7.423 billion in lieu   loan also helped MPG meet
                              of settlement of outstanding dues    part of the adjustment cost
                              from municipalities to MPSEB.        including the settlement of
                                                                   electricity dues of
                                                                   municipalities and other
                                                                   local bodies. There was no
                                                                   strong opposition from
                                                                   stakeholders such as trade
                                                                   unions, and MPG had the
                                                                   political will to undertake the
                                                                   sector reforms to meet the
                                                                   conditions of the program
                                                                   loan.
Desired Outputs: Project Loan
     Increased              (i) Installation of three 315          Financial resources
     transmission           megavolt-ampere (MVA) 400/220          provided by ADB were more
     capacity               kV and five 160 MVA 220/132 kV         than adequate to implement
                            additional transformers, (ii)          the original scope of the
                            construction of 222 kilometers         project. The resultant loan
                            (km) of 220 kV lines and 634 km        savings were utilized to
                            of 132 kV lines, (iii) construction    expand the scope of project
                            of five new 220 kV substations         investments in augmenting
                            and 25 132 kV substations, (iv)        the transmission and
                            construction of four 220 kV feeder     distribution networks.
                            bays, and (v) augmentation of 71
                            132/33 kV substations.                 The project implementation
                            To utilize the loan savings,           capacities of implementing
                            additional works were                  agencies were good and
     Pilot-testing the      undertaken: (i) construction of        they did not require
     HVDS (high-            four 220/132 kV substations and        consultancy support to
     voltage                13 132/33 kV substations, (ii)         implement the project. The
     distribution           augmentation of 132/33 kV              unbundling of distribution
     systems)               substations, and (iii)                 operations of MPSEB into
                            establishment of 647 km of 220         three companies did not
                            kV lines and 446 km of 132 kV          affect project
                            lines.                                 implementation as MPSEB
     Rehabilitation                                                continued to handle the
     and expansion          Conversion of 927 km of low-           procurement of material and
     of distribution        voltage lines to 11 kV lines.          recruitment of contractors.
     network                 Construction of 58 km of new 11       Only the supervision of
                            kV lines.                              contractors was delegated
                             Installation of 5,842 transformers    to the successor entities.
                            of 10 kilovolt-ampere (KVA) and 5
                            KVA capacity in Mandsaur and           The pilot-testing of HVDS
                                                                   undertaken by the project
 56     Appendix 2



                                      Ujjain districts of Madhya                 was successful.
                                      Pradesh.
                                                                                 The revenue management
        Installation of               Construction of (i) 170 33/11 kV           system that was to be
        consumer                      substations and 7,600 11/0.4 kV            funded by the project was
        meters                        substations, and (ii) 1,800 km of          financed using domestic
                                      33 kV lines and 2,095 km of 11             resources and inputs from
                                      kV lines in Bhopal, Gwalior,               the DFID finance
        Institution of a              Indore, Jabalpur, Khargone,                consultants.
        revenue                       Mandsaur, and Ujjain areas.
        management                    Subsequently, to utilize loan
        system                        savings, additional works were
                                      included in October 2004: (i) 112
                                      33/11 kV substations and 1,050
                                      11/0.4 kV substations, and (ii)
                                      1,071 km of 33 kV lines and 858
                                      km of 11 kV lines,.

                                      MPSEB procured 35,273 three-
                                      phase meters, which had been
                                      installed by November 2003

                                      MPSEB requested ADB to delete
                                      this component from ADB
                                      financing as MPSEB intended to
                                      finance it from its own resources.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ATC = aggregate technical and commercial, CIDA = Canadian International
Development agency, DFID = UK Department for International Development, DISCOM = distribution company, HVDS
= high voltage distribution system, kV = kilovolt, KWh = kilowatt hour, MFF = multitranche financing facility, MoU =
memorandum of understanding, MPG = MPGenco = MPSEB = Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, MPSERC =
Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Regulatory Board Commission, MPTranscom = Madhya Pradesh Power
Transmission Company, MW = MVA.
Sources: Independent Evaluation Mission; ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
          Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program. Manila.
        57       Appendix 6


                       COMPARISON OF APPRAISAL AND ACTUAL COST ESTIMATES

                                  Appraisal Estimate              Revised Estimate                      Actual
 A. Project Components        Foreign      Local     Total    Foreign     Local      Total   Foreign     Local      Total
 33 kV and 11 kV Systems
                                 55.80     27.10     82.90      52.50     28.50      81.00      55.20    12.30     67.50
 Improvement
 Conversion of LT lines to
                                  5.30      1.80       7.10       3.90      1.80      5.70       4.10      1.00      5.10
 11 kV
 Transmission
 System                          89.10     29.60    118.70      99.50     54.00    153.50      114.45    18.66    133.11
 Reinforcement

 Computerized
 Information and
                                  7.80      2.00       9.80       7.80      2.00      9.80       0.00      0.00      0.00
 Revenue
 Management System

 Metering                         1.10      0.00       1.10       0.70      0.00      0.70       0.61      0.00      0.61
 Consulting Services             1.80       0.00      1.80       0.00      0.00      0.00        0.00     0.00      0.00
 Subtotal (A)                  160.90      60.50    221.40     164.40     86.30    250.70      174.36    31.96    206.32
 B. Contingencies
 Physical                        15.90      6.00     21.90        7.50      9.10     16.60       0.00      0.00      0.00
 Price                            5.00      8.70     13.70       9.90      9.30      19.20       0.00      0.00      0.00
 Subtotal (B)                    20.90     14.70     35.60      17.40     18.40      35.80       0.00      0.00      0.00
 Front-End Fee                    2.00      0.00       2.00       2.00      0.00      2.00       2.00      0.00      2.00
 Taxes and Duties                 0.00     30.50     30.50        0.00    13.00      13.00       0.00    16.00     16.00
 Interest/Commitment
 Charges during                  16.20     13.20     29.40      16.20     21.10      37.30       2.63    33.10     35.73
 Construction
 Grand Total                   200.00    118.90     318.90     200.00    138.80    338.80      178.99    81.06    260.05
kV = kilovolt, LT = low tension.
Sources: Independent Evaluation Mission; ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors:
          Proposed Loan to India for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program. Manila.
58    Appendix 4


         COMPLIANCE WITH PROGRAM LOAN TRANCHE RELEASE CONDITIONS

                    Condition                         Compliance at the Time of Approval of
                                                               Tranche Release
Prior Actions before Loan Approval

      Establishment of Madhya Pradesh State             Established in June 1999 under the
      Electricity Regulatory Commission                 Electricity Regulatory Commission (ERC)
      (MPSERC) in 1998                                  Act of the Government of India
      Order issued by the government of Madhya          Order issued in October 2001
      Pradesh (MPG) to exempt the Madhya
      Pradesh State Electricity Board (MPSEB)
      from paying electricity duty on its own
      auxiliary consumption
      Notification of the effective date of the         Notified in July 2001
      Madhya Pradesh Reform Act
      Restriction of free power supply to               Restriction of free electricity supply
      residential and agricultural consumers            became effective in January 2001 and
      below poverty line only to those belonging to     large number of residential and
      scheduled caste/scheduled tribe (SC/ST)           agricultural consumers below poverty line
      categories and having consumption below           and receiving free electricity up to then
      25 kWh and 5 hp, respectively                     but did not belong to SC/ST categories
                                                        were disconnected in 2002. In 2003, the
                                                        government decided to provide
                                                        subsidized electricity to non SC/ST
                                                        consumers below the poverty line (BLP)
                                                        and reconnect them with the outstanding
                                                        dues waived on the condition that they
                                                        agree to have a metered connection.
      Submission of comprehensive and                   The plan was submitted in November
      implementable loss reduction plan by              2001. It included undertaking energy
      November 2001                                     auditing at feeder level by installing
                                                        feeder meters.
      MPSEB to allow consumers to pay the               Although this was expected before the
      connection charge in 12 monthly                   loan approval, the order was issued in
      installments                                      May 2002.


1st Tranche Release and Loan Effectiveness
Conditionalities
                                                        The payment of Rs. 3.0 billion was made
     Payment by MPG of R s3.0 billion to MPSEB          in March 2002 and was considered
      as partial settlement of outstanding account      sufficient for declaring the loan effective
      receivables as of March 2001 and payment          and to release the first tranche.
      of total electricity dues between April 2001
      and August 2001
                                                        The Madhya Pradesh Electricity Reform
     The Madhya Pradesh Electricity Reform Act
                                                        Act became effective in July 2001.
      becomes effective
                                                        The first tariff award made in October
                                                                             Appendix 4      59


                                                      2001 increased average HT tariff by
                                                      12.3% and average LT tariff by 18.7%,
                                                      resulting in an overall tariff increase of
    First tariff award by MPSERC                      14.7%

                                                      MPGenco MPTransco, and MPDiscom
                                                      incorporated and registered in November
                                                      2001.However, the final decision
    Incorporation and registration of Madhya          regarding the configuration of distribution
    Pradesh Power Generation Company                  companies was not made at this time.
    Limited (MPGenco), Madhya Pradesh
    Power Transmission Company Limited
    (MPTransco), and Madhya Pradesh Power             MPG made the payment of Rs620 million
    Distribution Company Limited (MP Discom)          for settling of over due payments to
    under Indian Companies Act, 1956.                 MPSEB in accordance with the MOU
                                                      between MPSEB and MPG in November
    MPG and MPSEB agree on all outstanding
                                                      2001.
    dues and cross liabilities.
                                                      Order issued in June 2001. However, it
                                                      was not implemented as intended and
                                                      the receivables from municipalities
    Orders issued by MPG allowing MPSEB to            increased after the settlement of dues as
    disconnect all defaulting municipalities and      of March 2001 using the program loan
    other MPG bodies exceeding payables for           proceeds. As of May 2002, the
    more than the immediately preceding 1             receivables had already increased to 2.1
    month equivalent of sales. This order was         times monthly sales.
    reinforced by MPSERC in its first tariff
    award
                                                      Energy audit meters numbering 7,795
                                                      had been installed and put into operation
2nd Tranche Release Conditionalities                  by July 2002. They represent over 85%
                                                      of medium-voltage feeders.
    Installation of 7,500 33 kV and 11 kV
    feeders by MPSEB for undertaking energy           Boards of directors established on 12
    audit at feeder level.                            September 2002 with 8 directors for
                                                      MPGenco and 6 directors for MPTCL.
    Establishment of board of directors of            The directors were appointed in
    MPGenco and MPTransco including                   accordance with the recommendations of
    majority of experts recruited through open        a selection committee, including 6
    and transparent selection from outside            directors from outside the government
    government services, and representing the         service for MPGenco and 4 directors for
    disciplines of finance, commerce, human           MPTransco.
    resource, corporate planning, and
    information technology                            Decision made in accordance with the
                                                      condition in June 2002 to split MPSEB's
    Decision by MPG on reconfiguration of             distribution unit into three franchises.
    distribution based on, inter alia, the findings
    of the Energy Infrastructure Services Project
    (EISP) study, as mutually agreed upon by
    the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and              This payment had been made by July
    MPG.                                              2002.
    MPG paid in cash Rs2.0 billion as partial
 60    Appendix 4


      settlement of outstanding dues of
      municipalities and other local bodies due as
                                                                A debt restructuring plan was prepared
      of March 2001.
                                                                by Canadian International Development
      MPG submitted to the central government                   Agency (CIDA) consultants. It required
      an approved debt restructuring plan that                  substantial fiscal transfer of around Rs10
      MPG and ADB agreed on.                                    billion per year during 2003­2005 before
                                                                MPSEB could reach cash breakeven by
                                                                2006. The plan included restructuring of
                                                                existing debts and transfer of outstanding
                                                                liabilities to central utilities to MPG.
                                                                However, MPG had not accepted that at
                                                                the time of release of the second tranche.
                                                                MPSEB filed the second tariff in May
                                                                2002, a 48% increase for LT consumers
      MPSEB submitted a second tariff                           and 4% increase for HT consumers,
      application to MPSERC.                                    resulting in an overall increase of 24%.


                                                                Three distribution companies were
                                                                incorporated and registered on 16 July
 3rd Tranche Release Conditions
                                                                2002.
      Incorporation and registration of new                     An asset and liability transfer scheme
      distribution companies under Indian                       was prepared with assistance from CIDA
      Companies Act, 1956                                       and DFID. An ADB technical assistance
      Finalization of transfer scheme                           for developing a personnel transfer
                                                                scheme was approved in October 2002.
                                                                However, implementation of the transfer
                                                                scheme of liabilities and staff took more
                                                                than 3 years after the release of the third
                                                                tranche.
                                                                The transfer of assets to 5 successor
      Transfer of MPSEB assets to MPGenco,                      companies was completed in July 2003.
      MPTransco, and at least one of the newly
      incorporated distribution companies, in
      accordance with the transfer scheme(s)
      Filing of Third Tariff Application before                 The third tariff application was submitted
      MPSERC                                                    in July 2003.
      Payment of Rs2.423 billion by MGP for full                This payment was made in July 2003.
      settlement of outstanding electricity dues of
      municipalities and other local bodies as of
      March 2001
Sources: Independent Evaluation Mission; ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
         Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program. Manila; ADB.
         2008. Completion Report.
                                     COMPLIANCE WITH LOAN COVENANTS

                       Covenant                          Reference in                 Status of Compliance
                                                       Loan Documents
     Program Loan

     Implementation   Arrangements   and   Executing
     Agency

1.      (a) The State shall be responsible for the Program Loan LA       Complied with and the state had set up a steering
        coordination and execution of the Program Schedule 5, clause     committee chaired by the chief secretary of the
        with the various concerned ministries and 1 (a)                  state with principal secretaries for finance, power,
        agencies of the State.                                           law and planning as members to oversee the
                                                      Program Loan LA    implementation of the reform program.
        (b) Without limiting the generality of the Schedule 5, clause
        foregoing clause, the Energy Department and 1 (b)
        Finance Department of the State shall be the
        Program Executing Agencies and shall be
        responsible for implementation and monitoring
        of the Program.

     Loan Proceeds and Counterpart Funds

2.   The Borrower shall transfer the Counterpart Funds Program Loan LA   Additional allocations had been made to Madhya
     generated under the Loan, under the normal Schedule 5, clause       Pradesh in fiscal years 2001/02, 2002/03, and
     arrangements for transfer of external assistance to 2               2003/04, respectively by the central government
     the State and shall treat such Counterpart Funds                    to cover the adjustment cost of reforms including
     as additional to its transfers allocated annually to                the payment of outstanding electricity dues of
     the State.                                                          municipalities.

3.   The Borrower shall ensure that the Counterpart Program Loan LA      During 2001­2003 the government of Madhya
     Funds are used by the State to finance the Schedule 5, clause       Pradesh (MPG) incurred (i) Rs7.42 billion for
     adjustment costs associated with the Program, 3                     municipal dues, (ii) Rs350 million for




                                                                                                                                Appendix 5
     satisfactory to ADB for this purpose and shall, in                  rationalization of electricity dues, (iii) Rs620
     particular,     provide     necessary     budget                    million for set-off of cross-liabilities between
     appropriations in support of the financial                          Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board




                                                                                                                                61
                                                                                                                                     62
                                                                                                                                     Appendix 5
                         Covenant                            Reference in                 Status of Compliance
                                                           Loan Documents
     restructuring of MPSEB including (i) payment of                        (MPSEB) and MPG, (iv) Rs6.75 billion for set-off
     outstanding municipality and other local and State                     on dues on market borrowings, and (v) Rs17.5
     Bodies' due owed to MPSEB; (ii) rationalization of                     billion for reduction of debt obligations of MPSEB.
     electricity duty; (iii) set-offs on dues of market
     borrowing of MPSEB to the State; (iv) set-off cross
     liabilities between the State and MPSEB; and (v)
     reduction of debt obligation of MPSEB.

     Budgetary Allocations

     The Borrower shall cause the State to ensure that Program Loan LA      MPG had made budgetary allocations of Rs1.8
4.   sufficient budgetary allocations are made in a Schedule 5 clause       billion, Rs1.06 billion, and Rs1.25 billion in fiscal
     timely manner for the efficient and timely 4,                          years     2001/02,     2002/03,   and      2003/04,
     implementation of the Program.                                         respectively, to the power sector. The debt
                                                                            restructuring    of     power   sector     liabilities
                                                                            implemented in 2005 was carried out through
                                                                            issuance of government bonds to the creditors to
                                                                            MPSEB in settlement of MPSEB liabilities. The
                                                                            servicing cost of these bonds is charged to the
                                                                            annual budget.
     Policy Actions

5.   The Borrower and the State shall ensure that all Program Loan LA       The supply of free electricity to single-point
     policies adopted and actions taken prior to the Schedule 5, clause     connection     (below   25     kWh)     residential
     date of this Loan Agreement, as described in the 5                     consumers and agricultural consumers with less
     Policy Letter and Policy Matrix, shall continue to                     than 5 hp pumps was restricted to consumers
     be in effect for at least the duration of the                          belonging to scheduled caste (SC)/ scheduled
     Program.                                                               tribes (ST) in 2001 as a prior action. As a result,
                                                                            large numbers of agricultural and residential
                                                                            consumers were disconnected in 2002. However,
                                                                            this was changed in 2003 when the government
                                                                            decided to reconnect the disconnected
                                                                            consumers and waive off the past areas, on the
                                                                            condition that they agree to have metered
                       Covenant                        Reference in                    Status of Compliance
                                                     Loan Documents
                                                                         connections. It was also decided to provide
                                                                         electricity to non SC/ST consumers below the
                                                                         poverty line at a discounted price and for MPG to
                                                                         bear the cost of subsidy. Set-off of arrears
                                                                         against free supply to agricultural consumers
                                                                         (during Jan 01 to Dec 03) was Rs5 billion in
                                                                         2004-05 and Rs12.8 billion in 2005-06 (total-
                                                                         Rs17.8 billion).


     Sector Reforms

6.   The Borrower shall take timely steps in the Program Loan LA         On 15. Nov 2000 the government of Chhattisgarh
     resolution of issues relating to (i) the final Schedule 5, clause   went ahead and created the Chhattisgarh State
     allocation of assets and liabilities of MPSEB and 6                 Electricity Board (CSEB). CSEB gained control of
     the CSEB; (ii) the revenue collected by the CSEB                    the assets, rights and revenues of Chhattisgarh
     for the period 1 December 2000 to 15 April 2001l                    region without accepting corresponding liabilities
     and (iii) allocation of surplus power from the CSEB                 and ignoring the Government of India agreed-
     and central sector utilities to MPSEB.                              upon date of 14th April 2001 as the date for
                                                                         segregation (as per Government of India Order of
                                                                         12th April 2001). Consequently, MPSEB was
                                                                         formed on 1st Jan 2001

                                                                         Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (MPEB) still
                                                                         exists with the undivided assets and liabilities.
                                                                         Audited and undisputed opening balances for the
                                                                         liabilities will be settled only after the settlement
                                                                         of the litigations pending in the Supreme Court of
                                                                         India.

7.   The State and MPSEB shall review with ADB the Program Loan LA       The recommendations of the EISP-funded




                                                                                                                                 Appendix 5
     recommendations of the EISP study and other Schedule 5, clause      consultants were subsequently refined with the
     technical assistance, towards the restructuring of 7                assistance of DFID-funded consultants and
     its power sector for its long-term administrative,                  extensively discussed with ADB and other




                                                                                                                                 63
                                                                                                                               64
                                                                                                                               Appendix 5
                           Covenant                        Reference in                  Status of Compliance
                                                         Loan Documents
      financial,     and   economic     viability, for                      stakeholders prior to implementation.
      implementation thereof and      in a manner
      satisfactory to ADB.

8.    The Borrower and the State shall assist in Program Loan LA Following the unbundling of MPSEB, five power
      expediting issue of due permits and licenses for Schedule 5, clause sector companies were incorporated: Madhya
      the effective functioning of the successor entities 8               Pradesh Power Generating Company Limited
      of MPSEB as required by law.                                        (Genco), Madhya Pradesh Power Transmission
                                                                          Company Limited (Transco),            and three
                                                                          distribution companies (DISCOMs2). Genco has
                                                                          been vested with Madhya Pradesh's electricity
                                                                          generation assets and has taken over their
                                                                          operation. Transco has become the sole
                                                                          transmission company in the state. The three
                                                                          DISCOMs have taken over the distribution and
                                                                          supply activities in three geographic areas (east,
                                                                          central, and west). In June 2005, the companies
                                                                          started to operate independently. The formation
                                                                          of the Madhya Pradesh Power Trading Company
                                                                          Limited (Tradeco) for the bulk procurement of
                                                                          electricity from generators in order to sell to
                                                                          DISCOMs was announced in June 2006. All
                                                                          power purchase agreements for which MPSEB
                                                                          was the purchasing counterparty have been
                                                                          transferred to Tradeco.
9.    The State shall ensure that MPSEB, or its Program Loan LA Metering in 2006 for domestic consumers was
      successor entities carry out meeting of all end Schedule 5, clause 78%; this increased to 82% in 2009. For
      consumers in the State, in a phased manner, for 9                   agricultural consumers, metering was 11%; this
      completion with four years from the Effective Date.                 increased to 20% in 2009.

      Transfer Scheme(s)

10.      (a) The State shall ensure that its power Program Loan LA The employee transfer to the utilities was delayed
             sector reforms and the preparation of the Schedule 5, clause due to the dispute over transfer of employees
                          Covenant                          Reference in                  Status of Compliance
                                                          Loan Documents
             Transfer Scheme(s) are undertaken with 10                       between MPSEB and Chatisgarh SEB, after the
             full information and participation of all                       bifurcation of the state. After this issue has been
             stakeholders including but not limited to,                      resolved, the employees of MPSEB has been
             consumers, utilities, employees and unions                      transferred to the respective companies vide
             of    MPSEB,       and    nongovernmental                       state government order 30 November 2010.
             organizations. In doing so, the State shall
             also ensure that such participation includes
             information to stakeholders, procuring
             feedback on the same.
         (b) Recommendations of employees transfer
             under the Transfer Scheme(s) shall be in
             full participation and consultation of all
             affected, in accordance with the applicable
             laws and regulations of the Borrower State.

      Administrative Reforms

11.   Within a period of fifteen months from the Effective Program Loan LA   The chief managing directors (CMDs) for the
      Date, the State shall ensure that majority of the Schedule 5, clause   distribution companies were appointed through
      officers in the senior management of MPGenco, 11                       an open competition by the selection committee
      MPTransco, and one of the distribution                                 as provided under the Electricity Reform.. The
      companies, are recruited through open and                              CMDs of Transco, Genco, and Tradeco are from
      competitive selection process by the board of                          MPSEB's technical cadre and the current CMDs
      directors of the respective companies.                                 of all three DISCOMs are from Indian
                                                                             Administration Service (IAS).. Most of the other
                                                                             senior staff members are from the erstwhile
                                                                             MPSEB.
12.   Financial Reforms

      The State shall make timely and adequate Program Loan LA
      budgetary appropriations to meet its subsidy and Schedule 5, clause




                                                                                                                                   Appendix 5
      subvertion payments so as to ensure that all dues 12
      are paid in cash to MPSEB and other utilities
      within not more than six (6) months of the raising




                                                                                                                                   65
                                                                                                                             66
                                                                                                                             Appendix 5
                          Covenant                          Reference in               Status of Compliance
                                                          Loan Documents
      of the claim by MPSEB and other utilities.

13.      (a) The State shall make timely and adequate Program Loan LA This has been complied with.
               budgetary appropriations to meet its Schedule 5, clause
               rural electrification subsidy/subvention 13
               payments based on the MOU.

         (b) The State shall continue to make timely                       There was a onetime settlement of municipal
               and adequate budgetary appropriations                       dues in 2002. However, since then the municipal
               to meet MPSEB's balance of receivables                      dues have been accumulating in the balance
               (excluding past due till 31 August 2001)                    sheets, with occasional set-offs against the
               from municipalities and other local and                     receivables of MPG.
               State bodies/authorities so as not to
               exceed the immediately preceding one
               month's equivalent of sales at any time
               with effect from 1 January 2002.

      Program Implementation and Benefit Monitoring     Program Loan LA
                                                        Schedule 5, clause
14.      (a) The State and MPSEB shall undertake 14                        This has been complied with as MPG cooperated
             together with ADB, periodic reviews during                    with Asian Development Bank (ADB) review
             the program implementation, to evaluate                       missions and provided all relevant information
             the scope, implementation arrangements,                       ADB required.
             progress and achievement of the
             objectives of the Program in accordance
             with     ADB's     Project    Performance
             Management Systems Handbook.
         (b) For the purposes of clause (a) of this
             paragraph, MPSEB shall set up the
             Program Implementation and Benefit
             Monitoring Unit (BMU) within three months
             of Effective Date. Responsibilities of BMU
             shall additionally include monitoring of
             impact of the reforms under the Program
                           Covenant                          Reference in   Status of Compliance
                                                           Loan Documents
            on end-consumers, particularly those
            below the poverty line. Using consulting
            services BMU will undertake an in-depth
            qualitative and quantitative assessment of
            the impacts of the Program on end-
            consumers.

2.   Project Loan

     Project Execution and Implementation


     The Project Management Unit (PMU) established
     in May 2001 by MPSEB and headed by a senior
     MPSEB officer shall implement and supervise the
     project.

3.      (a) MPSEB shall expand the staff strength of
            the PMU to correspond with the increased
            workload under the project. Except for
            exceptional organizational requirements,
            the staff assigned to the PMU shall be
            retained for the entire duration of the
            project implementation in the PMU and any
            vacancy in the PMU shall be filed before
            such vacancy is made effective.
        (b) The PMU shall be delegated the powers of
            decision    making    and     accountability
            allowing MPSEB's field units to be directly
            responsible for supervision of Project
            Parts.




                                                                                                   Appendix 5
     Consulting services




                                                                                                   67
                                                                                                                                 68
                                                                                                                                 Appendix 5
                          Covenant                            Reference in                Status of Compliance
                                                            Loan Documents
4.    MPSEB shall engage under its own financing,                            (i) Consultants for Part D for benefit monitoring
      domestic consultants to (i) implement Part D of the                    were appointed in May 2004 and they submitted
      project, within four months of Effective Date; and                     the final report to MPSEB on April 2006.
      (ii) to carry out the Benefit Monitoring of the
      Project and the Program in accordance with
      paragraph 8 of this Schedule and paragraph 14 of
      the Program Loan Agreement.

      Environmental Issues

15.      (a) Within four months of Effective Date,                           Within 2 months of loan effectiveness, MPSEB
             MPSEB shall establish a fully functional                        established the Social and Environmental
             social and environmental management cell                        Management Unit in May 2002. This unit has
             to the satisfaction of ADB.                                     been adequately staffed.
         (b) The State and MPSEB shall ensure that                           Complied with.
             the Project is undertaken and al Project
             facilities operated and maintained, in
             compliance with all applicable laws, rules
             and regulations of the Borrower and the
             State, and the Environmental Assessment
             Requirements of ADB. All transformers and
             capacitors purchased under the Project
             shall be Poly-Chlorinated Biphenyls-free
             and this requirement shall be included in
             the bid documents. MPSEB shall ensure
             that all environmental clearances are
             obtained from the relevant statutory
             authorities of the Borrower, the State and
             all environmental mitigation measures set
             forth     in   the    initial Environmental
             Examination is undertaken during Project
             Implementation.
         (c) MPSEB shall provide ADB annual reports
             on the monitoring results, permits, licenses                    The project file maintained by South Asia
                         Covenant                              Reference in               Status of Compliance
                                                             Loan Documents
            and clearances obtained for the project. In                       Department (SARD) does not contain such an
            case any violation of laws and standards                          annual monitoring report.
            cited, the report shall also include
            certification from the relevant authority that
            such violation has been cured or an
            acceptable plan for correction thereof has
            been approved.

     Land Acquisition

6.   MPSEB shall ensure that in case of any specific                          The land acquisition and compensation
     land acquisition under the project, the (i) Land                         framework was submitted in July 2002 to ADB.
     Acquisition and Compensation Plan (where there                           The same framework was used for land
     is no settlement), and (ii) the Land Acquisition and                     acquisition for the additional works approved in
     Resettlement Framework (where there is                                   2004.
     resettlement), for the various subprojects as
     agreed upon with ADB, are implemented and due
     compensation is paid to those affected in
     accordance with ADB's Involuntary Resettlement
     Policy and ADB's Handbook on Resettlement,
     1998 as amended from time to time.

     Progress Review

7.   ADB shall review the implementation and                                  Complied with.
     operation of the project based on the reports
     provided and meet with the Borrower, the State
     and MPSEB semi-annually to review the Project
     progress.

     Program Implementation and Benefit Monitoring




                                                                                                                                 Appendix 5
8.      (a) Without limiting the generality of                                Complied with.
            paragraph 7 of this Schedule, the State




                                                                                                                                 69
                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                                                             Appendix 5
                        Covenant                             Reference in               Status of Compliance
                                                           Loan Documents
            and MPSEB shall undertake together with
            ADB, periodic reviews during the project
            implementation, to evaluate the scope,
            implementation arrangements, progress
            and achievements of the objectives of the
            Project in accordance with ADB's Project
            Performance        Management        System
            Handbook.
        (b) For the purposes of clause (a) of this
            paragraph, MPSEB shall set up a Project
            Implementation and Benefit Monitoring Unit
            (BMU) within three months of Effective
            Date. Responsibilities of BMU shall
            additionally include monitoring of impact of
            the    Project    components     on    end-
            consumers, particularly those below the
            poverty line (the blue-card holders as
            issued by the State). Using consulting
            services BMU will undertake an in-depth
            qualitative and quantitative assessment of
            the impacts of the Project on end-
            consumers.

     Social Issues

9.   The State and MPSEB shall allow all end-                               The consumers are billed as per the regulatory
     consumers below the poverty line (the blue card                        guidelines on the supply code.
     holders as issued by the State) to make their
     payments for electricity connection charges
     including up-front charges associated with
     electricity connections in twelve monthly
     installments.

     Assessments with successor entities of MPSEB
                                    Covenant                                Reference in                         Status of Compliance
                                                                          Loan Documents

             Owing to the functional segregation of the MPSEB                                     Complied with.
             under the Program, if at any time in the interest of
             proper implementation of the Project it is found
             necessary by ADB, the State and MPSEB,
             MPSEB shall transfer its rights obligations under
             this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement to
             its successor entities as required, with prior
             approval of and on such terms, conditions and
             arrangements as acceptable to ADB, whereof
             such successor entities, shall be deemed to be
             substituted for MPSEB for the purpose of this Loan
             Agreement and Project Agreement.
Sources: Independent Evaluation Mission; ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the
          Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program. Manila; ADB. 2008. Completion Report.




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 5
                                                                                                                                                           71
72     Appendix 6


                    EX POST ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSES

A.     Economic Assessment

1.      Ex-post economic and financial analyses were carried out for the project loan. The
project loan consisted of six components, but economic analysis was undertaken only for
component A (distribution improvement), component B (conversion of selected distribution
feeders to 11 kV), and component C (transmission improvement). Component D (revenue
management system) and component F (project implementation support) were not financed
by ADB, and component E (installation of 3-phase meters) does not have identifiable
economic benefits. Hence, these components were not included in the ex post economic and
financial analyses.

       1.      Quantification of Economic Benefits

2.      Component A. This component was designed to reduce bottlenecks and network
constraints in the medium-voltage network caused by underinvestment in the previous
decade. Component A (i) increased the capacity of the medium-voltage (33 kV and 11 kV)
distribution network to cater to increasing consumer demand; (ii) improved the quality of the
power supply by reducing feeder lengths to improve the voltage profile; and (iii) increased the
number of substations, reduced the length of low-voltage (LV) lines, and reduced the
technical losses in the distribution network. Although economic benefits occurred from project
outcomes (i) and (ii), only the economic benefits attributable to (iii) are considered for ex post
economic analysis as a conservative way of estimating the economic benefits. It was difficult
to quantify the economic benefits associated with (ii) (improved quality of supply). The
economic benefits associated with (i) (increased network capacity) were also not considered
because increased network capacity alone would not result in economic benefits in the
absence of a corresponding increase in generation and transmission capacity.

3.      As ADB financing to expand the distribution network was combined with funding from
the central government's Accelerated Power Development and Reform Program (APDRP)
and both projects were implemented concurrently, it is difficult to attribute economic benefits
(reduction in technical losses) to either the ADB-financed or APDRP-financed investments.
Hence, the economic benefits (reduction in technical losses) attributable to overall investment
in the distribution sector, for which ADB had financed a significant share, were considered for
economic analysis. The pro rata share of these economic benefits based on the proportion of
the overall investment in distribution financed by this project was used for computing the
economic internal rate of return (EIRR).

4.      For the purpose of ex post economic analysis, only the reduction in technical losses
was considered (Table A6.1) because electricity sales lost due to commercial losses could
still be utilized for useful economic activities. Although no precise data were available
regarding the extent of technical losses as a proportion of total losses, it was conservatively
assumed that the technical losses were 40% of the total distribution losses in 2002 and
commercial losses in terms of gigawatt-hours (GWh) did not increase during 2002­2007. As
the total energy consumption increased during 2002­2007, the implication is that the share of
commercial losses as a proportion of total electricity sales decreased during that period.

5.     It was further assumed that distribution losses as a percentage of energy inflow to the
network increased in the absence of any investments at the same rate as the increase in the
energy inflow to the network.
                                                                               Appendix 6        73



     Table A6.1: Quantification of Technical Loss Reduction due to Component A

 L                                                                        2002            2007
 Total distribution losses (%) in Madhya Pradesh                           38.6             32.1
 Total energy inflow to distribution network (GWh)                       27,083           35,148
 Total distribution losses (GWh)                                         10,454           11,282
 Commercial losses (60% of total distribution losses in 2002)             6,272            6,272
 Technical losses (GWh)                                                   4,182            5,010
 Technical losses as % of electricity sales                               15.44            14.25
 Technical losses (%) in the absence of network investments               15.44            18.38
 Technical losses in the absence of network investments (GWh)             4,182            6,460
 Reduction in distribution losses (GWh)                                           1,450
 Total investment in distribution network, 2002­2007 (Rs million)
    - ADB-financed project                                                        3,040
    - APDRP Project                                                               1,307
 Technical loss reduction attributable to ADB-financed project                    1,014
 (GWh)
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ARDRP = Accelerated Power Development and Reform Program, GWh =
gigawatt hour.
Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.

6.     Component B. Component B primarily aimed to reduce the commercial and
technical losses associated with electricity distribution in rural areas by converting LV feeders
and installing small distribution transformers for each agricultural consumer. The commercial
losses (electricity theft) were virtually eliminated (Table A6.2) by preventing illegal
connections to the LV network, and the technical losses were reduced because technical
losses were lower in medium-voltage feeders than in LV feeders.

     Table A6.2: Quantification of Technical Loss Reduction due to Component B

                                                                            2002          2007
   Total distribution losses in feeders converted to HVDS (%)               55.0         15.0
    Commercial losses (%)                                                   33.0          2.0
   Technical losses (%)                                                     22.0         13.0
   Energy sales of feeders converted to HVDS (GWh)                          33.0         42.6
   Energy losses due to technical losses (GWh)                               9.3          6.4
   Technical losses in the absence of HVDS (%)                              22.0         28.3
   Energy losses due to technical losses in the absence of HVDS              9.3         16.0
   (GWh)
   Technical loss reduction attributable to the investment (GWh)                   9.6
 GWH = gigawatt hour, HVDS = high voltage distribution system.
 Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.

7.      Component C. This component was designed to expand the capacity of the
transmission network by increasing the 400/220 kilovolt (kV), 220/132 kV, and 132/33 kV
substations and increasing the coverage of the 220 kV and 132 kV networks. While these
improvements improved the voltage profile, network stability. and availability, the quantifiable
benefits were due to the reduction in transmission losses. The transmission losses as a
percentage of energy inflow dropped from 7.93% in 2002 to 4.09% in 2007 (Table A6.3) It is
estimated that without the transmission investments funded by ADB, the losses would have
reached 11% by 2007.
74       Appendix 6



      Table A6.3: Quantification of Technical Loss Reduction due to Component C

                                                                        2002       2007
      Transmission losses(%)                                              7.93       4.09
      Transmission losses in the absence of investments (%)                 7.9        11
      Energy flow (GWh)                                                 27,083     35,148
      Transmission losses (GWh)                                          2,332      1,499
      Transmission losses in the absence of investments (GWh)            2,332      3,905
      Reduction in technical losses (GWh)                                     2,406
     GWh = gigawatt hour.
     Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.


8.     It was also conservatively assumed that the reduction in transmission/distribution
losses as a result of ADB-financed investments would be frozen at the levels achieved in
2007 for the rest of the lifetime of network investments, as any further increase in electricity
flows would require additional investments to achieve further reduction in
transmission/distribution losses.

        2.       Valuation of Economic Benefits

9.      The reduction of distribution losses due to the ADB investments in the project results
in economic benefits. Madhya Pradesh had been suffering from electricity shortages, and any
electricity saved due to reduction in losses would have resulted in the reduction of unserved
electricity. It is likely that part of the reduction in unserved energy would have resulted in
nonincremental energy consumption to replace captive power generation by industries and
the use of diesel generators by commercial consumers, as well as incremental energy
consumption by industrial, commercial, as well as residential consumers due to increased
availability of electricity and increased household connections due to the expanded
distribution network.

10. As per ADB's guidelines for economic analysis, incremental benefits needed to be
valued at the consumer's willingness to pay and the non-incremental benefits by replacement
cost. The consumer's willingness to pay is likely to be much higher than the prevailing tariff
as proven by several studies undertaken in India and elsewhere. The cost of generating
electricity using captive power plants and small diesel generators is in the range of Rs10­12
per kWh and higher than the prevailing electricity tariffs. Hence, as a conservative measure,
the economic benefits due to reduction in transmission and distribution losses were valued at
the average electricity tariff of 2007 applicable to different consumer categories. As a further
conservative measure, it was assumed that there would not be an increase in electricity tariff
in real terms after 2007 and the tariff would remain constant in real terms. Table A6.4 shows
the 2007 electricity tariffs for different consumer categories used for valuing the economic
benefits.
                                                                                         Appendix 6     75




 Table A6.4: Average Electricity Tariffs and Energy Consumption of Various Consumer
                                       Categories

  Consumer Category              Average Tariff               Energy              % of Consumption
                                   ( Rs/kWh)                Consumption
                                                               (GWh)
 Domestic                                3.36                   3,915                          20.3
 Agricultural                            2.39                   6,341                          32.8
 Low voltage                             4.72                   1,905                           9.9
 Commercial/Industry
 High-voltage industry                   4.56                      7,148                       37.0
GWh = gigawatt hour, kWh = kilowatt hour.
Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.

         3.       Economic Costs

 11.     Economic analysis was carried out using the world price numeraire. The economic
 costs were derived from the financial costs by deducting taxes and duties. The costs were
 separated into foreign exchange and local currency costs. Local costs were further separated
 and a specific conversion factor of 0.85 was used for unskilled labor. The remaining local
 costs were converted to border price level by applying a standard conversion factor of 0.9.
 Annual operating and maintenance costs were also calculated in economic prices as a
 percentage of the total capital investment cost. The financial cost in the project completion
 report (PCR) was used as the basis for deriving the economic cost of the project.

 12.    A summary of the economic analysis of the three project components is given in
 Table A6.5.

      Table A6.5: Summary of the Economic Analysis of Three Project Components

                                                       EIRR (%) at         EIRR (%) at       EIRR (%) at
                                                          RRP                 PCR               PPER
 Component A : 33 kV and 11 kV                              29.3               23.6              46.6
 network rehabilitation
 Component B : Conversion of selected                       16.8               15.1               8.5
 LV feeders to 11 kV
 Component C : Reinforcing and                              25.3               24.0              48.0
 augmenting 220 kV and 132 kV
 transmission system
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, PCR = project completion report, PPER = program performance
evaluation report, kV = kilovolt, LV = low voltage, RRP = report and recommendation of the president.
Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.

 13.     The recalculated EIRRs for components A and C in the project performance
 evaluation report (PPER) exceeded the estimates in the report and recommendation of the
 President (RRP) and the PCR. In the RRP and the PCR, a share (10%) of the incremental
 electricity sales was considered as attributable to the contribution from the reduction of
 distribution and transmission losses respectively. This approach is methodologically flawed
76      Appendix 6


as it is not correct to apportion a share of incremental sales to technical loss reduction
because there is no relationship between the share of incremental sales considered for
economic benefits and the technical loss reduction brought about by the project investments.
Due to the arbitrary nature of this approach, the incremental sales attributed to loss reduction
are underestimated and result in lower EIRR estimates.

14.    In the PPER, a more robust methodology for quantifying the reduction in technical
losses with and without the project investments was used. The incremental sales were
assumed equal to the technical loss reduction achieved.

B.       Financial Assessment

15.     For the financial assessment, a methodology consistent with the economic
assessment was used. For components A and C, the incremental sales were assumed to
arise from the reduction in technical losses as the investments funded by the project were not
meant to reduce commercial losses. Hence, incremental sales attributable to ADB-financed
investments were equal to the incremental electricity sales shown in Table A6.6. However,
these incremental sales were valued at the net realized per unit of electricity injected to the
transmission system as against the electricity tariff used in economic analysis.

16.       For component B, however, conversion of rural LV feeders to 11 kV resulted in virtual
elimination of commercial losses and significant reduction in technical losses. Hence, the
financial losses arising from reduction in both commercial and technical losses were taken into
account in the financial analysis of component B. 17.This is to account for the high degree of
electricity losses and collection and billing inefficiencies because only a portion of electricity
losses avoided resulted in financial revenues to MPSEB. The financial cost of capital
expenditure is used for the financial analysis. Table A6.7 is a summary of the financial
analysis.

           Table A6.6: Quantification of Incremental Sales due to Component B

                                                                       2002             2007
Total distribution losses in the feeders converted to HVDS             55               15
(%)
Energy sales of the feeders converted to HVDS (GWh)                     33              42.6
Aggregate commercial and technical losses (GWh)                         40.3             7.5
Incremental sales due to aggregate commercial and                               32.8
technical loss reduction (GWh)
GWh = gigawatt hour, HVDS = high voltage distribution system.
Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                             Appendix 6        77


                            Table A6.7: Summary of Financial Analysis

                                                   FIRR (%) at RRP           FIRR (%) at          FIRR (%) at
                                                                                PCR                  PPER
Component A : 33 kV and 11 kV                                  15.5               14.5                 32.8
network rehabilitation
Component B : Conversion of selected                           10.3                 10.0                20.3
LV feeders to 11 kV
Component C: Reinforcing and                                   23.8                 11.1                36.6
augmenting 220 kV and 132 kV
transmission system
FIRR = financial internal rate of return, kV = kilovolt, LV = low voltage, PCR = project completion report, PPER =
program performance evaluation report.
Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.

18.    The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) was compared with the weighted average
cost of capital (WACC) to ascertain the financial viability of the project. The project was
financed by an ADB loan and domestic debt. The ADB loan was provided to MPSEB in the
form of a local currency loan by the government of India at an interest rate of 10.6% and the
domestic debt was raised at an interest rate of 11%. The computation of the WACC is shown
in Table A6.8.

                           Table A6.8: Weighted Average Cost of Capital

                                           Amount ( RS,          Interest           Interest         Weighted
                                             million)            Cost (%)           Cost (%)         Interest
                                                                before Tax          after Tax        Cost (%)
Asian Development Bank loan                      5,689             10.6                 7.4             6.12
Domestic commercial loan                         1,190             11                   7.7             1.33
Weighted average cost of capital                                                                        7.45
Source: Estimated of Independent Evaluation Mission.

19.     The FIRR of components A and C were lower than the EIRR, but significantly
exceeded the WACC and can be considered financially viable. The FIRR was lower than the
EIRR because a certain proportion of the incremental electricity sales arising from technical
loss reduction attributable to project-financed investments did not translate into electricity
sales because there was a high degree of commercial losses. However, the FIRR for
component B exceeded the EIRR because financial benefits resulting from reduction in both
commercial and technical losses after converting LV feeders to 11 kV feeders exceeded the
economic benefits where only the technical loss reduction was considered. It can be deduced
that component B had higher financial than societal benefits to the utility as it reduced
electricity theft and pilferage, and components A and C had lower financial than economic
benefits because of the prevalence of electricity theft.
