Performance Evaluation Report




Project Number: 37905
Equity Investment Number: 7192
November 2006




India: Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal Project




  Operations Evaluation Department
                 CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

             Currency Unit ­ Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)

                 At Appraisal                  At Operations Evaluation
             (15 December 2003)                     (15 May 2006)
Re1.00   =          $0.02                                $0.02
 $1.00   =         Rs47.00                             Rs45.00



                      ABBREVIATIONS

    ADB      ­    Asian Development Bank
    APM      ­    administered pricing mechanism
    BPCL     ­    Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
    CAPEX    ­    capital expenditure
    CIF      ­    cost, insurance, freight
    CNG      ­    compressed natural gas
    CO2      ­    carbon dioxide
    CPCL     ­    Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited
    CSP      ­    country strategy and program
    DMP      ­    disaster management plan
    EIA      ­    environmental impact assessment
    EIRR     ­    economic internal rate of return
    EPC      ­    engineering, procurement, and construction
    ERP      ­    emergency response plan
    FIRR     ­    financial internal rate of return
    FOB      ­    free on board
    GAIL     ­    GAIL (India) Limited
    GDF      ­    Gaz de France
    GDFI     ­    GDF International
    GE       ­    General Electric
    GIDC     ­    Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation
    GMB      ­    Gujarat Maritime Board
    GPCB     ­    Gujarat Pollution Control Board
    GSPA     ­    gas sales and purchase agreement
    GTG      ­    gas turbine generators
    HBJ      ­    Hazira­Bijaypur­Jadgishpur
    IGL      ­    Indraprastha Gas Limited
    IHI      ­    Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Company Limited
    IOC      ­    Indian Oil Corporation Limited
    IPO      ­    initial public offering
    ISO      ­    International Standards Organization
    JCC      ­    Japan crude oil cocktail
    JV       ­    joint venture
    KG       ­    Krishna Godavari
    LNG      ­    liquefied natural gas
    MGL      ­    Mahanagar Gas Limited
    MOEF     ­    Ministry of Environment and Forests
    MOPNG    ­    Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
    MSEB     ­    Maharashtra State Electricity Board
NELP     ­   New Exploration Policy
NOx      ­   nitrogen oxides
O&M      ­   operation and maintenance
OCR      ­   ordinary capital resources
OEM      ­   Operations Evaluation Mission
OIL      ­   Oil India Limited
OISD     ­   Oil Industry Safety Directorate
ONGC     ­   Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
PCG      ­   partial credit guarantee
PLL      ­   Petronet LNG Limited
PPER     ­   project performance evaluation report
PPP      ­   public-private partnership
PSD      ­   private sector development
PSOD     ­   Private Sector Operations Department
Rasgas   ­   Ras Laffan Liquefied Natural Gas Company Limited
RIL      ­   Reliance Industries Limited
RRP      ­   report and recommendation of the President
SCV      ­   standard combustion vaporizer
SO2      ­   sulfur dioxide
SPA      ­   sales and purchase agreement
SPM      ­   suspended particulate matter
STV      ­   shell and tube vaporizer
TA       ­   technical assistance
USEPA    ­   US Environmental Protection Agency
WACC     ­   weighted average cost of capital
                                   WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

              BBL            ­      barrel
              BCM            ­      billion cubic meter
              km             ­      kilometer
              m3             ­      cubic meter
              mg/N m3        ­      milligrams per normal cubic meter
              MMBTU          ­      million British thermal unit
              MMSCMD         ­      million standard cubic meters per day
              MMT            ­      million metric ton
              MMTPA          ­      million metric ton per annum
              MW             ­      megawatt
              ppm            ­      parts per million
              SCM            ­      standard cubic meters
              TCF            ­      trillion cubic feet



                                               NOTES

       (i)     The fiscal year (FY) of Petronet LNG Limited ends on 31 March.

       (ii)    In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                       Keywords
Asian Development Bank, Dahej Indian gas sector, liquefied natural gas, Petronet LNG public-
private partnership




Director General         B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director                 R. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

Team leader              B. Finlayson, Senior Evaluation Specialist, OED
Team members             J. Dimayuga, Evaluation Officer, OED
                         R. Perez, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant, OED

                         Operations Evaluation Department, PE-693
                                         CONTENTS

                                                               Page

BASIC DATA                                                        ii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                iii

I.     THE PROJECT                                                1

       A.     Project Background                                 1
       B.     Project Features                                   2
       C.     Progress Highlights                                4

II.    PROJECT EVALUATION                                         4

       A.     Overview                                            4
       B.     Development Outcome                                 5
       C.     ADB's Investment Returns                           10
       D.     ADB's Effectiveness                                10
       E.     ADB's Additionality                                11
       F.     Overall Rating                                     11

III.   ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                    12

       A.     Project Issues                                     12
       B.     Lessons                                            13
       C.     Follow-Up Actions                                  14

APPENDIXES

1.     Private Sector Development Indicators and Ratings         15
2.     Developments in the Indian Gas Market                     16
3.     Review of Petronet LNG's Operations                       21
4.     Reevaluation of the Economic Internal Rate of Return      26
5.     Social, Environmental, Health, and Safety Performance     30
The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department on avoiding conflict
of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report. The
fieldwork was undertaken by consultants Pradeep K. Dadhich (Gas Specialist) and TS Panwar
(Environment Specialist) under the guidance of the mission leader. To the knowledge of the
management of the Operations Evaluation Department, there were no conflicts of interest of the
persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

This report contains information that may be subjected to disclosure restrictions agreed between
ADB and the relevant sponsor or recipient of funds from ADB. Recipients should therefore not
disclose its content to third parties, except in connection with the performance of their official
duties. A summary of this report shall be made publicly available in accordance with ADB's
Public Communications Policy (PCP) and such summary shall not include any confidential
information and other information that falls within the exceptions set out in Paragraphs 126, 127
and 130 of the PCP.


As agreed by Operations Evaluation Department, Office of the General Counsel, Office of the
Secretary, and the Department of External Relations, only the 35-paged redacted summary will
be uploaded in the Board Document System.
                                                  BASIC DATA

           Equity Investment 7192: Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal Project in India

 TA Number                       TA Title                       Type            Amount           Approval Date
 TA 2752         Technical Assistance to India for the           PP             $600,000          27 Jan 1997
                 Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal Project


 KEY DATES                                                  Expected                           Actual
 Fact-Finding                                                 Jul 2003                       28 Jul 2003
 Appraisal                                                  Nov 2003                        11 Nov 2003
 Board Approval                                              Jan 2004                       13 Jan 2004
 First Disbursement                                         Feb 2004                         6 Feb 2004
 Project Completion                                        1 Apr 2004                         9 Apr 2004


 DMC                                            Government of India
 Executing Agency                               Petronet LNG Limited

 MISSION DATA                                               Missions                        Person-Days
 Type of Mission
 Fact-Finding                                                   1                                   8
 Appraisal                                                      1                                   6
 Project Administration
         Review                                                 1                                   2
 Operations Evaluation                                          1                                  24




ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR =
financial internal rate of return, OEM = Operations Evaluation Mission, PP = project preparatory, TA = technical
assistance, WACC = weighted average cost of capital.
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        In December 2003, the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) Board of Directors approved a
report and recommendation of the President (RRP) for: (i) an equity investment in Petronet LNG
Limited (PLL) for a 5.2% shareholding; and (ii) a partial credit guarantee (PCG), without a
Government guarantee, to support a PLL bond issue of up to Rs7 billion, amounting in exposure
terms to Rs3.525 billion. The funds, sourced from ADB's ordinary capital resources (OCR), were
to be used to construct and operate a liquefied natural gas (LNG) import and regasification
terminal with a 5.0 million metric tons per annum capacity at Dahej in Gujarat state. This project
performance evaluation report (PPER) assesses ADB's support to help develop PLL's LNG
plant at Dahej (the Project).

        The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) visited India 24 April­5 May 2006 to review
the Project and obtain the necessary data to prepare the PPER. The OEM interviewed project
stakeholders, including representatives of PLL's senior management team, shareholders,
lenders, and government officials. The PPER incorporates the findings of the OEM,
observations of relevant ADB staff, and a review of project reports and documents. The
evaluation criteria used for the Project were based on the best practice guidelines identified by
the Evaluation Coordination Group of the Multilateral Development Banks on Private Sector
Operations, as well as the criteria presented in ADB's draft Guidelines for the Preparation of
Performance Evaluation Reports of Private Sector Operations. Reflecting these arrangements,
ADB's participation in the Project was evaluated using four criteria: (i) development outcome, (ii)
ADB's investment returns, (iii) ADB's effectiveness, and (iv) ADB's additionality. Overall, the
Project is rated satisfactory.

         The development outcome is rated satisfactory. It was evaluated using five subcriteria: (i)
private sector development (PSD), (ii) business success, (iii) economic sustainability,
(iv) contribution to living standards, and (v) and environmental impacts. For PSD, the primary
justifications for the Project presented in the RRP were to (i) help meet growing energy demand
in North and West India; (ii) enhance energy security by diversifying the energy base; (iii)
contribute to economic development by providing additional and lower-cost alternate inputs to
the power, fertilizer, oil, and transport sectors; (iv) promote the use of clean energy; (v) provide
an example of good practice in public-private partnership in infrastructure development; and (vi)
further develop the capital market for long-term, fixed-rate financing through the use of the PCG.

        The RRP objectives were relevant. With the exception of capital market developments,
the Project helped achieve these goals. The Project was the first step in liberalizing and
commercializing the LNG segment of the Indian gas industry, and encouraging the use of a
clean, environmentally friendly fuel. Demand for energy in India continues to grow rapidly, and
the increased availability of clean energy at internationally competitive prices is important for the
development of the country. The Project demonstrated that the successful importation of LNG at
competitive prices is possible, thereby supporting the liberalization of the gas sector and
enhancing the level of private sector participation in the energy sector. PLL has demonstrated
the high standards of performance that can be achieved by a modern, well-run public-private
partnership managed on a commercial basis. PLL's business success has been excellent due to
lower-than-expected operating expenses and interest costs. Further, the Project has
demonstrated that the use of LNG technology is feasible in India. As such, additional plants are
being developed.

      Economic sustainability was rated excellent due to the substantial benefits derived from
meeting unmet demand, and the cost savings realized by firms that can use gas instead of
iv


naptha. The environmental benefits associated with the use of gas, offsetting emissions from
coal-fired generation, are difficult to quantify. However, they are likely to be substantial. While
the Project was assigned an environmental rating of category A at project appraisal, the actual
direct social and environmental impacts have been minimal. The main issues at the plant site
relate to safety of the mooring facilities during the monsoon period. A shareholder in PLL, GDF
International, which has more than 30 years of LNG experience, is assisting in developing and
refining the mooring procedures.

        ADB's investment returns have been excellent, as PLL's share price has risen
significantly since investment. Offsetting this result, ADB did not issue the PCG that was
originally envisaged in the RRP, as it was not commercially attractive.

         ADB's effectiveness is a function of factors such as screening, appraisal, structuring,
monitoring, and supervising the Project. The result has been satisfactory. PLL management
found that ADB's financial appraisal was performed to a high standard, and investment approval
was completed promptly. Most assumptions underpinning the Project have been realized largely
as envisaged in the RRP. The main weakness of the Project was the PCG, which was not
commercially viable. This outcome was primarily due to adverse movements in the market.
Monitoring of the Project appears to have been of a high standard, with regular visits by ADB
staff to PLL headquarters and the plant site, although most of these visits focused on arranging
financing for the phase II expansion. The documents on the subscription agreement and
insurance documents are in order. The main issue with the monitoring arrangements related to
environmental and social safeguard policies, as regulatory reports were not supplied to ADB
quarterly as stipulated in the equity subscription agreement. The OEM confirmed PLL's
compliance with regulations through its review of the regulatory reports submitted to the
Government.

       ADB additionality for the Project appears material, and was rated satisfactory. In
discussions, the management said ADB played a critical role in facilitating the liberalization of
the gas market. Subsequently, ADB helped mitigate investor and lender concerns regarding a
new and untested product and technology in India, where locally available skills and experience
were limited. ADB was given a position on the board of directors, and contributed to
improvements in corporate governance by heading the PLL audit committee.

       The main variations from the original project concept were as follows: (i) the price of oil
and natural gas increased dramatically, (ii) the construction by GAIL of the Dahej­Uran pipeline
was delayed, (iii) the breakwater was replaced with the construction of a third LNG tank, (iv) the
Government did not divest its majority shareholding in one the main state-owned shareholders
of PLL, and (v) ADB was unable to issue the PCG due to adverse market movements.

        The Project generated lessons in a number of areas. PSD was significant in terms of
helping to catalyze industry reforms through technical assistance to improve the enabling
environment, and through direct investment that helped reduce financiers' concerns about
project risks. Although the Project has been operating for only 2½ years, the financial
assumptions are radically different from the investment appraisal, especially regarding
international prices for oil and gas, highlighting the importance of an adequate financial
assessment. Despite a category A rating at project approval, environmental impacts and social
externalities at the plant site have not been significant. However, some safety issues still are
being resolved. Unstable mooring conditions have been more challenging than originally
anticipated, reinforcing the need for an adequate assessment of new technology during due
diligence. Some of the original assumptions on privatization of PLL have not materialized, and
                                                                                              v


the current ownership structure continues to represent a public-private partnership. A small
shareholding by ADB was required to help make the project viable. This model can be
replicated in future gas projects, which potentially can be financed without ADB support. The
most important lesson that emerges from the Project was the ephemeral demand for PCGs and
bond finance for infrastructure projects in India.

       No follow-up social and environmental action is required.




                                                           Bruce Murray
                                                           Director General
                                                           Operations Evaluation Department
                                      I.      THE PROJECT


A.     Project Background

1.      In December 2003, the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) Board of Directors approved a
report and recommendation of the President (RRP) for: (i) an equity investment in Petronet LNG
Limited (PLL) for a 5.2% shareholding; and (ii) a partial credit guarantee (PCG), without a
Government guarantee, to support a PLL bond issue of up to Rs7 billion, amounting in exposure
terms to Rs3.525 billion. The funds were to be used to construct and operate a liquefied natural
gas (LNG) import and regasification terminal (the Project) with a 5.0 million metric tons per
annum (MMTPA) capacity at Dahej in Gujarat state. The Project would serve gas users along
the 2,500-kilometer (km) Hazira­Bijaypur­Jadgishpur (HBJ) pipeline that covers Gujarat,
Western Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Delhi, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh, and Uran,
Maharashtra. It was to be the first ADB private sector transaction to utilize a long-term PCG, as
well as the first PCG that would support local currency debt.

2.     At appraisal in 2003, the Project was to be financed based on a debt-equity ratio not
exceeding 70:30 and achieve an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 23.0%. The Project
began operations in April 2004. ADB's Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) had not
prepared a Project Completion Report at the time of appraisal.

3.      The Project was strongly oriented towards strengthening the energy sector. At appraisal,
India's predominant source of energy was coal (55%), followed by oil (31%), and natural gas
(8%). Energy consumption in India had been growing rapidly through the 1990s, relative to the
rest of the world, reflecting strong potential for continuing growth in the sector. Rising oil prices
and concerns about environmental impacts stimulated demand for natural gas, which was
envisaged at appraisal to increase from 8% to 15% of Indian energy consumption by 2011­
2012, provided gas was available. In addition to relieving energy constraints, the Project was
expected to lower industrial costs. The industrial sector is a heavy user of natural gas, which
can be used as a substitute for naphtha. At appraisal, about 50% of fertilizer units in India used
natural gas as feedstock. While growth in this sector was not expected to be high, an increasing
number of plants using naphtha and fuel oil were expected to switch to gas.

4.      Traditionally, the Government of India (the Government) has dominated production in
the gas sector. At appraisal, the majority state-owned companies Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation Limited (ONGC) and Oil India Limited (OIL) accounted for 75% of gas production,
with the balance controlled by joint ventures (15%) and private companies (10%). State-owned
GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL) had a near monopoly on onshore transmission, including the HBJ
pipeline. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) regulated GAIL in areas such as
setting gas quality and access standards, and administering monopoly tariffs.

5.     To help relieve supply constraints, the Government started to liberalize the gas sector in
1991 with the opening of oil exploration to small-scale private sector participation. Despite the
reforms, domestic production did not keep pace with the increase in demand for natural gas. As
India has limited indigenous natural resources, the supply shortage was expected to increase.
In 1996 and 1997, ADB provided technical assistance (TA) for two studies that helped develop a
master plan for the natural gas industry in India. These studies also assisted with (i) an
assessment of the potential for setting up public-private joint ventures to build and operate LNG
terminals, (ii) formulation of a project implementation plan, and (iii) development of a structure to
enable limited recourse financing. Although the TA studies have not been evaluated formally,
2


the sponsors appeared to regard them highly, and they seemed to contribute to the liberalization
and development of the gas sector in India. In 1999, the Government introduced further reforms
to allow private domestic exploration, incorporated the TA concept into its Hydrocarbon Vision
2025, and removed many of the restrictions on LNG imports.

6.      As part of these developments, four state companies--Bharat Petroleum Corporation
Limited (BPCL), Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC), GAIL, and ONGC (collectively referred to
as the sponsors)--formed PLL to develop LNG facilities at Dahej, Gujarat and Kochi, Kerela.
The sponsors include some of the largest companies in India. BPCL is engaged in refining
crude oil, and production and distribution of petroleum products. IOC, the largest company in
India in terms of sales, is engaged in refining and distributing petroleum products. GAIL is the
dominant gas transmission and marketing company, while ONGC produces the majority of the
natural gas in India. In 2002, the sponsors asked ADB for financial assistance to implement the
Project in Dahej.

B.     Project Features

7.        The Project was designed to build, operate, and transfer the first LNG import and
regasification terminal in India, with a phase I capacity of 5.0 MMTPA. The land at the project
site is part of an industrial complex owned by Gujarat Maritime Board (GMB). At appraisal, PLL
had signed a letter of intent with GMB to enter into a 99-year concession agreement to lease the
58.6 hectare site at Dahej, Gujarat, as well as a 30-year agreement to develop and use a port
facility. The concession was not tendered formally, as the market for leasing land at the project
site was competitive and does not have any monopoly characteristics. The project facilities
comprised (i) two full-containment LNG storage tanks, each with a gross capacity of 160,000
cubic meters (m3); (ii) recovery system for re-condensation of the boil-off gas; (iii) send out
facilities, including "shell and tube" and "submerged combustion" vaporizers; (iv) auxiliary
facilities, including a 23-megawatt (MW) gas-fired captive power plant; (v) electrical and utilities
production control systems; (vi) metering, fire, and gas detection and protection systems; (vii) a
jetty; and (viii) initially, a breakwater. A backup power agreement was signed with the Gujarat
State Electricity Board, and the plant is connected to the local high-tension network. At
appraisal, the Project had an environmental rating of category A, indicating substantial impacts
primarily in the area of safety, rather than emissions. Two environmental impact assessments
(EIA) reports were prepared for the Project--one for the onshore storage and regasification
facility, the other for the marine unloading facilities. The Ministry of Environment and Forests
(MOEF) and the Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB) approved the EIAs, which defined the
standards that are monitored by their local regional offices.

8.     Following competitive bidding, PLL signed a sales and purchase agreement (SPA) with
Ras Laffan Liquefied Natural Gas Company Limited (Rasgas), obligating PLL to purchase up to
7.5 MMTPA of LNG for 25 years. The agreement had two stages. In the first stage, PLL would
take 5.0 MMTPA on a take-or-pay basis up to 2009. After 2009, PLL could take the remaining
2.5 MMTPA subject to the mutual agreement of both parties. The purchase price initially was set
at $2.53 per million British thermal units (MMBTU), and it will be rebased regularly in
accordance with a defined formula after 2009. Rasgas, a joint venture between Qatar Petroleum
(70%) and Exxon Mobil (30%), has access to the largest non-oil associated gas fields in the
world. An international consortium led by Mitsui OSK Lines provided two dedicated special
purpose tankers with capacity of 138,000 m3 each to transport LNG to PLL under a 25-year
contract under terms that were commensurate with the Rasgas contract. GAIL (60%), IOC
(30%), and BPCL (10%) (collectively referred to as the offtakers) are purchasing gas from the
                                                                                                3


LNG terminal. The offtake contract is take or pay, with terms that are back-to-back with PLL's
SPA.

9.      As envisaged at appraisal, the offtakers initially were to transport the gas from the PLL
terminal to consumers through an expanded 528 km HBJ pipeline system, and eventually
through a new 485 km pipeline connecting Dahej to Uran. IOC and BPCL have executed gas
transport agreements through GAIL, which is responsible for expanding the existing and
proposed pipelines. The offtakers intended to use the gas for internal consumption, or to sell it
under long-term contracts to industrial users. One third of the output would be consumed by
IOC and BPCL at their refineries; one third would be sold to large end-use consumers, such as
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, ONGC, and a fertilizer company; and the balance
sold to smaller end-use consumers, such as power and fertilizer companies that are customers
of GAIL.

10.     PLL's gas sales price to end users is set commercially without any Government control.
The price consists of the LNG rate, taxes and duties, and a regasification charge that reflects
actual costs of LNG supply. As presented in the RRP, the gas price was estimated to average
$3.27 per MMBTU at PLL's delivery point n the first 5 years of operation; and, after the offtakers
add transport charges and sales tax, $3.80 per MMBTU at the end-user point. This price was
considerably higher than the subsidized domestic gas price of $2.84 per MMBTU being charged
at the time of appraisal, though it was commercially attractive due to the substantial demand
supply gap in the market. PLL's gas was expected to meet demand that was either not met at
all, causing capacity underutilization; or replace alternate fuels, such as naptha, that were more
expensive than PLL's gas.

11.     The Project was to be constructed under a lump sum, fixed price, date certain turnkey
EPC agreement with an international consortium selected through international competitive
bidding. PLL's in-house staff was to operate and maintain the LNG terminal with technical input
from ONGC and a new strategic shareholder in PLL, Gaz de France International (GDFI). A
combination of equity and short-term bridging debt finance, was to fund project construction. As
part of the Project, the shareholding structure of PLL would be expanded from the four original
state-owned shareholders, which would retain a 50% interest with equal 12.5% shareholdings.
The remaining 50% ownership interest in PLL was to be allocated to (i) GDFI holding 10%; (ii)
ADB holding 5.2%; and (iii) public and other shareholders holding the remaining 34.8% of the
shares. The inclusion of offtakers and the supplier in the shareholding structure was intended to
help mitigate risks. As envisaged, the Indian public sector shareholding would not exceed 50%,
and would decline as a consequence of the proposed privatization of BPCL. ADB became a
shareholder to meet its charter requirements for an anchor investment to support its guarantee
operations, and these funds were to be injected in January 2004 after mechanical completion.

12.     After the start of commercial operations, the Project was to be financed under a debt-
equity ratio that would not exceed 70:30. The 70% debt financing was to be sourced from local
currency ADB-guaranteed bonds (up to approximately 30.0% of total debt) and Indian
commercial bank debt (up to approximately 70.0% of total debt). The bonds were to be issued
after construction in April 2004. A charge on all of PLL's assets, project documents, and cash
flows were to support the bonds in the first instance. Subsequently, a PCG that covered part of
the scheduled principal repayments and part of the scheduled interest payments on the bonds
was to provide support. ADB was given a position on the board of directors.
4


C.        Progress Highlights

13.    PLL and a consortium led by Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Company Limited
signed the EPC agreement in January 2001. Construction was completed on schedule, and the
plant was mechanically complete in December 2003. At the same time, GAIL doubled the
capacity of the HBJ pipeline by laying a new 82 km pipeline from Dahej to Vemar, Gujarat; and
a 528 km pipeline parallel to the existing HBJ pipeline from Vemar to Bijaypur, Madhya Pradesh.
The Dahej­Uran pipeline identified in the RRP has not been constructed due to delays in the
tender process, and completion is now targeted for 2007. The first shipment of gas arrived from
Qatar in January 2004, initiating the commissioning period. Commercial supply commenced on
schedule in April 2004.

14.     The actual project cost of the PLL plant was less in local currency terms than the initial
cost estimate in the RRP. This cost saving resulted from a decision by PLL not to proceed with
the construction of the breakwater that had been included in the original design. Originally, a
660-meter breakwater was included in phase I to restrict downtime during the monsoon period.
Based on the morphological data collected in the early stages of breakwater construction, PLL
concluded that the breakwater was not required. The plant could accommodate any potential
delays arising from the lack of a breakwater by increasing storage capacity, and an additional
LNG storage tank would provide greater operating flexibility. As a result, PLL decided to
reallocate breakwater funds to construct a third tank, which will be part of the phase II
expansion that will increase plant capacity to 10 MMTPA by 2009. Operating at 50% capacity in
2004, and then increasing to 100% in 2005, the terminal's technical performance has exceeded
expectations at appraisal. LNG has been of high quality, supply and transportation risks have
not materialized, and the delivery of LNG to the regasification plant has not been delayed or
interrupted. Staff from ONGC and GDFI supported PLL staff for the initial period of operations
under a series of technical support agreements. A possible extension is being negotiated with
GDFI, primarily to address ship mooring safety issues.

15.      The projected financial structure has been changed slightly, with a 34.8% stake
allocated to the public through an initial public offering (IPO) in March 2004. The price per
shares at IPO was Rs15, compared with the price at OEM appraisal of Rs60 per share. The
most important material departure from the financial structure presented in the RRP was the
failure to issue a PCG that could be used to support a bond issue. Due to adverse movements
in the Indian capital markets, bond financing was not seen as cost-effective. As a result, ADB's
PCG was not issued, and the Project relied on local currency long-term debt finance from Indian
banks.

                                        II.      PROJECT EVALUATION

A.        Overview

16.     The evaluation criteria used for the Project are based on the best practice guidelines
prepared by the Evaluation Coordination Group of the Multilateral Development Banks on
Private Sector Operations, and the derived criteria incorporated in ADB's draft Guidelines for the
Preparation of Performance Evaluation Reports of Private Sector Operations.1 Reflecting these
developments, ADB's participation in the Project was evaluated using four criteria:
(i) development outcome, (ii) ADB's investment returns, (iii) ADB's effectiveness, and (iv) ADB's
additionality. Overall, the Project was rated satisfactory.

1
    ADB's Operations Evaluation Department is preparing the guidelines, which will be finalized in 2006.
                                                                                                  5


B.     Development Outcome

17.     The initial criterion, development outcome, is rated excellent. It was evaluated using four
subcriteria: (i) private sector development, (ii) business success, (iii) economic sustainability,
and (iv) social and environmental impacts.

       1.      Private Sector Development

18.      Private sector development impact is rated satisfactory (details are in Appendix 2­4). In
the RRP, the primary justifications for the Project were to (i) help meet growing energy demand
in North and West India; (ii) enhance energy security by diversifying the energy base; (iii)
contribute to economic development by providing additional and lower-cost alternate inputs to
the oil, power, fertilizer, and transport sectors; (iv) promote the use of clean energy; (v) provide
an example of good practice in public-private partnership (PPP) in infrastructure development;
and (vi) further develop the capital market for long-term, fixed-rate financing through the use of
the PCG. Overall, the RRP objectives were relevant. With the exception of capital market
development, the Project helped achieve the envisaged goals.

               a.      Beyond Company Impacts

19.      In 1996, ADB provided TA to develop a master plan for the development of the natural
gas sector in India. The main objectives of this study were to (i) rationalize the projected
demand for natural gas, taking into account alternate energy sources and economic costs; (ii)
establish and analyze gas import alternatives; (iii) develop a plan for expansion of gas
infrastructure in India to meet the projected demand; and (iv) identify the economic, technical,
legal, and regulatory issues that need to be addressed as a result of the importation of natural
gas. The Government accepted ADB's recommendations on gas industry liberalization and
commercialization, establishing the foundation for investments in a public-private partnership
structure. In 1997, ADB approved a TA to provide financial, legal, technical, and economic
advice and assistance to PLL to develop LNG importation and regasification facilities in Western
and Southern India. The second TA project focused on formulating a bankable project structure
for specific facilities to the established at Dahej in Gujarat state, and at Kochi in Kerala state.
The second TA also was successful, and led to the PLL project at Dahej. The Project was the
first investment that reflected tangible progress in liberalizing and commercializing the LNG
segment of the Indian gas industry, and in encouraging the use of a clean, environmentally
friendly fuel. Overall, these activities provide an excellent example of how ADB can create an
enabling environment through its public sector operations, and then catalyze private investment
through its private sector operations.

20.     Development of the gas sector was important for India due to shortages of energy, as
well as the positive environmental impacts of using natural gas as an energy source. The power
sector accounts for the bulk of LNG demand (69%), followed by fertilizer and petrochemicals
(29%), with the balance consumed in sectors such as transport. Domestic fuel consumption is
growing following directives from the Supreme Court of India to increase the use of compressed
natural gas (CNG) as a fuel for the transport sector. Indraprastha Gas Limited (IGL) in Delhi and
Mahanagar Gas Limited (MGL) in Mumbai are developing city gas distribution projects for the
supply of CNG and piped natural gas in these cities. IGL is catering to about 94,246 vehicles of
different categories through 135 CNG stations. MGL has set up 105 CNG stations that serve
about 147,536 vehicles, mainly three-wheelers and cars.
6


21.     Coal is the main source of energy in India, though domestic supplies are low quality and
generate significant levels of harmful environmental emissions. While most of the coal is in
Eastern India, the majority of industrial demand is in Western India. This makes coal a high-cost
form of energy compared to alternative sources, such as LNG. The potential to increase the
availability of energy from other sources, such as nuclear and hydro power, is limited. Oil-based
products, such as naptha, have become expensive. Demand for natural gas in the fertilizer and
petrochemical sectors remains high. These circumstances are likely to continue for the
foreseeable future due to the continued price differential between natural gas and feedstock
substitutes, such as naptha.

22.     The two main constraints on natural gas supply are inadequate reserves and a lack of
transmission capacity. The Bombay High fields and Gujarat produce the bulk of India's natural
gas. However, these fields are relatively old, output is declining, and production is expected to
be exhausted by 2020. To help offset this decline in production capacity, the Government
opened the gas sector to private participation by awarding concession rights to public sector
joint ventures (JV) with private sector operators. In 1999, the Government developed the New
Exploration Policy (NELP), under which additional gas exploration concessions have been
awarded to private operators. As a result of these initiatives, a series of major new deep sea
gas fields have been discovered recently, especially by Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) in the
Krishna Godavari (KG) Basin off the coast of Andhra Pradesh in eastern Indian. These are
expected to substitute for the diminishing supplies from the existing fields.

23.     The Government is developing additional transmission capacity. The Indian gas
transmission infrastructure has consisted of small regional pipelines and the HBJ pipeline
operated by GAIL, which carries gas from the offshore Mumbai High basin to fertilizer and
power plants in North West India. However, the capacity of the HBJ pipeline is sufficient to meet
only about 45% of India's gas consumption. GAIL has expanded the Dahej­Bijaypur section of
the HBJ pipeline; and is building the Dahej­Uran gas pipeline, which is scheduled for
completion in 2006. GAIL also is developing a $4.4 billion National Gas Grid, which is expected
to cover the entire country. The 8,000 km project will be implemented in phases over the next
6­7 years. With the Government permitting private sector investment in gas transmission
infrastructure, RIL intends to build a 1,400 km pipeline from Kakinada to Ahemdabad via
Hyderabad and Uran in Maharashtra. The pipeline would transport the RIL's reserves in the KG
Basin to the Gujarat power plants belonging to National Thermal Power Corporation. In addition,
RIL plans to build a pipeline from Hyderabad on the east cost to Delhi. Several smaller projects
are also are being implemented.

24.      Despite these developments in the local gas industry, demand continues to outstrip
supply. To help bridge this gap, the Government has removed many of the restrictions on
importing gas, and some public and private sector companies are pursuing gas importation
options. Potentially, gas could be imported by pipeline from Iran, Turkmenistan, Bangladesh,
and Myanmar. However, none of these pipeline projects is expected to materialize in the next
4­5 years due to technical or political constraints, and LNG remains the most important source
of imported energy. India has only three LNG import terminals: (i) PLL's Dahej plant with a
capacity of 5.0 MMTPA (equivalent to 17.5 million standard cubic meters per day [MMSCMD]);
(ii) the Dabol plant (recently renamed Ratnagiri Gas) also with a capacity of 5.0 MMTPA, which
is only beginning production after years of inactivity due to the collapse of Enron in 2001; and (iii)
the Hazira plant owned by Shell, which has a capacity of 2.5 MMTPA (equivalent to 8.8
MMSCMD) and began operation in April 2005. Reportedly, the Hazira plant is operating at only
about 5% of capacity due to its reliance on a merchant business model that is unsuitable for gas
user requirements. The current gas deficit has prompted PLL to accelerate the phase II
                                                                                                  7


expansion of its Dahej plant, increasing its capacity to 10.0 MMTPA. PLL also has started the
development of a 2.5 MMTPA LNG plant at Kochi, which was part of the TA concept
investigated in 1997. The plant should be operational by 2009. In addition, a new 2.5 MMTPA
plant is expected to be developed at Ennore in Tamil Nadu. This plant, which is being
developed independently of PLL, appears to have been catalyzed by the excess demand for
gas and by the demonstration effects of the PLL projects.

25.      The current market structure uses gas prices that are administratively and market based,
although PLL's LNG is competitive. The Government sets the consumer price of natural gas for
approximately 54% of the market at $1.80 per MMBTU, compared with PLL's ex-terminal price
of $3.51 and a delivered price of $4.25 per MMBTU. Sourced from ONGC and OIL, the
subsidized gas is sold mainly to nominated consumers in protected sectors, such as power and
fertilizer. Although the Government announced in 1997 a program to eliminate these subsidies,
the program has stalled for political reasons. The proportion of the market that is subsidized is
expected to continue to decline over time. The Government subsidies are only sustainable as
the state-owned resources are sold at prices substantially below market rates. Available
supplies of subsidized gas are expected to fall as state-owned reserves are rapidly becoming
depleted. Approximately 20% of Indian gas consumption is sourced from JVs and private
concessions that are sold at market-linked prices (effectively market rates). The remaining 26%,
which is sourced from LNG, is sold at market rates. Gas produced from new fields will be priced
at market rates.

26.      While gas importation and exploration are now substantially competitive markets, GAIL
continues to maintain a near monopoly on onshore transmission. The Petroleum and Natural
Gas Regulatory Bill, enacted in April 2006, established an independent gas regulator. The new
regulatory body, which will be separate from MOPNG, is expected to be established and staffed
later in 2006. The precise regulatory framework that will be introduced is not clear, although the
independent regulator will be responsible for downstream operations relating to transmission
and distribution. Regulations will be based on competitive principles that will help attract private
investment in transmission, and will ensure open access to existing monopoly facilities. Tariffs
will be cost-based, which will ensure that private gas supplies are sustainable. Like the power
sector, gas supply will be subject to the requirements of the Competition Commission.

               b.      Direct Company Impacts

27.     PLL has demonstrated the high standards of performance that can be achieved by a
PPP managed on a commercial basis. PLL has helped increase firm access to gas at affordable
prices in Northern and Western Indian states, and now accounts for 20% of the country's natural
gas. As natural gas provides 8%­9% of domestic energy consumption, the Project has
increased the available energy in India by 1%. As the first company to establish and operate a
commercial LNG plant in India, PLL has provided strong demonstration effects. Steps are being
taken to replicate the original concept applied at Dahej at other LNG sites. As relatively few
skills were available in India to operate the plant, PLL has successfully trained local staff
through the use of a management contract with GDFI, which has more than 30 years
experience managing LNG plants. Further, PLL has completed international standards
organization (ISO) programs for quality, environment, health, and safety procedures, confirming
that policies and procedures reflect world class norms.

28.     Management and reporting systems are of a high standard. Accounts are prepared in
accordance with standards for publicly listed companies that reflect international accounting and
audit requirements. ADB has its own independent board representative, who has contributed to
8


the development of high corporate governance standards by chairing the audit committee. The
private sector participated directly in the ownership of PLL through a highly successful initial
public offering (IPO) of 34.8% of the company's shares. Offsetting these positive results, the
objective of stimulating bond market development was not achieved due to an adverse shift in
the cost of this form of finance, which obviated the need to issue a PCG and PLL bonds.

          2.       Business Success

29.     Business performance is rated excellent.2 The recalculated real financial FIRR before
phase II expansion was higher than the estimate at loan approval. The assumptions and
analysis underpinning the FIRR calculation are in Appendix 5. The recalculated FIRR exceeds
PLL's WACC. Project performance has been strong, and no material problems with supply,
plant operation, offtake, or gas pricing risks have arisen. PLL has a competitive advantage
relative to other energy companies through its long-term access to low-cost gas under the take-
or-pay contract with Rasgas, and its access to the GAIL transmission network. GAIL, IOC, and
BPCL procure the gas from PLL under take-or-pay arrangements that are very low risk,
although end-user demand ultimately will underpin the security of these arrangements.

30.     Natural gas customers of the state-owned oil companies currently pay only $1.80 per
MMBTU, while private sector operators sell domestic gas at international prices that range from
$3.00 to $3.50 per MMBTU. Nevertheless, private firms remain competitive as the availability of
state-owned gas is declining, and not enough gas is available to meet consumer needs. LNG
imports from Dahej for the first 5 years have an external price of $3.51 and a delivered price to
end users of $4.25 per MMBTU. Although this price is slightly more than the market price of
local gas supplies, it is substantially less than naptha, which costs about $16.50 per MMBTU.
After 2009, PLL's fixed procurement price for gas will become variable and linked to the Japan
crude oil cocktail (JCC) price, with a cap and floor. The move to a floating rate will increase
offtake risks, though this risk is substantially moderated by the rolling average cost of gas that
was secured contractually when gas prices were much lower than current market rates.

                        Table 1: Key Financial Ratios of Petronet LNG Limited
Item                                     2004A       2005A         2006         2007        2008         2009
Net Profit Margin (%)                  (0.01)        4.57           3.51          3.73        3.84        2.88
Return on Average Assets (%)              -        15.30           12.19        12.69        13.45       12.85
Return on Average Equity (%)              -        18.01           13.03        13.48        14.45       13.38
Current Ratio                            1.65        3.01           2.84         2.32          2.11       2.00
Long-Term Debt: Total Assets (%)       50.00        49.1            46.6         42.8         38.7        32.9
( ) = negative, A = actual.
Sources: Audited accounts and PLL and ADB estimates.

31.     Reflecting the near certain demand and low cost of gas, PLL's financial performance has
been strong. In its first year of operations, PLL recorded a net loss of Rs284 million in 2004 as
the plant ran at 50% capacity. In 2005, the plant utilized 100% of its capacity utilization and
achieved a profit of Rs1,755 million, more than five times the appraisal estimate of Rs335
million. This improvement in projected performance, which is attributed to lower-than-expected
operating expenses and interest costs, is the reason for the material increase in the FIRR.
Sensitivity analysis of critical variables, such as the exchange rate and movements in the LNG
price, indicate that the FIRR is reasonably robust. Long-term debt as a percentage of total
assets does not exceed 50%. PLL has raised additional debt for the development of the Kochi

2
    The rating scale is as follows: (i) excellent: FIRR > WACC + 2.5%, (ii) satisfactory: FIRR > WACC, (iii) partly
    unsatisfactory: FIRR > WACC ­ 2%, and (iv) unsatisfactory: FIRR < WACC ­ 2%.
                                                                                                                        9


plant, and might raise additional finance through the international sale of a convertible bond on
the Singapore exchange. This underscores the financial success of the PLL venture.

          3.       Economic Sustainability

32.    Economic sustainability is measured by the EIRR generated by the Project, which aims
to capture the effects of competition, as well as externalities associated with social and
environmental impacts. The recalculated EIRR is 32.6%, which is excellent.3 Appendix 6 shows
the assumptions underpinning the EIRR calculation. The recalculated EIRR is higher than the
appraisal estimate of 23.0%. The end users for PLL gas are predominantly industrial users
along the expanded HBJ pipeline, consisting of fertilizer (40%), power (20%), petrochemical and
chemical (20%), and others (20%). These benefits are derived from the Project meeting unmet
demand (incremental), and generating substantial cost savings for firms that can switch from
naptha to gas (non-incremental). Sensitivity analysis indicates that these results are robust
under a wide range of scenarios.

          4.       Social and Environmental Impacts

33.     While the Project was assigned an environmental rating of category A at appraisal, the
actual negative social and environmental impacts have been minimal. The main issues relate to
safety of the mooring facilities during the monsoon period. Details on social and environmental
impacts are in Appendix 7. PLL has provided positive social impacts by investing in local road,
water, and power infrastructure; and by providing emergency relief to local residents affected by
the earthquake that occurred in the region several years ago. During the 3 years of construction,
an average of 700 new jobs were created. About 160 staff are required for continuing operations
at the plant, and 50 staff are employed at the head office in Delhi. An additional 176 staff are
employed indirectly through shipping LNG (60 staff), outsourcing of jetty management (70 staff),
and security (46 staff). Approximately 15 squatters on the project site were resettled. State-
owned Gujarat Investment Development Corporation, which created the project site for
industrial use, addressed the associated issues before the Project started. The main forms of
compensation provided to the resettled parties were comparable land, and accommodation and
cash grants financed by PLL to cover daily living expenses during the construction of new
premises.

34.      LNG is a cleaner source of energy than oil and coal. The environmental benefits of the
project arising from offsetting the use of coal are likely to be substantial due to the reduction in
energy-related emissions, such as carbon dioxide (CO2). Natural gas is about 32% cleaner than
coal. Conservative estimates of the value of these CO2 savings in India range from about $4.0 to
$24.0 million per year. These external environmental benefits were not included in the EIRR due
to difficulties in precisely quantifying them. Additional economic benefits are being generated by
the project site, where the high quality of the technology and strong management team have
resulted in virtually zero emissions. However, some safety issues still are being resolved. The
LNG terminal has limited environmental impacts. PLL has complied with all necessary
environmental regulations. Independent third parties audit the annual and quarterly reports,
which are submitted to MOEF, GPCB, and Forests and Environment Department of the
government of Gujarat. The terminal has received ISO certification for its processes and
procedures for quality (ISO 9001), environmental management (ISO 14001), and occupational

3
    The rating scale is as follows: (i) excellent: EIRR > 18%, (ii) satisfactory: EIRR > 12%, (iii) partly unsatisfactory:
    EIRR > 6%, and (iv) unsatisfactory: EIRR < 6%.
10


health and safety management (ISO 18001). PLL's Dahej plant was the first LNG facility in the
world to achieve accreditation within 1 year of operation.

35.     The Project's major environmental risks are associated with safety. PLL has prepared
various emergency response plans. The terminal has achieved 2.73 million accident-free hours
of operation to date. In October 2005, the National Safety Council conducted a safety audit and
made recommendations for improving systems and procedures. The main issues that have
arisen involve the safety of the jetty and ship mooring operations due to strong currents, high
winds, and large waves during the monsoon season (May to September). As originally
envisaged, a breakwater was to be constructed to help mitigate the effects of wind and waves.
Construction started and then was halted following an analysis that concluded the breakwater
would not mitigate these effects. A program is being developed to remove rock debris that was
being used to construct the breakwater, and this will increase ship maneuverability. GDFI is
providing assistance to develop and refine safe mooring procedures. In the event of an accident
at the terminal, the effects probably would not extend beyond the boundaries of the plant site.

C.     ADB's Investment Returns

36.    PLL is in a strong financial position, which is reflected in the substantial appreciation in
ADB's equity shareholding in the company. Offsetting this result, ADB did not issue the PCG as
envisaged at appraisal because it was not commercially attractive. While no direct costs arose
from the PCG, an opportunity cost was associated with the facility.

D.     ADB's Effectiveness

37.    ADB's effectiveness is rated satisfactory, based on an evaluation of screening, appraisal,
and structuring; and monitoring and supervision.

       1.      Screening, Appraisal, and Structuring of the Project

38.      Screening, appraisal, and structuring are rated satisfactory. Screening refers to
relevance of the Project in achieving ADB's strategic objectives, as defined in its country and
sector strategy documents; and in complying with policies on private sector development, and
social and environmental protection. The Project met these requirements to a high degree. By
establishing a commercially viable and environmentally friendly LNG plant, the Project
supported the country strategic program (CSP) objectives of removing impediments to the
liberalization and growth of privately financed energy infrastructure in India. In the view of PLL
management, ADB's appraisal was of a high standard, and the investment approval process
was performed rapidly. The assumptions underpinning the Project have materialized largely as
envisaged in the RRP. The primary weakness in the Project related to ADB's performance was
the PCG, which proved not to be commercially viable. This was due mainly to unforeseen
adverse movements in the market.

       2.      Monitoring and Supervision Quality

39.    Monitoring and supervision quality was satisfactory. Monitoring appears to have been of
a high standard. PSOD staff visited PLL headquarters and the plant site regularly, although
most of these visits focused on arranging financing for the phase II expansion. The documents
on the subscription agreement and insurance documents are in order. The main issue with the
monitoring arrangements involved environmental and social safeguard policies, where
regulatory reports were not supplied to ADB quarterly as stipulated in the equity subscription
                                                                                                11


agreement. Following a review of the regulatory reports submitted to the Government, the
Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) confirmed PLL compliance with regulations.

E.     ADB's Additionality

40.    Additionality is defined as the extent to which something happens as a result of an
intervention that would not otherwise have occurred in the absence of the intervention. The
Project has been successful from the perspective of stimulating development, liberalizing the
energy market, encouraging private sector investment, and creating a strong company that has
had significant demonstration impacts. In discussions with the OEM, PLL management said
ADB played a critical role in liberalizing the market before the investment. While the construction
program was largely complete by the time PSOD participated, ADB helped mitigate investor and
lender concerns regarding a new and untested product and technology in India, where locally
available skills and experience were limited. ADB also helped facilitate corporate governance
through the introduction of an independent private director to the board. ADB's direct board
representative, who has important international experience, chairs the board's audit committee.

41.     Offsetting this result, ADB was not able to pursue the pioneering issuance of a PCG
equivalent to $65 million. As a result, ADB did not stimulate the development of the local bond
market. This bond transaction never materialized due to adverse market movements that were
beyond the control of the participants. In 2001, the International Finance Corporation had
successfully issued PCGs to support the mobilization of local currency financing for several
large Indian companies, such as Bharti Mobile Limited. Thus, the product appeared attractive
and feasible. However, subsequent movements in interest rates meant that firms could access
funds from the domestic market using a swap at less cost than issuing bonds in the local market.
This price differential has persisted and continues to favor swaps over local bonds as a source
of local currency.

F.     Overall Rating

42.     The Project received an overall rating of satisfactory. The evaluation criteria were
development outcome, ADB's investment profitability, ADB's operational effectiveness, and
project additionality. Based on the analysis in Section II, the ratings are presented in Table 2.
12


                    Table 2: Evaluation of the Petronet LNG Limited Project
                                                         Partly
Item                               Unsatisfactory                        Satisfactory     Excellent
                                                      Satisfactory

Development Outcome                                                            X
Private Sector Development                                                     X
Business Success                                                                               X
Economic Sustainability                                                                        X
Contribution to Living
Standards                                                                      X
Environmental Performance                                                                      X
ADB's Investment
Profitability                                                                                  X
ADB's Effectiveness                                                            X
Screening, Appraisal, and
Structuring                                                                    X
Monitoring and Supervision                                                     X
ADB's Additionality                                                            X
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Source: ADB Operations Evaluation Mission.

43.     Development outcome is rated satisfactory based on an assessment of the following five
subcriteria: (i) private sector development was rated satisfactory, as the objectives of catalyzing
private investment in a competitive natural gas industry are being achieved to a significant
extent, and PLL has demonstrated strong corporate performance, though capital market
development goals were not attained; (ii) business success is rated excellent, as the
recalculated FIRR exceeds the WACC; (iii) economic sustainability is rated excellent, as the
EIRR of 32.6% was higher than expected due substantial cost savings and incremental demand
arising from improved availability of gas; (iv) contribution to living standards is rated satisfactory,
as PLL has helped develop local infrastructure and create jobs, without any material
resettlement or indigenous people issues; and (v) environmental performance is rated excellent,
based on the substantial reduction in energy-related emissions, such as CO2, due to improved
availability of gas offsetting the use of coal. In addition, the plant site has generated virtually
zero emissions due to the high quality of the technology and strong management team,
although some safety issues still are being resolved. ADB's second criterion, investment
profitability, is rated excellent. ADB's operational effectiveness is rated satisfactory. Screening,
appraisal, and structuring, as well as monitoring and supervision, have been of a high standard,
aside from the limited follow-up on collecting outstanding environmental impact reports. ADB's
additionality is satisfactory. While not participating until construction was almost complete,
ADB's presence helped crystallize industry reforms, strengthen corporate governance, and
support partial privatization of PLL.

                     III.    ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.      Project Issues

44.     Due to ADB's involvement in the Project only a few months before operations
commenced, the relatively short period since operations began, and the robust business model,
variations from the expectations presented in the RRP have been limited. The main differences
were as follows:
                                                                                             13



       (i)     The price of oil and natural gas has increased dramatically following ongoing
               geopolitical problems in the Middle East.
       (ii)    GAIL has not completed the construction of the Dahej­Uran pipeline.
       (iii)   The breakwater was not constructed. It has been replaced with a new LNG
               storage tank as part of the phase II construction program, resulting in a cost
               saving.
       (iv)    The Government has not divested its majority shareholding in BPCL. As a result,
               PLL continues to be majority state-owned.
       (v)     ADB did not issue its PCG due to unforeseen adverse market movements.

B.     Lessons

45.    Based on the developments outlined in Section II, ADB could improve its performance
by considering the following factors when designing projects:

46.      Private Sector Development. ADB played a central role in the liberalization and reform
of the Indian gas sector, and then catalyzed a series of important PPP investments in LNG
facilities. As such, the Project provides an excellent example of how ADB's Private Sector
Development Strategy can work in practice. Some of the most important private sector
development benefits involved discoveries of domestic gas by Indian private sector companies,
independent of PSOD participation. An important issue that emerges from the analysis of
private sector impacts is the long gestation period required for enabling environment reforms to
flow through to tangible PSOD investments and loans. In many respects, these delays were
necessary to provide the Government time to implement reforms before ADB and private
investors could commit funds. A precondition for the investment was the certainty that the
planned changes would occur within the industry. The sponsors did not perceive access to
ADB's funding per se as the most important benefit of ADB participation. Rather, the sponsors
were more interested in the leveraging effect of ADB involvement, even through a small equity
participation.

47.     Revenue and Cost Projections. The price forecasts for PLL gas in the RRP were
based on an assumed price of $29 per barrel, well below the price of approximately $75 per
barrel at the time of the OEM. Similarly, significant cost savings on capital expenditure were
realized, even though ADB participation occurred only months before project completion. These
adjustments highlight the random volatility inherent in commodity products, as well as the need
for aggressive sensitivity analyses--especially for downside scenarios--to ensure that credit
risks are managed adequately.

48.    Social and Environmental Impacts. The Government was well organized when dealing
with social impacts, keeping risks associated with resettlement with the public sector agency,
Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation. Similarly, GAIL retained the risks associated with
the development of the gas transmission network, effectively eliminating any negative social and
environmental impacts from construction and commercial performance. PLL's operations have
had positive impacts through employment, with an increasing number of local staff being
employed over time. Environmental operational impacts have been negligible due to the nature
of LNG, and the associated technology that resulted in almost zero emissions. The safety of the
mooring operations is the primary outstanding issue associated with externalities. Safety risk
has very localized physical impacts. The more serious risks involve PLL compliance with
commercial take-or-pay obligations, which probably would fall under force majeure provisions.
14


49.     Ownership Structure. As envisaged in the RRP, a chain-type ownership structure
would be adopted, allowing the Government, buyers, and a supplier to have an ownership
interest in the facility that would help minimize commercial risks. In many cases, equity
ownership can complicate buyer and supplier incentives unnecessarily. Ideally, reliance should
be placed on input and output contracts wherever possible to minimize risks of conflicts of
interest. Another important feature associated with PLL's ownership structure was an
assumption in the RRP that the Government would divest its majority shareholding in BPCL,
thereby handing majority ownership of PLL to private investors. Although the divestment has not
occurred, it does not appear to have created a problem. However, international evidence
suggests that a privatized PLL will achieve better commercial results over time.

50.     Financial Structure. Indian banks have been prepared to lend to PLL on a secured
basis due to the financial strength of the buyers and the high level of Government involvement
in the Project. As the lead arranger and financier of PLL, the Government-owned State Bank of
India raised the issue of how ADB participation adds value to Indian PPP infrastructure projects.
The primary benefits relate to access to private sector funds. Despite having a relatively
sophisticated banking sector, India still lacks access to sufficient long-term funds to finance
necessary infrastructure projects. This makes private sector participation increasingly important,
and ADB can play a central role in allaying investor and lender concerns.

51.      Partial Credit Guarantee. The potential benefits arising from the application of a PCG
were one of ADB's primary motivations for participating in the Project. However, the PCG was
not used due to adverse movements in the market. At loan appraisal, international financial
institutions, such as the International Finance Corporation, had used guarantees successfully to
support local currency bond issues. Subsequently, however, corporate bond market activity was
limited, and the market for raising local currency through the use of swaps became much more
active. ADB has the capacity to participate in this market on favorable terms due to its AAA
credit rating.

C.     Follow-Up Actions

52.     No follow-up actions are required, although ADB is recommended to exit its equity
participation as soon as practicable. The main development objectives of the equity
participation--i.e., allaying financiers concerns and strengthening governance provisions--have
been largely achieved. ADB can exit safely through the share market. No outstanding social and
environmental actions are required by ADB. Given the potential for substantial shifts in the
market between ADB's approval and financial drawdown, a degree of flexibility needs to be
incorporated in the structures presented in Board documents.
                                                                                                      Appendix 1        15


                       PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS AND RATINGS

                                                        Annotations and Ratings
                                                            Potential Future
                                                                 Impact
                                              Assessed        and Risk to
                                                Impact        Realization       Combined
Change Attributable to the PSO                 to Datea    Impact      Riskb      Rate                     Justification

A. Beyond Company Impacts
1. Improved laws, frameworks, and sector         4.0           4.0        4.0          4.0       ADB has played an important
institutions                                                                                     role developing the enabling
                                                                                                 environment for natural gas
2. Pioneering or increased private sector        4.0           4.0        4.0          4.0       Private investment is occurring
role in the country's natural gas sector                                                         in LNG
and more widely
3. Pioneering or enhanced competition (to        4.0           4.0        4.0          4.0       Private competition is being
state natural gas monopolies, early                                                              introduced into the LNG sector
concession operators, or others)
4. Relative to investments, significant          3.0           3.0        4.0          3.0       Project is helping to stimulate
economic links to previously underserved                                                         private investment in North
regions and business sectors (including                                                          West India
SMEs); and more productive employment
for reached social groups for poverty
reduction, including women
5. Pioneering or catalytic finance to            2.5           3.0        4.0          3.0       ADB could not use its partial
enhance market funding prospects for                                                             credit guarantee to support a
more investments in the natural gas                                                              bond issue, although a
sector                                                                                           subsequent follow-on ADB
                                                                                                 financing facility has been
                                                                                                 approved
B. Direct Project Company Impacts
1. Know-how: internalized management             3.5           3.0        4.0          3.5       Leading-edge LNG technology
and operational skills                                                                           introduced
2. Achieved standards of the company:
(i) against global industry performance          3.5           3.0        4.0          3.5       Standards compare with
and service quality benchmarks                                                                   developed countries
(ii) in corporate governance, transparency,      3.5           3.0        4.0          3.5       Excellent environmental, safety,
worker relations, health and social                                                              and corporate governance
security
3. Direct employment impact in relation to       3.0           3.0        3.0          3.0       Capital- rather than labor-
the amount of investments                                                                        intensive
                          c                                                                3.5   Satisfactory
          Overall Rating
LNG = liquefied natural gas, PSO = private sector operations, SME = small and medium-sized enterprise.
a
  Impact: excellent (4), satisfactory (3), party unsatisfactory (2), unsatisfactory (1).
b
  Risk: low (4), modest (3), medium (2), high (1).
c
  The calculation of the overall rating for private sector development impact is not arithmetic.
Source: Draft Guidelines for the Preparation of Performance Evaluation Reports of Private Sector Operations.
16     Appendix 2



                      DEVELOPMENTS IN THE INDIAN GAS MARKET

A.     Overview of the Natural Gas Sector in India

1.      Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) is one of the fastest growing fuels in the world, with
average annual usage rising about 8% over the past 5 years. Natural Gas is a clean and
environment-friendly fuel that can comply with stringent emission standards in power generation
and industrial processes. It is also used as compressed natural gas (CNG) in the transport
sector, helping reduce vehicle emissions. In India, substantial reserves of natural gas have been
discovered onshore and offshore. While the availability of gas is expected to improve, the
demand for energy is expected to grow more quickly. At ­160O C, natural gas becomes liquid
and its volume shrinks by 600 times, facilitating its transportation for trade.

2.      With crude oil prices at around $75 per barrel (BBL), LNG has emerged not only as a
clean source of energy, but also as a cost-effective fuel. Several industries in the country are
using more expensive liquid fuels (naphtha and fuel oil, low-sulfur heavy stock) as sources of
energy and carbon feedstocks. The indigenous availability of natural gas is unable to meet the
demand of natural gas, and the reserves are declining steadily. As such, the importation of LNG
is increasingly important. India is strategically located close to the large gas reserves in the
Middle East and the Asia-Pacific countries. These countries hold 70% of the world's LNG
liquefaction and export facilities. Globally, gas accounts for nearly 23% of commercial energy
consumption. Natural gas accounts for only 9% of the Indian energy basket due to domestic
supply constraints. The Government of India (the Government) is seeking to identify options to
increase natural gas consumption within India.

B.     Demand and Supply of Natural Gas

3.      Lack of access constrains the demand for natural gas. If additional supplies of LNG were
made available within the country, through discoveries of further reserves and expansion of of
pipeline distribution capacity, the use of gas could be much higher. Table A2.1 shows various
supply scenarios based on a Government study, Hydrocarbon Vision 2025.

                          Table A2.1: Future Gas Deficit Scenarios
                                         (MMSCMD)
                                                  2002    2007     2012    2020
                      A. Demand Scenario 1         117     166      216     322
                      Supply
                      1. As given scenario          70       58      45      36

                      2. Optimistic scenario        70       64      78      84
                      Gap (as given)                47      108     171     286
                      Gap (optimistic)              47      102     138     238

                      B. Demand Scenario 2         151      231     313     391
                      Supply
                      1. As given scenario          70       58      45      36

                      2. Optimistic scenario        70      64        78     84
                      Gap (as given)                81     173      268     355
                      Gap (optimistic)              81     167      235     307
                      MMSCMD = million standard cubic meters per day.
                      Source: Hydrocarbon Vision 2025.
                                                                                      Appendix 2   17


4.       In 2005, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) estimated in its annual
report that the energy sector accounted for 69% of natural gas consumed in India, while the rest
was used primarily as feedstock in the fertilizer and petrochemical industries. The energy and
fertilizer sectors are allocated state-owned gas at subsidized prices, although they are free to
purchase gas from private sources at market rates if they wish. The most rapid sources of
growth between 2004 and 2005 are the domestic fuel sector (269%), followed by industrial fuel
(16%) and petrochemicals (10%). Domestic fuel consumption is growing following directives
from the Supreme Court of India to increase in the use of CNG as a fuel for the transport sector.
Indraprastha Gas Limited (IGL) in Delhi and Mahanagar Gas Limited (MGL) in Mumbai are
developing gas distribution projects for the supply of CNG and piped natural gas in these cities.
IGL is catering to about 94,246 vehicles of different categories through 135 CNG stations. MGL
has set up 105 CNG stations to service about 147,536 vehicles, mainly three-wheelers and cars.

5.      The two critical supply constraints are inadequate reserves of natural gas and lack of
distribution capacity. The geographic distribution of India's gas reserves is as follows: (i)
western offshore, 54%; (ii) onshore Gujarat region, 13%; (iii) onshore Andhra Pradesh region,
6%; and (iv) others, 27%. The western offshore area (Mumbai High Basin) supplies most of
India's gas. Assam, Andhra Pradesh, and Gujarat states also produce major volumes of gas,
followed by Tripura, Tamil Nadu, and Rajasthan. About 60% of India's natural gas is associated
with oil. The south basin and Tapti fields in the western offshore area, the gas fields in the
western offshore area, and the gas fields in Tripura and Andhra Pradesh Krishna Godavari (KG)
Basin produce most of India's non-associated gas. The majority of the western offshore gas
supply, including Mumbai High Basin, is expected to gradually die out by 2020.

6.       In terms of volume, India's proven gas reserves at the beginning of 2004 stood at 0.85
trillion standard cubic meters (SCM). The Government has been actively encouraging private
sector investment in exploration and development under the New Exploration Policy (NELP),
which is used to tender concessions to firms in the public and private sectors. The NELP
program has been successful. A recent gas discovery of more than 0.283 trillion SCM in the KG
Basin by the private company Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) increased India's reserves
significantly, and more is expected to be found. Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation made an
estimated 0.566 trillion SCM discovery in the KG Basin that is potentially the largest gas find in
India. Other companies, such as Oil and Natural Gas Corporation of India (ONGC), also have
found gas in KG Basin. RIL has discovered additional gas reserves in three Bay of Bengal wells
off the coast of Orissa, where potential reserves could total 0.142 trillion SCM. In addition to
natural gas reserves, the Government has developed a policy to extract methane trapped in
coal seams that can be used as an energy source. Coal-based methane resources are
estimated at about 820 billion cubic meters (BCM), with expected production of about 23 million
standard cubic meters per day.1

7.      The two national oil companies--ONGC and Oil India Ltd (OIL)--accounted for 79.66%
of the natural gas production in the country, with ONGC accounting for the larger share. The
private sector's share in natural gas production has increased from 2% in 1997 to 21.34% in
2005, and is expected to rise further as several NELP fields start yielding natural gas.




1
    http://www.dghindia.org/cmb_listofblocks.html, last accessed on 7 November 2005
18     Appendix 2



                       Table A2.2: Company Production of Natural Gas
                                         (MCM)
                Year             Oil           ONGC             Private/JV         Total
                1995/96        1,433           20,875                331              22,639
                1996/97        1,496           21,281                479              23,256
                1997/98        1,670           23,050              1,681              26,401
                1998/99        1,713           22,841              2,874              27,428
                1999/00        1,729           23,252              3,465              28,446
                2000/01        1,861           24,020              3,596              29,477
                2001/02        1,619           24,041              4,054              29,714
                2002/03        1,744           24,244              5,407              31,395
                2003/04        1,880           23,584              6,491              31,955
                2004/05        2,007           22,985              6,782              31,774
                 OIL = Oil India Ltd., ONGC = Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd., JV = joint
                 venture, MCM = million cubic meters.
                 Source Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (2005).

8.      In addition to the shortage of domestic gas reserves, the Indian gas market has limited
transmission infrastructure. It consists of small regional pipelines, and the Hazira­Bijaipur­
Jagdeshpur (HBJ) 2,300 kilometer (km) pipeline that carries gas from the offshore Mumbai High
Basin to fertilizer and power plants in North West India. The capacity of the HBJ pipeline is
about 1.18 billion cubic feet per day (bcfd), which is sufficient for about 45% of India's gas
consumption. The HBJ pipeline, operated by GAIL India Limited (GAIL), carries Petronet LNG
Limited's (PLL) LNG imports through the state of Gujarat. GAIL is expanding the Dahej­Bijapur
section of the HBJ pipeline; and building the Dahej­Uran gas pipeline, which is scheduled for
completion in 2006. GAIL also is developing the $4.4 billion National Gas Grid, which is
expected to cover the entire country. The 8,000 km project will be implemented in phases over
the next 6­7 years. GAIL intends to build and operate an east-to-west truckline linking Kakinada
port in the Bay of Bengal to Hazira in the Arabian Sea. With the Government permitting private
sector investment in gas transmission infrastructure, RIL intends to build a 1,400 km pipeline
from Kakinada to Ahemdabad via Hyderabad and Uran in Maharashtra. The pipeline would
transport RIL's reserves in the KG Basin to the Gujarat power plants belonging to National
Thermal Power Corporation. In addition, RIL plans to build a pipeline from Hyderabad on the
east cost to Delhi. Several smaller projects also are being implemented, including (i) a 600 km
pipeline from Visakhapatnam to Secundrabad in Andhra Pradesh; (ii) a 700 km pipeline from
Managalore in Karnataka to Madurai in Tamil Nadu; and (iii) a 575 km pipeline that will connect
PLL's Kochi LNG terminal to Kerala.

9.      Despite the increasing private investment, recent discoveries of domestic natural gas
reserves, and improvements in the transmission network, demand continues to outstrip supply.
To help bridge this gap, some public and private sector companies are pursuing gas importation
options. In 2004, PLL commissioned the first LNG terminal in India at Dahej, Gujarat. The PLL
terminal has a capacity of 5.0 million metric tons per annum (MMTPA). In April 2005, a second
LNG terminal with a capacity of 2.5 MMTPA was commissioned at Hazira, Gujarat by Royal
Dutch Shell Group and Total Gaz Electricite Holdings of France, which are the joint owners and
operators of the terminal. The Hazira plant sources gas from the spot market instead of using
the conventional system of purchasing gas through long-term sales and purchase agreements.
Few other LNG terminals have been planned along the east and west coast of the country.
Details of LNG terminals in India are summarized in Table A3.3.
                                                                                                   Appendix 2        19

            Table A2.3: Details of Commissioned and Proposed LNG Terminals in India
Project and Developers          Location and State          Capacity         Supplier                 Status
                                                            (MMTPA)
Dahej LNG terminal             Dahej (Gujarat)               5 (to be       Qatar (5.0 +    Commissioned in February
(Petronet)                                               expanded to 10)    2.5 MMTPA)      2004, the terminal began
                                                                                            commercial sales in April
                                                                                            2004. Expansion to be
                                                                                            completed by 2008

Dabhol terminal                Dabhol (Maharashtra)             5.0           Oman,         Complete; commissioning
(GE/Bechtel/MSEB)                                                            Abu Dhabi      delayed by contractual
                                                                                            dispute

Hazira LNG (Shell)             Hazira (Gujarat)            2.5 (phase I),      Shell        Commissioned in April
                                                           5.0 (phase II)     Portfolio     2005

Kochi LNG (Petronet)           Kochi (Kerala)                   2.5         In discussion   Project expected to be
                                                                                            completed by 2008

Ennore LNG                     Ennore (Tamil Nadu)              2.5             Iran        Planned
(IOCL, CPCL)
CPCL = Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, GE = General Electric, IOCL = Indian Oil Corporation Limited, LNG =
liquefied natural gas, MMTPA = million metric tonnes per annum, MSEB= Maharashtra State Electricity Board.
Source: TERI (2005).

10.      Developers are investigating the potential for importing LNG via pipelines from
neighboring countries. Several pipelines have been proposed to serve the Indian market,
originating from Iran, Myanmar, Bangladesh, and Turkmenistan. The most likely international
pipeline is the 2,600 km overland pipeline connecting the South Pars field in Iran with the HBJ
pipeline in India via Pakistan. In June 2005, the Government signed a $20 billion contract with
Iran to import 5.0 MMTPA of LNG for 25 years, beginning in 2009. National Iranian Oil Company
would supply this gas from its South Pars gas field. The destination ports for the gas in India are
the Dahej and Kochi terminals. The negotiated price for the deal is $3.21 per million British
thermal units (MMBTU). This price includes a fixed component of $1.20 per MMBTU and a
variable component linked to the Brent price, which has been capped at $31 dollars per BBL.2
The current status of this deal is unclear, as Iran has asked for an increase in the price of
natural gas and has sought to limit supply to lean gas that excludes various carbon components
unrelated to energy content.

C.         Pricing and Regulation

11.     In the gas sector, prices are both administratively and market based. ONGC and OIL sell
gas from the pre-NELP blocks to GAIL under the administered pricing mechanism (APM). In
1997, the Government sought to achieve parity between fuel oil prices and gas, though this
policy has been ineffective. As a result, gas sold under the APM continues to be allocated at
prices substantially below market rates for gas and transmission costs. The APM price of gas
for the North Eastern region is approximately 60% of the new price. The matter of fixing the
producer price of natural gas has been referred to the Tariff Commission, a body under the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry that is serving as a de-facto regulator. For gas produced
under the NELP blocks, output can be sold at market-determined prices defined in the
negotiated production sharing contracts and gas sales agreements.



2
    Times of India. 2005. India, Iran sign $20-billion LNG deal. 14 June.
20     Appendix 2



12.     Similarly, imported regasified LNG sourced from the PLL and Shell plants is sold at
market-determined prices. PLL has signed an agreement with Ras Laffan Liquefied Natural Gas
Company Limited (RasGas) of Qatar for the supply of 5.0 MMTPA of LNG for 25 years at a free
on board (FOB) price of $2.53 per MMBTU for the first 5 years of operation, starting in 2004.
After accounting for items such as shipping, customs duties, pipeline charges, regasification,
and sales tax, the delivered price is $4.25 per MMBTU. After 2009, the fixed price will become a
variable price for a 60-month transition period. The participating parties have agreed to an
increase of $0.13 per MMBTU for each $1.00 increase in the price of oil above $20 per BBL.
This formula does not have a ceiling, allowing the price of LNG to rise to more than $6 per
MMBTU if the price of oil stays at more than $50 per BBL. At this stage, PLL's delivered gas
price is very competitive relative to the Hazira terminal gas. Royal Dutch Shell, which has been
promoting its Hazira terminal as a merchant terminal, sourced its first LNG consignment from
Australia's North West Shelf project at a price of $3.70 per MMBTU, which is significantly higher
than PLL's purchase FOB price. RIL's gas discovery in the KG Basin will affect the future
competitiveness of LNG imports. RIL recently agreed to supply National Thermal Power
Corporation a delivered consumer price of $2.97 per MMBTU in Gujarat, although this
transaction is seen as a one off loss leader.

13.      Demand for natural gas depends primarily on its competitiveness relative to other fuels,
as well as the price absorption capacity of its primary users (power and fertilizer). The use of
natural gas and LNG in the power sector depends on its competitiveness with respect to coal
and liquid hydrocarbons, such as naphtha, low-sulfur heavy stock, and fuel oil (which are used
sparingly). The eastern states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and Orissa hold 70% of the country's
coal reserves. The pithead coal price in the east averages about $12 per ton, and the freight
cost from east to west can add another $12 per ton. Given coal's relatively high transport costs,
the economics of gas for power generation differ from one area of the country to another,
resulting in a differentiated electricity market. As a rough guideline, if natural gas is priced at
$3.00­$4.00 per MMBTU in the western and southern parts of the country, it can compete with
coal. LNG is likely to be most competitive in these regions, especially if a power plant is close to
the regasification terminal and transmission costs are avoided. For the fertilizer sector, the
Government provides huge ($2.6 billion) annual subsidies. Many fertilizer plants use expensive
fuel oil and naphtha, because they have little incentive to switch fuels under the Government's
subsidy program. Recently, however, the Government has been promoting the use of natural
gas as a feedstock in the production of urea, and plans to convert many fuel-fed plants to gas.
As fertilizer imports are a viable long-term option, the netback of gas used in domestic urea
production versus urea imports needs to be priced at about $3.00 per MMBTU to stay
competitive.

14.    Transportation fees charged by GAIL for delivering gas over its pipelines are regulated.
The legislation establishing the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, enacted in April
2006, is designed to set up a regulatory body to oversee and regulate the refining, processing,
storage, transportation, distribution, marketing, and sale of petroleum products and natural gas.
The Government's gas industry policy lays out the role of the regulator in preparing a long-term
plan for the gas pipeline network. The policy proposes that the regulator should adopt a
nondiscriminatory approach when deciding on access arrangements for the gas pipeline, and
should consider the common carrier principle to ensure equal opportunities for all users.
                                                                               Appendix 3    21


                       REVIEW OF PETRONET LNG'S OPERATIONS

A.     Background

1.      In 1997, the Government of India (the Government) helped create Petronet LNG Limited
(PLL) to develop and import liquefied natural gas (LNG) at various coastal locations. PLL was to
bridge the large gap between the demand and supply of natural gas in the country. PLL is the
first company in India and South Asia to import LNG and successfully set up a LNG
regasification terminal. The 5.0 million metric tons per annum (MMTPA) LNG receiving and
regasification terminal at Dahej, Gujarat state (the Project) has been constructed and
commissioned in record time at a benchmark cost. During the buildup period in 2004, the Dahej
LNG terminal operated at 50% capacity, but from 2005 onward the plant has been capable of
operating at 100% capacity. Regasified LNG from Dahej terminal is supplying consumers in
Gujarat and along the recently upgraded Hazira­Bijaipur­Jagdishpur (HBJ) pipeline, traversing
the states of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, and Delhi. GAIL (India)
Limited (GAIL) is constructing about 485 kilometers (km) of additional pipeline from Dahej LNG
terminal to Uran in Mumbai.

2.       The increased availability of gas has generated important benefits for the Indian
economy. The Project has spurred market liberalization and commercialization of the LNG
industry. PLL's customer base is broken down as follows: power sector, 70%; fertilizer, 15%;
and others, 5%. As a result, the Project has had the greatest impact in the power sector, which
uses expensive naptha ($15­$18 per million British thermal units [MMBTU]) for generation. The
fertilizer sector has benefited from the Project, as expensive and low-energy naptha has been
replaced with natural gas in many cases to produce urea. Several industries have shifted to
captive power generation systems based on natural gas, which is more efficient. These
developments have freed up power for other sectors. In addition to economic benefits arising
from increasing energy efficiency, natural gas utilization has generated environmental benefits
by producing less carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions than other sources of energy and carbon
feedstocks. Additional benefits could be realized in the future as companies, such as GAIL and
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC), are able to extract high carbon components
from the rich PLL gas, without lowering the energy content. This would provide low-cost inputs
for sectors such as petrochemical manufacturing. The PLL plant has provided the Indian gas
sector with much-needed technical expertise in the design, operation, and maintenance of LNG
terminals.

B.     Description of Major Project Components

3.       The PLL facility is based on a concession agreement signed with Gujarat Maritime
Board, which provided a 99-year lease for a 58.6 hectare site, and a 30-year agreement to
develop and use a port facility. The government of Gujarat had not approved the draft at the
time of the Operations Evaluation Mission. PLL also signed a 25-year LNG supply contract with
Ras Laffan Liquefied Gas Company (Rasgas), based in Qatar, in July 1999. The contract
initiated construction of various facilities for suppliers and buyers of the LNG. Rasgas has
developed offshore gas production facilities in the North field of Qatar, as well as a dedicated
liquefaction train with 5.0 MMTPA capacity. It was commissioned to meet the requirements of
the Dahej terminal, and became fully operational in March 2004. The North field of Qatar is the
largest gas field in the world, which helps ensure the security of LNG supplies throughout the
contract.
22     Appendix 3



4.      PLL has signed two shipping time charter agreements with a consortium led by Mitsui
OSK Lines for transportation of LNG from Qatar to Dahej for 25 years. Mitsui has constructed
two special purpose vessels to transport LNG from Qatar to the Dahej LNG terminal in Gujarat
for 25 years. Mitsui contracted Daewoo Ship Building and Marine Engineering Company,
Republic of Korea, to construct the LNG tankers, which were completed on time and at agreed
cost. PLL appointed a consortium consisting of PSA Marine Private Limited, Singapore, and
Ocean Sparkle Limited, India, to operate the port at Dahej. The port operator, which is providing
tugs, marine crafts, and crew at the Dahej port, is responsible for safe berthing of LNG tankers
at the jetty and other related marine services. The port operator has formed a special purpose
company, named Sealion Sparkle Port and Terminal Services (Dahej) Limited, to provide the
services to PLL. Finally, the port operator has mobilized the required manpower, tugs, and
boats at the site, and berthing operations are in process.

5.      The construction of the LNG terminal at Dahej was executed through a lump sum
turnkey engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) contract issued by a consortium of
companies led by Ishikawajima Harima-Heavy Industries Corporation Limited (IHI), Japan. The
other members of the consortium are Ballast Nedam International BV-Netherlands, Toyo
Engineering India Limited, Toyo Engineering Corporation, Itochu Corporation, and Mitsui
Company Limited. IHI is one of the most reputable construction companies in the world in the
field of LNG regasification terminals. PLL commissioned India's first LNG receiving and
regasification terminal at Dahej in February 2004. Following the arrival of the first LNG tanker at
Dahej and the mechanical completion of the terminal facilities, the EPC contractor completed
the commissioning in April 2004, allowing the commencement of commercial operations. Foster
Wheeler Energy Limited was the project management consultant responsible for the regular
review, monitoring, and execution of the Project according to the EPC contract.

6.      The LNG port facilities include an approximately 2.5-kilometer (km) jetty and the
equipment necessary to unload LNG from special purpose ships. The Dahej facilities also
include two full containment LNG storage tanks, each with gross capacity of 160,000 cubic
meters, and a gas recovery system for re-condensation of boil-off gas. Send out facilities
include seven air-heated shell and two tube vaporizers (STV) and submerged combustion
vaporizers (SCV). The STVs and air heaters with 112 fans have the capacity to evaporate 88.2
tons per hour of LNG. The STVs are heated indirectly through a glycol-water system, which
circulates in a closed loop and uses the ambient air as a heat source. Most LNG plants use
seawater for evaporation of the LNG. The traditional water gasification system was not adopted
in Dahej, because the plant is located in an estuary where the seawater is muddy. PLL would
have to go approximately 50 km offshore to obtain clean seawater for regasification, which
would not be cost-effective. Each SCVs can process 100 tons per hour of LNG using hot water
sourced from the waste heat of the gas turbine flue gases. Two of the three gas turbines are
always in operation, while one is on standby. Auxiliary facilities include three 7.5-megawatt (MW)
gas turbines in a captive power plant facility, and a high-tension backup power supply
arrangement from the Gujarat Electricity Board. The only major technical deviation from the
design reviewed at appraisal was the substitution of a full containment LNG storage tank for the
construction of the proposed breakwater. The EPC contractor is building the new tank as part of
the phase II expansion program.

C.     Plant Operations and Safety Aspects

7.      The two special purpose LNG tankers deliver the LNG at the jetty that has been built
specially for unloading these tankers. The jetty has three unloading arms and a return regasified
gas line. The facility has one of the longest LNG jetties in the world, with about 2.5 km of
                                                                                     Appendix 3     23


pipelines for the transportation of the LNG from the jetty to the storage tanks. The two LNG
tankers have a capacity of 138,000 cubic meters each, and they utilize a membrane technology
to keep the gas cool in a liquid state. The water depth at the ship mooring is 16 meters
maximum, and the tidal variation is 10.4 meters.

8.      Qualified graduate engineers trained by Gaz de France (GDF), which is a stakeholder in
PLL, manage and maintain plant operations. GDF, which is responsible for carrying out safety
audits regularly, has signed off on PLL operations as efficient with boil-off gas half that of the
designed values. The plant is operated in accordance with international practices and norms
specified for LNG terminals. Safety is the primary issue associated with the plant. In response,
GDF has recommended that unloading during the monsoon period be carried out under
predefined parameters. These are related to local weather conditions, which should cover the
wind speeds, wave height, and water currents that have caused difficulties during mooring
operations. PLL has been advised to appoint a local weather consultant for this activity, and
simulation exercises with the assistance of an international consultant have been recommended
to define the safe limits for unloading during the monsoon period.

D.     Risk Mitigation

9.       During the Project, the events that constitute critical safety risks at the LNG terminal are
(i) a collision of LNG tankers with other ships, or LNG tankers running aground; (ii) an LNG leak
during unloading; (iii) an LNG leak from safety valves at the top of the storage tanks; and (iv)
major earthquakes. The likelihood of these events has been minimized through strict application
of rigorous standards in the design and operations of the terminal, and through
institutionalization of a standard emergency response plan and a disaster management plan.
Safety aspects are incorporated in the design of the project facilities using well-established
standards. The national design codes are the Oil Industry Safety Directorate OISD­194. The
design standards internationally adopted are the European standard, EN­1473, the US National
Fire Protection Association standard, NFPA­59A, and British Standard BS7777. The design of
the existing facilities adopted these standards. They also will be applied to the new facilities with
some non-safety-related modifications to suit the site specificities, such as the choice of indirect
LNG regasification using glycol water-air heating system instead of the conventional open rack
vaporizers. The air heating system has proved to be environmental friendly, producing a
significant volume of clean water from condensation of humidity in the air.

10.      The two existing LNG storage tanks are full-containment tanks that are safer than the
more conventional single- or double-containment tanks. In addition to safety considerations, full-
containment tanks have the following advantages over single- and double-containment tanks: (i)
higher operating pressure, thus reducing boil-off gas during unloading operation; (ii) loads of
piping structure and accessories not transferred to the primary container; (iii) no risk of leaks
from tank; and (iv) secondary container can withstand external impacts without collapse, and
can hold LNG if it leaks from the primary container. For these reasons, the two new storage
tanks under the phase II expansion also will be full-containment tanks. Several other safety
measures adopted in the design of the existing LNG terminal will be incorporated in the phase II
facilities. Some examples of the existing plant safety measures include (i) locating the isolation
valve of the pig launcher station closer to the plant boundary to provide additional protection
against backflow from the transmission network that could feed fires and damage the tank; (ii)
providing a pressure sensor on the glycol side of the STVs to trigger LNG shutdown in the event
of a leak; (iii) installing a rupture disk on glycol side (shell) for overpressure protection; and (iv)
providing blast-proof construction in accordance with local regulations. The control room,
administration building, and other inhabited buildings are constructed with minimal or no
24     Appendix 3



windows towards the production process, and their overall window area has been minimized.
Firewater tank and pumps are located as far away from the process areas as possible. As the
project site is in a region classified as earthquake class 3, the terminal facilities were designed
based on the assumption of an earthquake-induced lateral movement once in 1,000 years.

11.     The terminal has been designed to accommodate accidents due to fire and LNG vapor
leakage, in accordance with the United States Environmental Protection Agency standard EN
1473. The thermal exclusion zone and the vapor dispersion zone were calculated for the
following possible scenarios:

       (i)     rupture of one of the unloading arms during discharge of LNG from the tankers,
               and
       (ii)    release of LNG from the three relief valves on top of one of the tanks.

12.     The thermal exclusion zone and the vapor dispersion zone were calculated using the
models recommended in EN 1473 for the storage tank leak, and the models recommended by
the USEPA for the unloading arm leak. The findings of the consequence analysis are
summarized in Table A3. The exclusion zones in the case of the storage tanks are within the
boundaries of the terminal complex. In the case of the unloading arms, the exclusion zones are
within the distance between the jetty and the complex.

                        Table A3: Summary of the Consequence Analysis
                    Exclusion Zone   Rupture of Unloading Arms   Storage Tank Leak
                                                (meters)              (meters)
                 Thermal                          700                    77
                 Vapor dispersion                 250                    57
                Source: Petronet LNG Limited estimates.

13.     PLL has prepared and institutionalized an emergency response plan (ERP) and a
disaster management plan (DMP). The ERP prescribes actions and procedures to be taken
when dealing with major releases, unignited releases, and fire and explosion emergencies. The
ERP is supported by (i) gas detection, (ii) safety shutdown and fire protection systems, (iii)
safety and security zones, (iv) ship and facility emergency response plan, (v) coordination with
the Gujarat Maritime Board and the coast guard, and (vi) evacuation plans and procedures. The
ERP will be revised to cover the expanded operations. The DMP prepared by PLL is effective in
preventing and managing any incidents or accidents in and around the terminal complex, jetty,
and waterfront. PLL has established and maintained suitable systems; employed or contracted
skilled and trained personnel; and installed efficient communication equipment, as well as other
equipment and facilities, required for prompt application at any stage of DMP procedures. PLL
organizes periodic exercises and simulations with the port operator and LNG tanker crew based
on various simulated accident scenarios. PLL will revise the DMP as appropriate to cover the
expanded operations, in line with the Ministry of Environment and Forestry's conditions for
environmental clearance.

14.     For jetty operations, PLL has engaged an experienced port operator to provide services
that include hazard prevention, as well as health, safety, and environment services related to
jetty operations. With the assistance of the port operator, the Health, Safety and Environmental
Unit is involved in prevention activities on the waterfront. PLL personnel have been trained
extensively in firefighting at LNG terminals operating in France and Qatar. The port operator
also has deployed trained personnel to manage the waterfront activities. The waste
management plan complies with International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of
                                                                                 Appendix 3     25


Ships. A mutual aid system is in place with other companies operating in the Dahej industrial
estate. In the event of a major incident, the management team can call upon other companies in
the area to assist within their resources and make them available as required.

15.     To enhance safety further during unloading operations, wind speeds and wave heights in
the vicinity of the jetty are monitored continuously, and the data are transmitted to a central
unloading control room at the jetty. Emergency responses are prescribed for various wind and
wave conditions, as well as LNG leaks; and procedures are established and ready for
implementation. The jetty terminal is fully equipped with firefighting equipment. The waters
around the jetty also are patrolled regularly to ensure security. These safety operations are
outsourced to a qualified port operator. The Gujarat Maritime Board regulates and inspects
regularly the emergency and safety measures. Terminal operations are centrally controlled by
computer. A computerized control system continuously measures and monitors all process
parameters, such as pressure, temperature, flow rate, and mass. The real-time data are
processed by computer and interpreted to ensure efficient process control and safety. The
computerized control system allows immediate identification and location of leaks in the terminal
system. Emergency signals and alarms are sent out automatically for immediate response.

E.     Marketing and Sales

16.     PLL's business model is based on back-to-back long-term contracts. The purchase of
the 5.0 MMTPA of LNG imported from Rasgas over 25 years under a sales and purchase
agreement has been tied to gas sales and purchase agreements (GSPA) with three offtakers:
GAIL, Indian Oil Company, and Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (collectively referred to
as the offtakers). Under the GSPA, PLL's sales obligation to the offtakers is completed on the
delivery of regasified LNG to the GAIL pipeline at the Dahej terminal. From there, GAIL
transports the gas through the HBJ pipeline at the offtaker's risk.

17.     While the offtakers' take-or-pay obligations ensure a market for the entire production,
some commercial risks remain. All the major participants in the Indian hydrocarbon sector have
plans to enter the natural gas industry. In addition to Indian firms, multinational companies
entering the Indian market are creating new competition. Improvements in exploration
technology, and economies of scale in gas liquefaction and transportation, are helping to drive
down delivered costs. Offsetting these concerns, the global price of LNG has increased due to
rising costs of crude oil. Scarcity of gas in domestic and international markets will help underpin
continued high prices.

F.     Construction Costs and Financial Projections

18.     At the exchange rate of Rs45 per $1, project costs was well within the range of current
international projects. For example, the Mitsubishi Flour Daniel LNG Terminal Project was
estimated to cost approximately $885 million. Financial projections, based on conservative price
projections and operating costs, indicate excellent financial returns to sponsors, as well as
adequate security for debt financiers.
26        Appendix 4



                 REEVALUATION OF THE ECONOMIC INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN

A.        Methodology

1.      The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was recalculated for 2000­2028, covering 4
years of pre-operating activity (2000­2003) and 25 years of operations of the Project. Costs and
benefits are measured using domestic prices, with traded items being adjusted by an exchange
rate factor and expressed in constant 2006 prices.7 Figures were adjusted to exclude taxes and
interest. However, they include capital costs of associated facilities, such as the expanded
elements of the Hazira­Bijaypur­Jadgishpur (HBJ) pipeline. The shadow exchange rate used
in the analysis was 1.1, which was the same as in the original assessment.

B.        Valuation of Benefits and Costs

          1.       Valuation of Benefits

2.       Economic benefits arising from the Project have been estimated separately for the
fertilizer and the power sectors, which are the major consumers of natural gas. Other gas-
consuming sectors are transport and steel production. Benefits are based on:
          (i)      Switched (non-incremental) demand or resource cost saving, which reflects the
                   benefits derived from savings using liquefied natural gas (LNG) instead of
                   naphtha. This figure is derived by using the supply market price, which is the cost
                   of production at cost insurance freight (CIF) prices.
          (ii)     Unmet (incremental) demand that is valued by using the demand price based on
                   the free on board (FOB) prices, reflecting the price that consumers are willing to
                   pay for the LNG product.

3.     Volume demand by end users, as verified from interviews with stakeholders,8 is shown in
Table A4.1.

                                        Table A4.1: Demand Forecasts
                                                 (MMSCMD)
                                Sector                         Demand
                                Fertilizer          Unmet demand = 10 MMSCMD
                                                    Switched demand = 8 MMSCMD
                                Power               Switched demand = 7 MMSCMD
                               MMSCMD = million metric standard cubic meters per day.
                               Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.




7
    Benefits associated with environmental benefits of using clean gas rather than coal have been excluded from the
    analysis due to difficulties in quantifying them. However, these could be substantial, ranging from $4 million to $24
    million per annum.
8
    GAIL (India) Limited and Indian Oil Corporation Limited.
                                                                                  Appendix 4        27

4.     An important feature of these estimates is the combined demand from the fertilizer and
power sector, which exceeds the 5.0 million metric tons per annum plant capacity at Dahej. This
result raises two important points: (i) additional plant capacity is needed to meet the
requirements of users in the fertilizer, power, and other sectors; and (ii) the switching of
consumers from expensive alternatives, such as naphtha, will create demand for natural gas
from existing suppliers.

       1.     Valuation of Costs

5.     Financial capital costs were converted to economic costs by excluding taxes and interest
during construction. Traded components were converted to the domestic numeraire by using a
shadow exchange rate factor of 1.1. The capital cost included those costs associated with the
LNG terminal and the expansion of the HBJ pipeline.

6.      Besides capital expenditures, the valuation included operations and maintenance cost of
the LNG terminal and expanded HBJ pipeline, with the latter accounting for about 2.0% of the
capital cost of the HBJ pipeline. The valuation also takes into account the cost of imported LNG,
net of duties.

C.     Economic Internal Rate of Return

6.      The recalculated EIRR in 2006 prices is estimated to be 32.6% (Table A4.2), compared
with the appraisal estimate of 23.0%. The higher EIRR is attributed to the substantial price gap
between natural gas and naphtha, which contributed to higher resource cost savings (thus
higher benefits) derived from switching to gas. Sensitivity analysis indicated that the EIRR is
robust under a wide range of scenarios (Table A4.3).
28      Appendix 4



            Table A4.2: Petronet LNG Limited Economic Internal Rate of Return
                                         (Rs million)


                         CAPEX of
                        Associated        O&M        O & M of
            CAPEX        Facilities      Cost of     Associate       Cost of
            of LNG      (Expanded         LNG           d           Imported                           Net
 Year      Terminal        HBJ)         Terminal     Facilities       LNG         Benefits         Benefit
 2000         (487.1)                                                                              (487.1)
 2001       (4,824.7)                                                                            (4,824.7)
 2002       (6,054.6)                                                                            (6,054.6)
 2003     (10,954.6)                                                                            (10,954.6)
 2004                    (24,207.2)     (1,062.4)      (484.1)     (17,335.0)    25,209.9       (17,878.8)
 2005                                   (1,756.9)      (463.5)     (33,270.6)     58,669.0        23,177.9
 2006                                   (1,761.1)      (450.0)     (33,286.1)     58,254.7        22,757.6
 2007                                   (1,788.9)      (434.8)     (33,044.2)     57,940.2        22,672.4
 2008                                   (1,840.0)      (434.8)     (36,506.4)     59,184.9        20,403.7
 2009                                   (1,919.2)      (434.8)     (46,347.5)     59,200.3        10,498.8
 2010                                   (2,101.9)      (434.8)     (54,338.8)     59,678.5         2,803.0
 2011                                   (2,171.3)      (434.8)     (62,655.4)     60,133.5       (5,127.9)
 2012                                   (2,206.0)      (434.8)     (47,688.7)     65,176.5        14,847.0
 2013                                   (2,390.3)      (434.8)     (49,363.7)     67,093.3        14,904.5
 2014                                   (2,484.4)      (434.8)     (50,724.9)     69,066.7        15,422.6
 2015                                   (2,521.0)      (434.8)     (52,383.0)     71,098.0        15,759.2
 2016                                   (2,735.1)      (434.8)     (53,954.5)     73,189.1        16,064.8
 2017                                   (2,808.2)      (434.8)     (55,442.7)     75,341.8        16,656.1
 2018                                   (2,881.0)      (434.8)     (57,254.5)     77,557.6        16,987.4
 2019                                   (3,139.7)      (434.8)     (58,840.1)     79,838.8        17,424.2
 2020                                   (3,226.2)      (434.8)     (60,760.6)     82,186.9        17,765.3
 2021                                   (3,316.7)      (434.8)     (62,595.1)     84,604.2        18,257.5
 2022                                   (3,625.0)      (434.8)     (64,322.5)     87,092.6        18,710.2
 2023                                   (3,733.5)      (434.8)     (66,442.9)     89,654.0        19,042.9
 2024                                   (3,837.9)      (434.8)     (68,269.5)     92,291.0        19,748.8
 2025                                   (4,201.5)      (434.8)     (70,517.5)     95,005.3        19,851.5
 2026                                   (4,317.6)      (434.8)     (72,653.8)     97,799.6        20,393.3
 2027                                   (4,439.2)      (434.8)     (74,668.3)    100,676.1        21,133.8
 2028                                   (4,870.4)      (434.8)     (77,127.5)    103,637.0        21,204.4

                                                                                    EIRR            32.6%
( ) = negative, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, CAPEX = capital expenditure, O&M = operations and
maintenance, LNG = liquefied natural gas, HBJ= Hazira-BIjaypur-Jadgishpur.
Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
                                                                  Appendix 4   29

Table A4.3: Petronet LNG Limited Sensitivity Analysis

 Item                                                 EIRR (%)
 Base Case                                               32.6
 15% Increase in O&M Cost                                31.9
 20% LNG Price Increase                                  22.2
 10% Decrease in Benefits                                21.5
 All four adverse scenarios at the same time              3.9
  EIRR = economic internal rate of return, O&M = operations and
  maintenance, LNG = liquefied natural gas.
  Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.
30     Appendix 5


               SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY PERFORMANCE

A.     Petronet LNG Limited Facilities

1.      Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) has set up a liquefied natural gas (LNG) receiving, storage,
and regasification facility at Dahej, Gujarat state. The LNG terminal has a designed capacity of
5.0 million metric tons per annum (MMTPA) in phase I, with an expansion envisaged to 10.0
MMTPA in phase II. GAIL (India) Limited distributes natural gas from this terminal to consumers
through a pipeline from Dahej to Vijaypur, which runs parallel to the existing Hazira­Bijaipur­
Jagdishpur (HBJ) pipeline.

2.    At the Dahej site, the Gujarat Maritime Board allotted 55 hectares of land to set up the
LNG terminal. The facilities at the existing Dahej terminal include:

       (i)       marine facilities:           2.43-kilometer (km) jetty;
                                              mooring dolphins, breasting dolphins, unloading
                                              platforms, a gangway tower, walkway bridges.
       (ii)      unloading facilities:        LNG loading arms (3), LNG arm (1),
                                              unloading line (2), vapor return line, and
                                              de-superheater.
       (iii)     LNG storage tanks:           two tanks (full-containment type), each with
                                              160,000 cubic meter (m3) gross capacity.
       (iv)      boil-of-gas recovery system: cryogenic compressors (3);
                                              suction gas de-superheater and recondensor.
       (v)       send out facilities:         low-pressure in-tank pumps.
       (vi)      high-pressure in-tank:       pumps, shell and tube vaporizers,
                                              submerged combustion vaporizers.
       (vii)     auxiliary facilities:        gas turbine generators--3 units each of
                                              7.6 megawatts (MW)); and a transmission line
                                              (220 kilovolt ampere from Gujarat Electricity Board).

3.     The terminal started commercial operations on 9 April 2004. The Operations Evaluation
Mission (OEM) focused on the evaluation of activities in phase I of the construction and
operation of the Dahej LNG terminal.

B.     Social Impacts

4.      A public hearing is a mandatory requirement by Ministry of Environment and Forests
(MOEF), before it can grant Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) clearance. The Gujarat
Pollution Control Board conducted the public hearing for phase I on 19 November 1999, and
notices were published on 14 February 2001 in two newspapers. No objections were raised.

5.     At the project site, some 15 unauthorized occupants were provided alternate plots of
land by Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation (GIDC), an ex gratia payment for
constructing new dwellings, and a sustenance amount of funding. PLL made the monetary
payment to GIDC, which paid the occupants.

6.      PLL is undertaking corporate social responsibility activities, such as constructing a
temple, and contributing infrastructure for drinking water and roads. The company also has
recruited local people to provide security services, firefighting, and green belt maintenance.
Further, PLL has given the contract for housekeeping to a local person.
                                                                                Appendix 5       31



C.      Description of the Environment

7.     During construction of the terminal, the environmental impacts were limited. The EIA and
environmental management plan suggested adequate preventive measures. In the current
operational phase, the plant is meeting the environmental standards and conditions as
prescribed by enforcement and regulatory bodies. The details on compliance are as follows:

        1.     Terrestrial Environment

               a.       Air

8.      Ambient Air Quality. An agency approved by Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB)
regularly monitors sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOX), suspended particulate matter
(SPM), and hydrocarbons and flammable gases in the plant premises. Ambient air quality
impacts are found to be within the standards prescribed by GPCB. For example, in April 2006,
the 24 hourly ambient air quality values at various locations in and around the plant premises
(near main gate, near fire station, near tank 101, and near canteen) were well below the GPCB
standards (Table A5).

                          Table A5: Ambient Air Quality Values at PLL, Dahej
                                             (April 2006)
                                                                              Range of Ambient
 Std. No.               Pollutant                Unit          GPCB Limit      Concentrations
    1      Suspended particulate matter         g/m3                500           112­145
           (SPM)
   2       Oxides of sulphur (SO2)              g/m3                120            18­29
   3       Oxides of nitrogen (NOx)             g/m3                120            25­34
   4       Hydrocarbon                          g/m3                160            25­38
 GPCB = Gujarat Pollution Control Board, g/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter.
 Source: Asian Development Bank estimates.

9.      Stack Gas Emissions. The stack gas emissions from the gas turbine generators (GTG)
in the terminal are constantly monitored, and are within the standards prescribed by GPCB. As
the three GTGs run on natural gas, the emissions of SPM and SO2 are small. NOX is the only
significant potential pollutant. To address this issue, the GTGs are equipped with "lean-burn"
technology to control the amount of NOx emissions. The submerged combustion vaporizers for
LNG gasification also operate on natural gas, and are a potential source of NOx emissions.
However, they are used only occasionally during the winter months, which minimizes this risk.
Their contribution to NOx emissions is small compared with the emissions from the GTGs. The
stack gas emission monitoring results from the GTGs in April 2006 indicated SPM values of 39
milligrams per normal cubic meter (mg/Nm3), well below the GPCB limit of 150 mg/Nm3.
Likewise, the NOX values were 20 parts per million (ppm), less than half the GPCB limit of 50
ppm; and the SO2 emissions were zero, compared with the GPCB limit of 100 ppm.

               b.       Water

10.    As PLL gets industrial water from GIDC, no groundwater is used. No wastewater is
discharged outside the plant premises.
32     Appendix 5


               c.     Noise Level

11.    Noise levels are generally within the standards (except at a few locations in the plant).

               d.     Hazardous Waste

12.    A small quantity of waste oil is generated, which is disposed of through a GPCB-
accredited contractor.

       2.      Coastal Environment

13.     As indicated by the high levels of suspended solids, the coastal water adjacent to the
Dahej LNG facility is very turbid. The concentration of suspended solids, originating naturally
from the dispersion of bed sediment in the water, varies widely. High tidal influence and strong
currents mix the water column well. The overall productivity of marine resources is low, and the
levels of phytoplankton pigments are markedly low. Considering the quantitative and qualitative
nature of zooplankton, the area can be rated moderate to poor in secondary production.
Consequently, the Gulf of Khambat has no active commercial fishing.

14.     Potential impacts on the marine environment during the operational phase of the Project
involve (i) an LNG spill, (ii) release of wastes generated by ships or port terminals, and (iii)
large-scale release of fuel or chemicals due to accident or collision. Although an LNG spill would
not cause serious damage to the marine environment, it would create considerable risk of fire
and explosions. Major accidental spills of oil, though rare, have the potential to contaminate the
marine environment. Such spills can occur due to accidents, such as ship or tanker collisions
and ship grounding, which in turn are dependant on traffic density. Since the LNG tankers run
on natural gas and not diesel oil, the potential oil spill from an LNG tanker would be small
compared with that from ships running on diesel oil or from oil tankers. An appropriate traffic
control scheme and adequate navigational aids would reduce the frequency of such encounters.
PLL will participate in the traffic control management plan for the Dahej port and the Gulf of
Khambat, which the Gujarat Maritime Board will prepare.

15.     Due to unpredictable climatic conditions during the monsoon season, the original project
design included a breakwater to reduce the potential for accidents while ships are mooring at
the jetty. PLL has conducted some independent studies, which concluded that the breakwater
was not essential for safe ship operations. Based on the recommendation of several consultants,
PLL decided not to construct a breakwater at Dahej. Instead, it is constructing an additional
LNG storage tank, which will provide the necessary operational flexibility during the monsoon
season. While the decision not to build the breakwater will reduce environmental impacts, the
marine safety issues at the jetty are being reviewed with assistance from Gaz de France (GDF)
and other international consultants.

D.     Health and Safety

16.    The comprehensive environmental impact assessment studies for the LNG terminal,
which were carried out by the Institute for Petroleum Safety and Environment Management, Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, and Water and Power Consultancy Services Centre for
Environment, assessed the fire and explosion risks under different scenarios. The studies found
that under most scenarios the impacts would be within the plant premises. As designed, the
LNG installation is intrinsically safe. Except in a war-like situation, when the tank would leak
considerably, the nearest inhabitants are not under threat. In addition, Sofregaz conducted a
                                                                                  Appendix 5     33


rapid risk analysis of the LNG terminal at Dahej for three different types of LNG storage tanks,9
and recommended a full-containment type tank. The impacts of gas release from the safety
valves of the full storage tank showed that this scenario had no effect outside the battery limits
of the terminal.

17.     As these results show, apart from possible risks associated with the jetty, operating
conditions are safe. To date, the Dahej LNG terminal has achieved 2.73 million accident free
man-hours of operation since the start of operations. The National Safety Council, which
conducted a safety audit of the plant in October 2005, made recommendations for improving the
safety programs, procedures, and systems. GDF also carried out a safety audit of the Dahej
terminal and submitted its final report in November 2005 with recommendations. In particular,
GDF highlighted that the jetty remains one of the main safety issues for Dahej. GDF
recommended that a review of the nautical procedures be implemented to ensure they are
appropriate for the current jetty configuration. PLL has had three near misses in the past 2 years,
which is higher than the global average of about 0.3 near misses per year.

E.        Mitigation Measures for Environmental and Safety Risks

18.     Because LNG is a clean energy source compared with oil and coal, the Project improves
the environment while meeting the rising energy requirements of the country. The LNG terminal
has minimal environmental impacts. However, due to the nature of the product being handled,
safety issues are a high priority. The Dahej terminal has adopted a variety of measures that are
environmentally friendly and contribute to enhanced safety, including the following:

          (i)     Terminal operations are centrally controlled by computer using a system that
                  continuously measures and monitors all process parameters, and allows
                  immediate identification and location of leaks in the terminal system. Emergency
                  signals and alarms then are sent out for immediate response.

          (ii)    An unloading control room is situated at the jetty to receive continuous data on
                  wind speed and wave heights in the vicinity. Emergency responses to wind and
                  wave conditions, as well as LNG leaks, are prescribed, and procedures for
                  implementation are established. The jetty terminal is equipped for firefighting.
                  Another important feature is the system for automatic disconnection of the
                  unloading arm from the ship in case of an emergency.

          (iii)   For jetty operations, PLL has engaged an experienced port operator to provide
                  services that include hazard prevention, as well as health, safety, and
                  environment services related to jetty operations. With the assistance of the port
                  operator, the Health, Safety and Environment Unit is involved in prevention
                  activities on the waterfront.

          (iv)    The two existing LNG storage facilities are full-containment tanks that are safer
                  than double-containment tanks. The tanks have other advantages in addition to
                  safety, such as reduced boil-off gas during unloading operations (due to higher
                  operating pressure), and less risk from ruptures and accidents.

          (v)     Due to the site conditions, instead of conventional open rack vaporizers, PLL has
                  adopted an indirect LNG regasification system that uses a glycol water air

9
    Version dated 5 November 1998.
34     Appendix 5


               heating system. The air heating system has proved to be environment-friendly,
               producing a significant amount of clean water from condensation of humidity in
               the air. PLL has started collecting this water for cleaning and plant irrigation.

       (vi)    The fire protection and safety measures at PLL Dahej include spill detector, fire
               detector, gas detector, water curtain, and deluge spray systems.

       (vii)   A mutual aid system is in place with other companies operating in the Dahej
               industrial estate.

19.    In accordance with legal requirements, PLL has prepared various management plans to
handle an emergency situation. These plans are as follows:

       (i)     PLL has prepared an emergency response plan (ERP) to mitigate potential
               damage to health and the environment from fires, explosions, and toxic releases.
               The ERP prescribes actions and procedures for dealing with major releases, un-
               ignited releases, and fire and explosion emergencies. The ERP also is supported
               by (a) gas detection, (b) safety shutdown and fire protection systems, (c) safety
               and security zones, (d) a ship and facility emergency response plan, (e)
               coordination with Gujarat Maritime Board and the Coast Guard, and (f)
               evacuation plans and procedures.

       (ii)    An offsite emergency management plan was prepared in July 2003 for Dahej
               area (Vagra Taluka), though it needs to be updated. The local crisis group
               (chaired by the deputy collector) and the district crisis group (chaired by the
               district collector) were formed in the district in accordance with the Chemical
               Accidents (Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Response) Rule 1996 under
               the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 to combat any disasters or emergency
               situations that might endanger the safety and health of public. PLL is a member
               of the Disaster Management Centre, Dahej.

       (iii)   PLL has prepared an oil spill contingency plan for its Dahej marine terminal,
               which details the arrangements for responding to oil pollution incidents at the
               tanker jetty. It also shows the relationship of the plan to the National Oil Spill
               Disaster Contingency Plan, and to the district and regional Plans.

F.     Institutional Arrangements and Monitoring Program

20.     The PLL Dahej terminal complies with legal requirements related to environment and
safety. PLL has been reporting the status of its operations in accordance with regulatory
standards to various government bodies, such as MOEF and GPCB, which monitor the
conditions under which clearances are granted. As a proactive measure, PLL has had its Dahej
operations audited, and obtained third-party certifications for environment, health, and safety.
Reputable organizations also have conducted some additional safety audits, and have
recommended improvements to PLL.
                                                                                  Appendix 5     35


21.     Specific legal compliance requirements are as follows:

        (i)      MOEF, New Delhi cleared the EIA report for the Dahej terminal, subject to certain
                 conditions. 10 Since then, PLL has been submitting compliance reports on
                 conditions stipulated by MOEF to the regional office of MOEF at Bhopal.

        (ii)     The Forests and Environment Department of the government of Gujarat also
                 stipulated certain conditions for Coastal Regulation Zone clearance for
                 construction of the LNG import terminal at Dahej. 11 PLL submits compliance
                 reports to the state Forests and Environment Department every 6 months.

        (iii)    GPCB provided a no-objection certificate in 200012 for setting up the LNG project,
                 and subsequently gave a consolidated consent and authorization to operate in
                 2004,13 subject to certain conditions. The consents were issued under the Air Act
                 1981, Water Act 1974, and Authorization under the Hazardous Waste
                 (Management and Handling) Rules 1989, and its subsequent amendments under
                 the Environment Protection Act 1986. GPCB monitors compliance to ensure that
                 the conditions stipulated under the consent are being met. PLL submits quarterly
                 environmental monitoring reports, as well as an annual environmental statement
                 to GPCB.

        (iv)     The chief controller of explosives has provided licenses for liquid nitrogen
                 storage and diesel storage, and provided a no-objection certificate for
                 commissioning the LNG storage tanks.

        (v)      PLL has taken out a public liability policy.

22.      The Dahej LNG terminal received International Standards Organization (ISO) 9001
certification for quality management system in its first year of operation. The terminal also has
received Occupational Health and Safety Management system 18001 certification, and ISO
14001 certification for its Environment Management System in 2005.




10
   Letter dated 27 December 2000.
11
   Letter dated 29 September 2000.
12
   Dated 2 February 2000.
13
   Dated 28 September 2004.
