                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                   Operations Evaluation Department




            COUNTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM EVALUATION


                                          FOR


                                         INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response and the Board of
Directors' Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) Chair's summary of a discussion of the
report by DEC.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: CAP: IND 2007-23
Country Assistance Program Evaluation
September 2007




India




Operations Evaluation Department
                       CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                        (as of 13 September 2007)

                Currency Unit      ­    Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                      Rs1.00       =    $0.0247
                       $1.00       =    Rs40.43


                                ABBREVIATIONS
ADB        ­   Asian Development Bank
ADF        ­   Asian Development Fund
ADTA       ­   advisory technical assistance
ARC        ­   asset reconstruction company
BSE        ­   Bombay Stock Exchange
CAPE       ­   country assistance program evaluation
CEIP       ­   Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project
CMDP       ­   Capital Market Development Program Loan
COS        ­   country operational strategy
CRISL      ­   Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited
CSP        ­   country strategy and program
DEA            Department of Economic Affairs
DFI        ­   development finance institution
DFID       ­   Department for International Development, United Kingdom
DHFI       ­   Discount Finance House of India Limited
DMC        ­   developing member country
EA         ­   executing agency
EIRR       ­   economic internal rate of return
ESW        ­   Economic and sector work
FIL        ­   financial intermediation loan
FSPL       ­   Financial Sector Program Loan
FYP        ­   five-year plan
GDP        ­   gross domestic product
GERRP      ­   Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project
GOI        ­   Government of India
HDFC       ­   Housing Development Finance Corporation
HFC        ­   Housing Finance Company
HIV/AIDS   ­   human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
HQ         ­   headquarters
HUDCO      ­   Housing and Urban Development Corporation
IA         ­   implementing agency
ICICI      ­   Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
IDFC       ­   Infrastructure Development Finance Company
IEI        ­   Innovation and Efficiency Initiative
IFC        ­   International Finance Corporation
ILFS       ­   Infrastructure Finance and Leasing Services Limited
INRM      ­   India Resident Mission
IRDA      ­   Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
JBIC          Japan Bank for International Cooperation
JNNURM    ­   Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
KUDCEMP   ­   Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management
              Project
KUIDP     ­   Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
MDG       ­   Millennium Development Goal
MFF       ­   multitranche financing facility
MOF       ­   Ministry of Finance
MUD       ­   Ministry of Urban Development
NGO       ­   nongovernment organization
NHAI      ­   National Highways Authority of India
NHB       ­   National Housing Bank
NPL       ­   nonperforming loan
NSE       ­   National Stock Exchange
O&M       ­   operation and maintenance
OCR       ­   ordinary capital resources
OED       ­   Operations Evaluation Department
OEM       ­   Operations Evaluation Mission
PIU       ­   project implementation unit
PPER      ­   project performance evaluation report
PPP       ­   public-private partnership
PPTA      ­   project preparatory technical assistance
PRC       ­   People's Republic of China
PRS       ­   poverty reduction strategy
PSO       ­   private sector operation
RBI       ­   Reserve Bank of India
RUIDP     ­   Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project
SAARC     ­   South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
SAPE      ­   sector assistance program evaluation
SARD      ­   South Asia Department
SBI       ­   State Bank of India
SBICAP    ­   SBI Capital Markets
SBIGL     ­   SBI Gilts Limited
SEB       ­   state electricity board
SEBI      ­   Securities and Exchange Board of India
SES       ­   special evaluation study
SME       ­   small- and medium-sized enterprise
SOE       ­   state-owned enterprise
TA        ­   technical assistance
ULB       ­   urban local body
                                                   NOTE
(i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of India begins on 1 April and ends on 31 March.
       FY before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2000
       ends on 31 March 2000.

(ii)   In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                            Key Words
  india, development effectiveness, evaluation, strategy, program assessment, operations
  evaluations lessons, technical assistance, transport, energy, finance, urban development,
  public sector resource management, private sector operations, policy dialogue, policy
  reform, capacity building, governance reform




 Director General     Bruce Murray, Operations Evaluation Department
 Director             Ramesh Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2

 Team leader          Henrike Feig, Principal Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation
                      Department, Division 2
 Team members         Ma. Juana Dimayuga, Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation
                      Department, Division 2
                      Irene Garganta, Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations
                      Evaluation Department, Division 2

                         Operations Evaluation Department, CE-016
                                              CONTENTS
                                                                                               Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                iii

I.         INTRODUCTION                                                                         III
           A.   Objectives                                                                       1
           B.   Methodology                                                                      1
           C.   Organization of the Report                                                       1

II.        GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF ADB'S COUNTRY OPERATIONS                                        1
           A.   ADB Positioning                                                                  1
           B.   ADB Contribution to Development Results                                         12
           C.   ADB Performance                                                                 27
           D.   Overall Strategic/Institutional Rating                                          41

III.       EVALUATION OF ADB'S SECTOR ASSISTANCE                                                41
           A.   Transport                                                                       42
           B.   Energy                                                                          45
           C.   Finance                                                                         48
           D.   Urban Development                                                               50
           E.   Public Sector Resource Management                                               53
           F.   Overall Rating of Sector-Level Performance                                      55

IV.        OVERALL ASSESSMENT                                                                   56

V.         CONCLUSIONS, ISSUES, AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                             56
           A.   Lessons and Conclusions                                                         56
           B.   Key Findings, Issues, and Recommendations                                       59




     The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
     conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
     Vishvanath Desai, Marian Bond, Richard Slater, Narayanan Edadan, Suneel Pandey, Noel
     Gamo, and CRISIL Infrastructure Advisory provided inputs to the country assistance program
     evaluation (CAPE) as consultants. As a manager of a project division in the Asian Development
     Bank (ADB) during 1990­1992, V. Desai personally participated in the processing and
     supervision of ADB assistance to several hydrocarbon projects/program loans discussed in the
     CAPE. The CAPE team leader participated in the processing of the Capital Markets
     Development Program and the Private Sector Financing Facility as a mission member. Neither
     was involved in the evaluation of these projects. To the knowledge of the management of OED,
     there were no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
APPENDIXES
1.     Evaluation Approach and Methodology                                      64
2.     Government Development Priorities and Strategies, and Key Development    68
       Issues and Trends
3.     Asian Development Bank Country Strategies and Programs                   71
4.     India: Socioeconomic Data                                                81
5.     ADB Projects in India                                                    87
6.     Data on ADB Operations                                                  100
7.     Assessment of ADB Financial Sector Assistance                           110
8.     Client Perception Surveys                                               124
9.     Assessment of ADB Assistance for Urban Development                      133




Attachments:       Management Response
                   DEC Chair Summary
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       Introduction. This first country assistance program evaluation (CAPE) report for India
covers two decades (1986-2006) of Asian Development Bank (ADB) operations. However,
greater attention is focused on the more recent years to identify lessons relevant to developing
strategy for future operations. The report aims to provide inputs to the formulation of a new
country partnership strategy (2008­2012) for India. The performance assessment methodology
combines assessments of the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact of
ADB's sector operations with assessments of ADB country positioning and strategy, the
contributions of ADB programs to development results, and ADB performance.
         Country Context. After opting to be a nonborrowing member for two decades, India
decided to borrow from ADB starting in 1986, mainly to access an additional, albeit modest in
the country context, source of external finance. Minimal Government of India (GOI) expectations
and a guarded ADB approach characterized operations in the first decade (1986-95). The
relationship developed during the second decade (1996­2006). The CAPE period witnessed the
Indian economy's gradual and sometimes halting transition from nearly a quarter of a century of
extensive state regulation and ownership to a more market-oriented economic system. It was
also marked by acceleration in gross domestic product growth rates, and sizable reduction in
poverty levels from 45% to 28%. More recently, India's key development challenges have
included: (i) sustaining high rates of economic growth, while narrowing down fiscal and trade
deficits and continuing structural sector reforms; (ii) making economic growth more inclusive;
and (iii) improving the delivery of core public services.
       Strategic Positioning. ADB's country positioning and strategy are assessed to be
substantial. The country strategies of 1986 and 1990 were oriented primarily to supporting the
government program of industrialization through loans to state-owned/controlled financial
intermediaries and public infrastructure development (power, roads, railways, ports). Links with
reforms and policy dialogue were weak.
       The country strategies of 1996 and 2003 were prepared after India had launched a
vigorous reform program following the balance-of-payments crisis of 1991. The 1996 strategy
emphasized support for financial sector restructuring and the development of policy, regulatory,
and institutional frameworks in ADB's assistance for infrastructure development. It also shifted
the focus of ADB from central government entities to the state governments to help deepen and
spread the reform process across the country.
        The 2003 strategy sought to mainstream ADB's poverty reduction objectives without the
use of Asian Development Fund (ADF) resources, and also expanded support for the reform
process. The strategy extended ADB's assistance to poorer states, agriculture and rural
development, and increased attention to urban development and housing finance in support of
equitable growth and social development objectives. In the policy area, the strategy emphasized
the development of an appropriate policy environment for public-private partnerships in
infrastructure.
        Successive ADB strategies for India thus aimed at making increased contributions to
accelerating the reform process, while supporting priority programs for infrastructure
development, poverty reduction, and equitable growth. Strategies and programs were
adequately aligned with the GOI's development objectives and strategies, but also reflected
their shortcomings. Overall, the sequencing and continuity of ADB's India operations have been
satisfactory, albeit on the low side, given ADB's lack of strategic sector frameworks for the first
10 years of operations. Sector operations were started without adequate sector analysis or a
longer term sector assistance strategy that would systematically address impediments to sector
operations. Infrastructure investments were made despite deficiencies in the relevant policy and
regulatory frameworks, which affected the efficiency and sustainability of ADB assistance in this
iv
area, although, subsequently, reforms addressed some of these shortcomings (e.g., power
sector). Also, credit lines to and equity investments in industrial enterprises were provided in the
context of a non-conducive sector policy environment and financial system.
        ADB resources are small compared with India's total external financing requirements
and even smaller compared with India's annual investment expenditures (about 1%). Selectivity
has been necessary to maximize impact with limited resources. Particularly after 1996, ADB has
proactively sought to achieve geographic focus through the transfer of operations to the state
level and the selection of focus states to help maximize the developmental impact of ADB
assistance through a bundling of resources, greater ease of processing and implementing
projects with smaller counterpart agencies, and better integration of policy dialogue with
investment operations. This approach has been successful, as evidenced by a significantly
better performance of state-level projects compared with national-level projects. Comparatively
high sector selectivity has also emerged. Overall, ADB's efforts to strategically focus its
operations have been appropriate, considering India's development needs and ADB's resources
and corporate priorities.
       Contributions to Development Results. ADB's contributions to development results
are assessed to be modest mainly because ADB did not fully exploit its potential for achieving
development impact and providing value addition, particularly through proactive risk mitigation
and high-quality knowledge products and services. However, the rating is on the high side, as
substantial value addition was provided in terms of ADB's project support, advisory services,
and policy dialogue at the state level. There is also some evidence that ADB's projects
contributed to a reduction in poverty levels in India. ADB's assistance for infrastructure
development and policy reforms has had an impact on economic growth which helped mitigate
income poverty. ADB's recent focus on rural development activities and the provision of basic
urban services is likely to have a positive impact on the reduction of both income and non-
income poverty, although concerns about sustainability, if unaddressed, might diminish impact.
ADB support for policy and institutional reforms and capacity development has strengthened
governance at the sector level and helped reduce the scope for corruption. ADB's assistance for
private sector development has been significant through support for sector policies that
encourage private sector participation in infrastructure development and maintenance. ADB has
not been very effective in mainstreaming environmental and gender objectives in its sector
operations in India, however.
         ADB Performance. ADB's performance, which is rated modest on the high side, has
been measured by how well ADB has (i) managed its relationship with the GOI and other
stakeholders; (ii) used its resources and harnessed synergies to address development needs;
(iii) applied its policies, business processes, and products; and (iv) managed its loan portfolio in
India. Overall, ADB's relationship management in India has been adequate (see GOI
perceptions below), although there were periods, particularly during 1998 and 1999, and from
2001 to 2005, when relations deteriorated and the GOI expressed reservations about ADB's
lack of appreciation of country conditions and priorities. However, ADB usually responded with
efforts to address identified issues, which resolved most problems in a satisfactory manner
within the overall constraints of its policies and resources. Recently, ADB has given more
emphasis to consulting with a variety of government and nongovernment stakeholders during
country programming and project preparation, and to involving civil society organizations in the
implementation of ADB-financed projects. There is scope for doing more in this area to ensure
that the concerns of those affected by projects are fully reflected in project design and to
facilitate implementation of difficult reform measures.
      ADB's policies, processes, and instruments--and their application--have generally been
appropriate within the context of ADB's operations in India, but improvements are required in a
number of areas to respond to client concerns. While important, ADB safeguard requirements
                                                                                                v
that differ from national standards have added to transaction costs in India, not least due to the
way they have been applied, and appear to increasingly have had the perverse effect of
excluding from ADB financing environmentally sensitive projects or projects with land acquisition
issues. Business processes could be further streamlined and more authority, functions, and
commensurate resources delegated to the India Resident Mission (INRM) for project
implementation to increase client responsiveness. With the exception of the financial
intermediation loans, the application of other ADB business products has been mostly
successful in India. The new Multitranche Financing Facility under the Innovation and Efficiency
Initiative has had ready take-up, but more experience is needed to assess its effectiveness.
        While ADB's portfolio management has improved recently, it was less than adequate
over the entire CAPE period. The disbursement performance of operations in India has been
weak, with disbursement ratios below those for ADB as a whole. Mainly due to high loan
approval rates in recent years, undisbursed loan balances increased fourfold to $3.5 billion
during 1999­2006, which has put pressure on ADB loan implementation resources. However,
average implementation delays, which were initially significantly higher than the ADB-wide
average, have been reduced. Loans closed between 1996 and 2002 had, on average, delays of
2.8 years versus 2.1 years ADB-wide for ordinary capital resources (OCR) loans closed during
the same period. Delays were further reduced to 1.6 years for loans closed during 2003­2006,
which compares with 1.9 years for all of ADB's OCR loans closed during this period. Owing to
proactive measures instituted by ADB and the GOI, implementation performance significantly
improved in 2005 and 2006. Additional steps need to be taken to resolve the issues underlying
the delays to sustain the improvements witnessed during 2005/2006, including the provision of
adequate staff and technical assistance resources to ensure project readiness and adequate
implementation support. An analysis of the causes of implementation delays revealed three
major factors: (i) delays in awarding contracts; (ii) poor performance of contractors; and (iii)
executing agency-related issues, some of which could have been foreseen at the project design
stage. A number of implementation problems remain and are expected to grow with increasing
project complexities, weaker capacity in some of ADB's newer states of operations, and
increasing competition for the services of a limited numbers of qualified local contractors.
        Areas where strengthening is needed relate to the quality and numbers of ADB staff
resources and their allocation and coordination. The growing expertise of counterpart staff and
the complexities of ADB projects have raised the bar for expected performance and sector
expertise levels of ADB staff. Many mission leaders are perceived by government officials to
have good project processing skills, but are less experienced at conducting policy dialogue or
advising on sector issues, which tends to be delegated to consultants. Also, projects usually get
reassigned to more junior staff for implementation. In the past, most staff resources working on
India were allocated to project processing tasks. This has changed over the last couple of years,
and a more reasonable balance has been achieved. However, the addition of new states with
low capacity, in which operations have taken substantially more time and require more
resources, has put strains on staff resources and has been only feasible because of the
availability of sizable TA funds that helped with project preparation. There is potential for
improving the coordination of private sector and public sector operations, and work across
sectors in focus states. The latter could be operationalized through state-based operational
strategies and the establishment of state focal points.
       GOI Perceptions. The GOI regards ADB as a responsive and important development
partner, and appreciates its collegial approach to operations and problem solving. ADB's swift
support during the 1991 balance-of-payments crisis; readiness to shift the focus of its operations
to states, including the poorer ones; and initiative and drive in formulating emergency
assistance are noted as particularly positive contributions. ADB's role in contributing to
modernizing the state-level executing agencies and strengthening their capacity is also well
recognized. Several executing agencies noted that ADB-assisted projects were implemented
vi
more expeditiously than domestically financed ones. Contributions made by ADB's technical
assistance (TA) operations were generally considered to be valuable, although their
performance was seen to be uneven. There have been, however, concerns emanating primarily
from project implementation problems experienced, which are attributed by some executing
agencies and line ministries to (i) inadequate supply of ADB staff with requisite skills and
experience for project preparation and supervision; (ii) the push by ADB staff to get loans
approved before they were ready for implementation, particularly prior to 2005; (iii) excessive
and impractical safeguard requirements in some cases; (iv) rigid and undifferentiated application
of procurement and safeguard policies; and (v) bureaucratic, centralized, and time-consuming
response processes from ADB headquarters. These issues are seen to have contributed to
mounting undisbursed loan balances and consequently to growing commitment charges, which
is a matter of concern to the GOI.

        Portfolio and Sector Performance. ADB's public sector lending to India during 1986-
2006 amounted to $16.2 billion for 89 loan operations. Nearly two thirds of lending materialized
in the second decade of operations, making India the second largest ADB borrower during that
period. The loan portfolio has been concentrated in core infrastructure sectors, partly because
the GOI does not favor the use of OCR for social sector projects in the absence of access to
ADF resources. Recently, however, more assistance has been provided to other
sectors/subsectors including rural infrastructure, finance, and irrigation. The portfolio includes 12
program loans ($3.0 billion), the majority of which effectively promoted policy dialogue,
particularly on sector and state-level policy issues. ADB's lending program has been well
aligned with the core priorities of the GOI and the respective ADB country strategies, and is
generally cohesive, although recently there have been instances of ADB entry into new areas
on an ad hoc basis. The overall success rate for loan projects assessed by the Operations
Evaluation Department has been only 56%, which is reflected in the sector ratings.
         ADB's sector performance is rated successful, as most ADB assistance helped build
much-needed infrastructure and contributed towards improving sector policy and institutional
environments. Energy and public resource management sector operations are assessed to be
successful. ADB operations in the transport, urban, and financial sectors have been rated partly
successful, albeit on the high side. Operations in these sectors were usually well positioned and
relevant. The effectiveness of financial sector operations was reduced by significant
cancellations of financial intermediation loans due to lack of effective demand for this product
caused mainly by underlying unaddressed sector level structural problems or by the ready
availability of domestic funds. The efficiency of transport sector projects under implementation is
likely to be affected by lower than forecast traffic volumes and implementation problems, in
particular the poor performance of contractors and suppliers, which may lead to cost overruns.
Another key concern is related to the sustainability of ADB-financed investment projects in the
roads and urban sectors, which has been negatively impacted by a lack of operation and
maintenance funds and by weaknesses in institutional capacity, particularly at the lower levels
of government. These issues could have been better addressed at the project design stage,
which would have required more effective dialogue on program/project options and related tariff
or fiscal requirements with decision makers and consumers, and sufficient capacity-
development assistance to ensure sustained project/program benefits.
       Lending operations were supported by 239 TA grants for $147 million. TA activities were
generally well aligned with lending operations, and project preparatory TA provided especially
important support in preparing state-level projects. Likewise, advisory TA helped implement
complex reform programs in the power sector and public resource management. Overall, 69%
of TA operations in India were judged successful, close to the 70% ADB benchmark for
successful TA outcomes.
                                                                                               vii
        Economic and Sector Work. ADB's contribution to key development and policy issues
through provision of knowledge products is considered partly successful. Lack of internal
capacity has limited the preparation of knowledge products to a few sector studies prepared
under TA. ADB was not able to introduce relevant experience and practices from within the
region in its operations in India. The GOI and sector entities are encountering unfamiliar
situations and new challenges as the reform process moves on, and there is a genuine
realization on the part of many that necessary skills and experience are not often available to
them. Currently there is a need for specialized expertise in infrastructure regulation, public-
private partnerships, and new approaches to private infrastructure funding. Several clients
would value receiving from ADB well-researched analysis and advice on relevant sector
development, policy issues and good practices from the region.
        Private Sector Operations. These have remained relatively limited, with net
investments and loans totaling $766 million at end­2006. Most operations have been rated
successful. The pricing of ADB funds and some policy restrictions have inhibited more
transactions going forward. Deficiencies in the regulatory framework have constrained ADB
support for private infrastructure until recently. ADB successfully issued a local currency bond
and undertook swaps for its private sector operations in India. Opportunities for offering risk
mitigation products (guaranteeing long maturities, sharing in construction and start-up risks) are
expected to materialize with improvements in the policy environment for private sector
participation in infrastructure sectors. Potential synergies between ADB's public sector and
private sector operations were harnessed only recently, but a more strategic approach is
needed. For a number of sectors (e.g., power generation, power transmission, national highway
development) a greater shift from public to private or nonsovereign sector operations is
desirable, which will require a strengthening of ADB staff capacity in these areas. Given that
India is ADB's largest private sector client, exposure limits are likely to become a constraint in
expanding private sector operations in the country unless some innovative mechanisms are
used to address this issue (e.g., through proactive portfolio management) or the approach to
determining country exposure limits is reviewed.
       Overall Rating. Based on the country level as well as sector level performance
evaluation, the overall rating for ADB's country assistance is successful, but on the low side
implying that it could have been better and there are areas for improvement in ADB's future
operations in India.
        Key Lessons. While ADB's financial assistance may have been small relative to the
size of public investment in a middle income and large economy like India, an important finding
which has emerged from the CAPE is that ADB support made a significant contribution to the
country's development process. ADB's value addition was pronounced in the areas of project
design and implementation (by introducing international best practices for project management,
procurement, safeguards compliance, and financial management), and policy dialogue and
associated capacity development assistance for identifying and implementing policy options.

       ADB assistance was most effective when it was focused, part of a long-term
engagement, and integrated with government reform initiatives. The clients' strong ownership of
and commitment to the establishment of a conducive policy and institutional environment for
sector development played an important role in the success of ADB assistance to India.

        A proactive portfolio management approach helped turn around poor project
implementation performance. The goal of fostering strong partnership with client country
requires a review of mutual expectations and objectives, and concerted efforts for their
realization.
viii
        India's economy is growing fast. To sustain this high pace of growth and resulting
poverty reduction, India needs to (i) maintain high levels of investment; and (ii) remove
structural and physical infrastructure-related bottlenecks in the economy. ADB assistance can
contribute to achieving these development goals.

      Recommendations. Sector-level recommendations are presented in several sector
assessment reports and in the main text of this report. The following are broad
recommendations for consideration by ADB's Management in the formulation and
implementation of the new country partnership strategy for India:


Key Recommendations                                                                                   Responsibility

       1.   To improve strategic focus of ADB operations:                                             South Asia
                                                                                                      Department
             (i)     Consider entry into new sectors only if based on adequate sector analysis, a     (SARD)
                     strategy for longer term involvement to achieve critical mass and impact
                     supported by adequate technical assistance resources and ADB staff
                     capacity over the medium term, and a high probability of sustained
                     government interest and support at all levels.
             (ii)    Maintain operational focus on state-level assistance and concentrate
                     resources on a manageable number of focus states for maximum impact.
                     Keep a balance of more advanced states and states with lower capacity.
                     Develop a strategic and organizational framework for operations in focus
                     states, which should be included in the new country partnership strategy.
             (iii)   Anchor expansion in lending volumes and the addition of new sectors and
                     states to a country strategy business plan which ensures that aspirations are
                     matched by adequate resources.
             (iv)    Strengthen mainstreaming of environmental issues and consider stand-
                     alone projects in this area in the country partnership strategy.

       2.   To improve the quality of ADB's sector lending:                                           SARD
             (i)     Discontinue those financial intermediation loans for which there is no
                     effective demand and little value addition by the ADB, and address
                     underlying structural issues that affect demand and the mobilization of
                     domestic resources instead.
             (ii)    Address project sustainability issues through stakeholder consultation and
                     by adequately taking into consideration the policy environment and extent of
                     government ownership, capacity and finances during (sub) project selection
                     and at the project design stage.
             (iii)   Anticipate project implementation issues at the project design stage and
                     prepare implementation schedules and arrangements accordingly.
             (iv)    Strengthen staff incentives for project implementation.

       3.   To improve nonlending services:                                                           SARD, Budget,
                                                                                                      Personnel and
             (i)     Focus economic and sector work on topics that are of relevance to ADB's          Management
                     lending operations, and include a work program in the country strategy;          Systems
             (ii)    Strengthen staff incentives for economic and sector work.                        Department
                                                                                                      (BPMSD), and
             (iii)   Provide staff resources with infrastructure regulatory, policy, institutional,   Central
                     public-private partnership, and finance expertise to meet growing demand in      Operations
                     these areas.                                                                     Services Office
             (iv)    Encourage the engagement of exceptionally well-qualified international and       (COSO)
                     domestic consultants to ensure the provision of high quality advisory
                     services.
                                                                                                             ix

Key Recommendations                                                                              Responsibility

  4.    To increase private sector operations:                                                   SARD, Private
                                                                                                 Sector
         (i)     Equip India Resident Mission (INRM) with more staff skills for private sector   Operations
                 and nonsovereign infrastructure financing operations, and provide greater       Department
                 responsibility and accountability for proactive business development.           (PSOD), Office
         (ii)    Increase the headroom for more private sector lending to India.                 of Cofinancing
                                                                                                 Operations
         (iii)   Develop a joint operations strategy, covering both the public and private       (OCO).
                 sector sides of ADB, for supporting private sector participation in
                 infrastructure development and funding.
         (iv)    Shift funding from public to the private or nonsovereign window whenever
                 feasible.
         (v)     Catalyze more funding for infrastructure projects from commercial sources
                 including through the increased use of credit enhancements, loan
                 syndications, and innovative financial structures.

  5.    To increase responsiveness to client concerns:                                           SARD, COSO
                                                                                                 and Regional
         (i)     Consider decentralizing more functions and delegating more decision-            and
                 making authority to INRM, particularly if ADB business volumes in India         Sustainable
                 increase.                                                                       Development
         (ii)    Build a strong knowledge base and expertise in core areas of assistance,        Department
                 and engage with the GOI in policy discussions at appropriate times.             (RSDD).

         (iii)   Harmonize the approach to common safeguard concerns in India and
                 gradually move toward country systems at the agency and state levels,
                 where equivalence with ADB safeguard principles and implementation
                 capacity exist.
         (iv)    Undertake dialogue regularly with senior-level officials on policy and
                 operational issues for expeditious resolution.




                                                         Bruce Murray
                                                         Director General
                                                         Operations Evaluation Department
                                    I.      INTRODUCTION

A.     Objectives

1.     This country assistance program evaluation (CAPE) report presents an evaluation of the
Asian Development Bank's (ADB) assistance to India over the period 1986­2006. The
evaluation findings are expected to provide inputs to the formulation and implementation of a
new country partnership strategy for India (2008­2012).
B.     Methodology

2.       The preparation of the CAPE followed ADB's Guidelines for the Preparation of Country
Assistance Program Evaluation Reports, as outlined in Appendix 1. The performance
assessment methodology combines assessments of the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, and impact of sector operations, with assessments of ADB's country positioning
and strategy, the contributions of ADB programs to development results, and ADB performance.
The assessment of sector operations focuses on sectors in which ADB has been most active,
i.e., the transport, energy, urban development, finance, and public sector resource management
sectors. Private sector operations were also reviewed. Assessments are based on perception
surveys, interviews with officials in the Government of India (GOI) and other stakeholders,
review of documents, project performance evaluation reports, energy and transport sector
assistance program evaluations, various special evaluation studies, and rapid sector
assessments.
C.     Organization of the Report

3.      Chapters II and III are organized according to assessment categories to allow for a clear
reconciliation of CAPE findings and the overall ratings presented in chapter IV. Chapter V
provides recommendations for the future country partnership strategy based on the CAPE
findings and conclusions.

            II.      GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF ADB'S COUNTRY OPERATIONS

A.     ADB Positioning

4.     The evaluation period (1986­2006) witnessed the Indian economy's gradual and
sometimes halting transition from nearly a quarter of a century of extensive state regulation and
ownership, to a more market-oriented economic system. It was also marked by acceleration in
gross domestic product growth rates in excess of 6% per year, and a sizable reduction in
poverty levels from 45% to 28% in the country. Successive ADB strategies for India in 1986,
1990, 1996, and 2003 aimed at contributing to the reform process, while supporting priority
programs for infrastructure development, poverty reduction, and equitable growth.
       1.         Relevance and Alignment

5.      The relevance and alignment of ADB's strategies and programs in India have been
substantial. Both have generally corresponded to the GOI's development strategies and
programs and ADB's corporate objectives. Appendixes 2 and 3 provide background information
on the country context and the GOI's and ADB's strategies and programs. ADB's core
operational objective in India over the last two decades of combating poverty through
infrastructure-led growth has been consistent with India's development needs and with the
general thrust and themes of the GOI's development plans. ADB strategies and programs for
the country have been flexible, and readily accommodated changes in government strategies,
policies, and external assistance priorities (see Figure 1).
       2

                                   Figure 1: GOI and ADB Country Strategies and Program


 Economic Social and Conditions Government's Development Strategies ADB Strategies and Programs

                     Pre- 1985                                       1985-1990                                       1986-1995
   · Highly regulated self-sufficient economic    Accelerate growth to increase                     Assist development of modern
     system                                       employment and reduce poverty.                    technological economy through
   · Slow sectoral growth, low productivity,      · Industry assigned major strategic role                - support for private industries
     highly capital intensive, uncompetitive      · Ease infrastructure bottlenecks                         through private sector operations
     industrial structure with low labor          · Further liberalization measures to                      and DFI credit lines.
     absorption                                     increase productivity and economic                    - support for infrastructure projects
   · Subsidization of sick industries and           efficiency by                                           to relieve capacity constraints
     agriculture                                     - Easing licensing requirements                Support for GOI Industrialization
   · Slow growth                                     - Reducing government involvement              strategies
                                                       in pricing and providing for a greater             - Financial assistance for private
                                                       role for private sector.                              industries through DFI loans and
                       Pre- 1991                  · Accelerate food grain production                        PSO
   · Insufficient utilization of physical,        · Increase social services expenditure.                 - Removal of infrastructure
     financial, and human resources reflecting                                                              bottlenecks (ports, railways,
     inadequate infrastructure, financial and                                                               telecommunications, national
     human resources, and government              · 1991 Beginning of economic reforms                      highways, hydrocarbon sector,
     policies                                     · 1992 Constitutional amendment                           power generation)
   · Inadequate resource mobilization                mandates devolution
   · Industrial growth inhibited by restrictive                                                     Since 1991
     policy environment                                                                                   - Policy-based lending in support
   · High levels of public borrowings resulting                     1992-1997                               of GOI economic reforms
     in unsustainable fiscal deficits.            Achieve rapid sustainable economic                        (financial and hydrocarbon
   · High rate of population growth but           growth and macroeconomic stability                         sectors)
     reductions in incidence of poverty           · Reorient public expenditures to
                                                    strategic high-tech infrastructure and
                                                     human resource development
                                                  · Reduce regulatory controls to attract
                     Pre- 1997                       private investment (particularly in the
   · Faster growth helped reduce poverty             power sector)
     incidence although absolute levels of        · Enhance competition by allowing inflow
     poverty remain unchanged.                       of foreign capital and technology                               1996-2002
   · Growth not regionally balanced               · Reform financial sector                         Support for devolution and state-level
   · Infrastructure capacity not keeping pace     · Enhance efficiency of power and                 reforms
     with growth                                     transport sector investment                          - Shift to state-level operations
   · States lag behind in structural and fiscal   · Reform public enterprises                             - Support for fiscal and power
     reforms                                      · Promote human development                               sector reforms in focus states
   · Deficiencies in social development                                                                   - Urban development projects
     indicators                                                                                           - Continued support for national-
   · Reduced role of state in industry sector                        1997-2002
                                                                                                            level infrastructure development
   · Private sector becoming engine of            High growth combined with pro-poor
                                                                                                            (national highways, railways,
     growth                                       policies
                                                                                                            power transmission, financial
                                                  · Reduce public sector share in
                                                                                                            intermediation loans for energy
                                                     economy though more private sector
                                                                                                            efficiency/renewables, housing,
                                                     participation, and limit public investment
                      Pre- 2002                                                                             and private infrastructure)
                                                     to areas not served by private sector
   · Poverty incidence reduced to 28%                                                                    - Continued support for financial
                                                  · Upgrade infrastructure (particularly
   · India ranked 124 out of 173 countries in                                                               sector reforms
                                                     power and transport)
     human development indicators.                                                                       - Assistance for analyzing poverty
                                                  · Prioritize investments in agriculture and
   · States lag behind in structural and fiscal                                                            issues and for incorporating
                                                     support for rural development to
     reform.                                                                                               poverty reduction objectives in
                                                     generate productive employment and
   · Rate of growth declined over 9 th plan                                                                project and programs
                                                     reduce poverty
     period compared with 8th plan period         · Continue financial and trade sector
     despite high levels of investment                                                              1998/1999
                                                    reforms
   · Lack of private sector response to GOI                                                              - Nuclear test sanctions. Lending
                                                  · Upgrade urban infrastructure
     initiatives in promoting private                                                                      limited to projects with social
                                                  · Improve delivery of basic social
     infrastructure investment.                                                                            objectives.
                                                     services
                                                  · Enhance fiscal responsibility of states


                                                                     2002-2007
                                                  Promote high and equitable growth
                                                  · Improve fiscal sustainability at central
                                                                                                                  2003-2006
                                                     and state levels (including continued
                                                                                                  Support for pro-poor growth
                                                     restructuring of power sector)
                                                                                                      - Assistance for rural development
                                                  · Upgrade infrastructure (including PPPs)
                                                                                                        (rural roads, irrigation, rural
                                                  · Increase sector efficiencies and
                                                                                                         finance)
                                                     connectivity
                                                                                                      - Expansion to more less
                                                  · Refocus on agriculture and rural
                                                                                                        developed states
                                                      infrastructure
                                                                                                      - Continued support for national
                                                  · Create employment opportunities
                                                                                                        infrastructure (national highways,
                                                  · Promote decentralization and more
                                                                                                        power grid) and urban
                                                     participatory service management
                                                                                                        development
                                                  · Improve governance and fight corruption



ADB = Asian Development Bank, DFI = development financial institution, GDP = gross domestic product, GOI = Government of India, PPP = public-
private partnership, PRS = Poverty Reduction Strategy, PSO = private sector operations.
Source: Country Assistance Program Evaluation team.
                                                                                                               3


                  a.       1986 to 1991--Support for a Flawed Model

6.        ADB started its operations at a time when India needed external funding to finance large
infrastructure investments to support industrial development and economic growth (see Box 1).
ADB's assistance for infrastructure development clearly helped alleviate infrastructure
bottlenecks and contributed to economic growth between 1985 and 1990. However, the
efficiency and sustainability of ADB-funded infrastructure projects was affected by the prevailing
policy and institutional constraints. For example, in the power sector, the lack of incentives for
efficient operational performance, the lack of expenditure prudence, and skewed tariff structures
associated with the past governance and policy framework for the sector contributed to a
deterioration of the financial health of state utilities. The poor financial status and operational
efficiency of state electricity boards (SEBs) and state utilities (the executing agencies [EAs] for
ADB's sector projects), as well as large transmission and distribution losses, this not only
imposed a heavy burden on the financial resources of the respective state governments, but
also reduced economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) and limited the ability of EAs to fund
operation and maintenance (O&M) expenditures, thus reducing the sustainability of ADB
investments. For roads, institutional constraints, in particular the lack of project planning and
management capacity, and lack of coordination of various government departments at different
levels, caused implementation delays and reduced project efficiency. In railways, inadequate
management systems, high operating costs, and cross-subsidization (subsidies for passenger
traffic financed by high freight charges) resulted in significant project implementation delays and
affected the efficiency and sustainability of investments. In telecommunications, ADB-financed
projects actually supported and perpetuated government policies in the sector that created
economic distortions. Policy dialogue on the timely introduction of the private sector in a
competitive environment would have been more effective in supporting economic growth.
7.      The development effectiveness of ADB's support for industrial development via credit
lines through development finance institutions (DFIs) during that period was likewise marred by
the DFIs' institutional deficiencies and a policy environment that was not conducive to sound
lending. While the projects were relatively successful in channeling resources towards
worthwhile private industrial and small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME) projects, they
achieved limited results with regard to developing a sustainable credit delivery system.
8.        Although in hindsight it might appear inappropriate for ADB to lend in a policy
environment that was not fully responsive to the country's development needs, it needs to be
recognized that (i) ADB had just started operations in India, and was getting to know the
borrower, the sectors, and their issues--which is reflected in the small number of projects; (ii)
ADB wanted its emerging relationship with India to be supportive, rather than confrontational;
(iii) the political environment at the time was not conducive to externally driven policy dialogue;
and (iv) ADB introduced policy-based lending operations only in late 1978.1 Several sector
studies that examined policy issues were launched in 1988. ADB staff gradually engaged in
policy dialogue at the sector level, focusing on issues related to financial, managerial, and
technical efficiency, which affected the sectors in which ADB operated. For example, ADB
promoted the establishment of the Power Finance Corporation to help instill more financial
discipline into SEBs. However, prior to 1991, there was no explicit link between ADB lending
and policy, regulatory, or institutional reform in the sectors to which the ADB was lending.




1
    The success rates of policy loans ADB-wide, approved between 1978 and 1986 and between 1987 and 1995, were
    unacceptably low at 47% and 27%, respectively. This indicates that at the time ADB was struggling with how to
    effectively support policy reforms.
4


                           Box 1: India-ADB Relationship: An Overview
Although a member of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), India opted to be a nonborrowing member for
two decades after ADB operations began in 1966. This was due in part to a Government of India (GOI)
perception that India's borrowing would strain ADB's resources, without contributing much to addressing
India's requirements. In the mid-1980s, however, India reconsidered and decided to borrow from ADB
mainly due to (i) the need for increased foreign borrowings to finance the investment needs of its
economy, which had started to grow at higher rates; (ii) the views of some ADB shareholders that India's
participation in ADB's lending operations would strengthen ADB's role and profile as a regional institution;
(iii) potential access to Asian Development Fund (ADF) at a time when the World Bank Group had
reportedly advised India to diversify its sources of concessional financing; and (iv) the possibility of the
People's Republic of China joining ADB. ADB was thus likely regarded by India essentially as a source of
limited amounts of supplementary external financing.
ADB, on its part, decided to tread cautiously. ADB needed to familiarize itself with India's administrative
and government system and its model of "mixed' economy. ADB was also aware that India was highly
experienced in dealing with multilateral financial agencies, was one of the largest borrowers of the World
Bank Group, and had enjoyed considerable leeway in shaping its borrowing operations with it. Moreover,
the GOI's reluctance to entertain advice from external sources, especially on policy issues, was well
known. Consequently, the 1986 country operational strategy (COS) did not attempt to explicitly link ADB
lending to policy or institutional reforms. The relationship thus started with some tentativeness on the part
both of the GOI and ADB.
Operations during 1986­1990 remained confined to areas of ADB's traditional strength, particularly in
core infrastructure sectors. During this period, projects were "nominated" by the GOI for ADB financing,
effectively limiting ADB's ability to discuss any policy issues. Although several of the projects experienced
major implementation delays and below-average performance, the operations helped to develop
understanding of mutual needs and constraints between the two parties. As its assistance gradually rose
to $700 million by the fifth year of operations (1990), ADB began to be appreciated, especially as India's
foreign exchange position began to face increasing pressure.
ADB's swift response to India's balance-of-payments crisis (1991) and its shift to state-level operations,
particularly in the northeastern and other poorer states, strengthened GOI-ADB relations. The GOI came
to regard ADB as a valuable, responsive development partner, which enabled ADB to begin to address
policy issues proactively through program loans as well as project assistance. In 1998, ADB drastically
reduced its assistance in response to nuclear tests carried out by India. Subsequently, at the GOI's
request, ADB substantially expanded assistance from an average of about $600 million per year during
the 1990s to about $1.2 billion from 2000, and also extended operations to new areas and subsectors.
However, increases in operations were not matched by similar increases in ADB's capacity to process
and supervise expanded operations. The relationship came under increasing strains as several approved
projects experienced major implementation delays, causing mounting commitment charges for the GOI.
The GOI was uncomfortable with the uneven quality of some projects, the lack of project readiness prior
to approval, and the lack of improvement in disbursement performance. This period also saw episodes of
disharmony on matters concerning the India Resident Mission, which further added to the strained
relationship between the parties.
The GOI-ADB relationship is now back on track and is considered by both the GOI and ADB as important
and productive. ADB is the third largest source of external assistance to India and is regarded by the
Government as a responsive and dependable development partner. For ADB, India is a major ordinary
capital resources-only borrower, which now accounts for nearly one fifth of its lending. Both parties are,
however, aware that the substance of the relationship needs to be strengthened by raising the level of
dialogue and interaction on policy and operational issues. This should be achievable, as both the size and
the quality of operations are expected to grow in the future, bringing about greater appreciation of mutual
positions and objectives.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.
                                                                                                5


               b.     After 1991--Support for Policy Reforms

9.       After India started to introduce policy reforms during 1991, there was scope to translate
sector policy dialogue into lending programs. Although the GOI played the major role in
designing the reform measures, ADB responded by broadening its operational focus to include
institutional and policy support, which substantially improved the relevance and effectiveness of
ADB sector assistance in the infrastructure and finance sectors.
               c.     After 1996--Support for Devolution and State-Level Reforms

10.     Refocusing of ADB assistance to state governments from 1996 was a logical and
essential complement to the GOI's policy of devolving greater responsibilities to them, and was
also aimed at deepening and accelerating the reach of the newly launched reform process
throughout the economy. In deciding to provide assistance to state governments, ADB
responded to changes taking place in India. Sharing of powers between the central Government
and the states meant that the latter enjoyed substantial autonomy in a number of areas in which
the central Government could not act by itself. Successive finance commissions had also been
expanding the share of the states in the national revenue pie at the expense of the central
Government, which had been broadly consistent with the central Government's policy of
devolution and creating larger space for the state governments to manage and develop their
respective economies. This situation began to make the state governments attractive in
themselves as development partners for funding agencies. This development was further
reinforced by the consideration that penetration of key reforms (deregulation, privatization,
public sector restructuring) would remain slow and incomplete unless the state governments
were brought into the process. State government actions were essential to dismantle state-level
control mechanisms and regulations. In this situation, ADB's decision to interact more closely
with the state governments, and provide assistance at the state-level gave a strategic boost to
reform-minded state governments that wanted to venture out on their own reform programs but
lacked the experience and resources to do so.
11.    The preference for urban development, renewable energy, and housing projects in
ADB's portfolio reflected ADB corporate objectives at the time. While projects approved from
1991 to 1994 had only economic growth objectives, 36% of projects (30% in terms of value)
approved from 1995 to 1999 had social or environmental objectives either as a primary or
secondary objective, in line with ADB corporate requirements (see Table A5.1).
12.     By significantly increasing the volume of assistance from 2000 onwards with a strong
focus on developing infrastructure networks at the national and the state levels--through large
sector loans for the rural sector, highways, and power grid development--ADB responded to the
GOI's strategy of upgrading and expanding infrastructure to sustain high rates of gross domestic
product (GDP) growth.
               d.     After 2003--Greater Focus on Equitable Growth

13.     The inclusion of assistance for the development of rural areas and the extension of
state-level operations to more backward states including the northeast in the 2003 Country
Strategy and Program (CSP) was aligned with India's 10th five-year plan (FYP), which
emphasized the promotion of more equitable growth, and with ADB's 1999 Poverty Reduction
Strategy (PRS). Continued ADB support for the development of basic urban infrastructure was
in line with GOI objectives of reducing non-income poverty and meeting Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) targets.
6


        2.      Sequencing and Continuity
14.     Overall, the sequencing and continuity of ADB's India operations have been substantial,
albeit on the low side, given ADB's lack of strategic sector frameworks for the first 10 years of
operations. Prior to 1996, ADB's program was not strategized with a view to the proper
sequencing of assistance among and within sectors. Sector operations were usually started
without substantial sector analysis or a longer term sector assistance strategy that would
systematically address all impediments to sector operations. Infrastructure investments were
made despite serious deficiencies in the relevant policy and regulatory frameworks, which
affected the efficiency and sustainability of ADB assistance in this area, although, for example, in
the power sector, subsequent reforms addressed these shortcomings. Also, credit lines to and
equity investments in industrial enterprises were provided, even when an appropriate policy
environment and financial sector reforms were not in place.
15.      After 1996, more strategic approaches were taken, which contributed to better sequencing
of ADB's programs. The following themes emerged: (i) a shift from support for national programs
and central utilities to state-level operations; (ii) the establishment of linkages between assistance
for fiscal, public sector management, and power sector reforms at the state level (in Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh, and Assam), given that power sector financial losses were the major cause of
fiscal hemorrhage in most states; (iii) the selection of pilot states for reform activities that could act
as role models for reform efforts by other states; (iv) the implementation of policy or institutional
reforms as a condition for subsequent investment loans (particularly in the power and railways
sectors); (v) an expansion of assistance to lower government levels (e.g., the shift in urban
development support in Karnataka from larger cities to smaller municipalities) and to rural areas
(roads) and from higher to low capacity states; (vi) the increasing involvement of the private sector in
ADB's assistance for infrastructure development (through support for public-private partnership
(PPP) initiatives, infrastructure financiers, and private infrastructure projects); and lately (vii) the
move from sovereign to nonsovereign lending for well-performing utilities. The higher success rate
for projects developed under these principles lends credence to the validity of a carefully sequenced
approach.
16.      However, this approach has lately been somewhat weakened. The operational emphasis
in some of the new and more backward states where ADB has started to work is less on policy
dialogue and support for reform programs, and more on support for investment programs. Also,
the logical sequencing of ADB support that was successfully pursued in Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh, i.e., first providing support for fiscal and sector policy and institutional reforms, and then
for investments, is not being applied with the exception of Assam, although the support for power
sector reforms slightly preceded support for the more complex fiscal reforms. This is not
necessarily problematic, as many of these states have actually started to implement fiscal and
power sector reforms without external assistance in response to strong financial incentives set by
the GOI. Nevertheless, it remains to be seen whether the implementation and sustainability of
infrastructure investment programs will be affected in states with low fiscal performance or high
debt levels such as Jharkhand and West Bengal.
17.      The continuity of ADB's operations in the country has increased over time. There have
been a number of repeat projects with the same EA, particularly for national highways, rural
roads, power transmission, state power generation, and urban development operations, in
which the design of follow-up projects builds on the achievements and experience gained with
previous projects. The introduction and ready take-up of ADB's new multitranche financing
facility (MFF) in India is likely to further enhance the continuity of ADB assistance in the roads,
energy, and urban infrastructure sectors, as it supports sustained ADB involvement within the
framework of longer term government investment programs.
                                                                                                                   7


          3.       Selectivity
18.     ADB resources are small compared with India's total external financing requirements,
and even smaller compared with India's annual investment expenditure.2 Focus is necessary to
maximize impact with limited resources. Particularly after 1996, ADB has proactively sought to
achieve geographic focus. Comparatively high sector selectivity has emerged. Overall, ADB's
efforts to strategically focus its operations have been substantial, considering India's
development needs and ADB's resources and corporate priorities.
                   a.       Sector Focus
19.     ADB's program in India has been expanding in terms of sector spread but is still
comparatively focused. With ongoing loans in seven sectors and an average of 4.7 loans per
sector as of 31 December 2005, the level of concentration in ADB's loan portfolio measured 0.21
on the Hirschmann-Herfindahl Index,3 which compares with 0.129 for the total ADB portfolio at
that time. One reason is that sector selection has been limited by India's lack of access to Asian
Development Fund (ADF) resources. As it has been the GOI's policy to use only grants or
concessional funds to finance health, education, and agriculture projects, ADB involvement in
these sectors has been effectively precluded, although a recent relaxation of the GOI's approach
has allowed an irrigation project to go forward. Unlike in other country programs, in India ADB has
abstained from providing technical assistance (TA) in sectors where it has no lending program,
which has reinforced sector focus.
20.      ADB initially focused its efforts on a range of sectors, namely transport (roads, ports,
railways), telecommunications, energy (power generation--thermal and gas), finance, and industry,
in which it had considerable experience. The only obvious omission was urban infrastructure, for
which assistance was not contemplated until the 1990 country operational strategy (COS) due to
complexities involved and the need for substantial project preparatory assistance. Particularly during
the first 10 years of its operations in India, ADB's portfolio was highly concentrated in core
infrastructure sectors. Considering GOI priorities, the critical need for infrastructure associated with
industry-led economic growth, ADB's expertise in these sectors, and its limited resources, the initial
sector choice was valid.
21.     With the 1996 COS, ADB intensified its involvement in transport, energy, and urban
infrastructure. Although envisaged under the 1996 COS, assistance for ports,
telecommunications, and hydrocarbon projects did not materialize, mainly due to increasing
private sector involvement, technological changes (in the telecommunications sector), and
policy changes (in the case of the hydrocarbon sector), where ADB's upstream involvement was
discontinued in line with recommendations under its 1995 Energy Policy. The share of
assistance to urban development projects in ADB's country portfolio rapidly expanded with an
increasing number of integrated urban development projects and credit lines for urban
infrastructure and housing development in response to ADB's changing corporate requirements4
and sector policy reforms. A new sector was added to ADB's operations with the inclusion of
public sector resource management programs supporting crucial fiscal reform efforts. Overall,
the sector distribution and subsector selection during that period were in line with GOI priorities,
development needs, and ADB operational objectives. Expansion within some of the existing key

2
    ADB's annual commitment to India of $500 million in 1990 amounted to around 1% of India's annual investment
    expenditure and 5% of India's total external financing requirements of $10 billion.
3
    The Hirschmann-Herfindahl Index formula is [n/p]2, where n is the number of loans a country has in a sector, p is
    the country's total number of loans, and the squares of n/p are summed across all sectors. The maximum index
    value of 1 is reached when all of a country's loans are in a single sector. The minimum index value approaches
    zero when there is one loan per sector for an infinite number of sectors.
4
    Both ADB's Long-Term Strategic Framework (2001­2015) and its first Medium-Term Strategy (2001­2005)
    promoted the allocation of loan funds to projects with social and environmental objectives.
8


sectors, particularly roads, would not have been possible with the existing staff complement at
that time.
22.      The 2003 CSP further increased the number of designated sectors of ADB operations. To
provide greater focus on rural development, assistance for agrobusiness development and
irrigation was programmed. Other envisaged new areas of operations included support for inland
waterways, hydropower, energy efficiency, SME development, and judiciary reform. However,
planned projects in some of these sectors were cancelled (e.g., judiciary reform, inland
waterways, and SME development), which in part reflects the ad hoc nature with which these
sectors were added to the program. In general, throughout its involvement in India, ADB's entry
into new subsectors has lacked sufficient strategic direction and analytical underpinning in the
form of meaningful sector development and engagement plans. If done properly, this might have
predicted problems that later led to rapid ADB exits from a number of areas. Sector roadmaps
contained in the last CSP did not provide much strategic guidance, although there have been
more attempts recently to strategize sector operations with the help of advisory technical
assistance (ADTA), particularly in urban development.
               b.      Shift in Support from Central to State-Level Organizations

23.     Prior to 1996, ADB assistance was provided mainly for national programs and central
public utilities in the transport and energy sectors, for credit lines that were channeled through
national DFIs, and for reform programs at the national level.
24.     The 1996 COS formalized ADB's gradual shift to state-level organizations to help
maximize the developmental impact of ADB assistance through a bundling of resources, greater
ease of processing and implementing projects with smaller counterpart agencies, and better
integration of policy dialogue with investment operations. The share of state-level operations in
new ADB lending substantially increased from 30% during 1996­2002 to 65% during 2003­
2006, although in terms of value, state-level lending was between 35% and 40% during these
periods.
25.     Moving operations to the state-level was highly relevant, as demonstrated by Operations
Evaluation Department (OED) evaluations for ADB loans made in India from 1995 onwards.
These indicate a success rate of 71% for the 14 evaluated state-level projects, which compares
with a success rate of 33% for 9 evaluated national-level projects and 17% for 6 evaluated
financial intermediation loans during this period.
               c.      Geographic Focus

26.      Initially, geographic focus was not an element of ADB's strategic positioning in India. ADB
assistance was provided mainly for programs and projects with national coverage or for key
infrastructure projects that were chosen primarily according to their importance for meeting the
infrastructure needs of high-growth regions. As a result, assistance was spread thinly in terms of
geographical range, covering the majority of India's states, albeit with mostly insignificant levels of
assistance at the state level. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, and West
Bengal were the only states that were covered by four or more ADB-financed projects during 1986­
1995.
27.     When ADB commenced state-level operations and introduced the concept of focus
states under the 1996 COS, the following criteria were used for state selection: (i) willingness of
the state government to undertake a comprehensive program of economic reforms; (ii) high
demand for ADB assistance in terms of infrastructure investment requirements; (iii) willingness
of the state government to borrow on ADB's ordinary capital resources (OCR) terms, and the
capacity to manage foreign exchange risk and to service the loans; (iv) satisfactory record of
project implementation; and (v) absence of substantial assistance to the state from other
                                                                                                                             9


agencies (in particular the World Bank). ADB's selection criteria for these initial focus states
were appropriate and in line with operational objectives. Choosing reform-minded states
responded to GOI concerns about states' fiscal and debt-servicing capacity and helped spread
the overall reform agenda to sectors under state control. The application of the selection criteria
was equally appropriate.5 ADB's selection of Gujarat as the first state with which to negotiate a
loan was a good choice. Gujarat was a reform-minded state, with good governance and private
sector orientation. The state government had strong ownership of the reforms from the
beginning. Although there was no substantial follow-up assistance to the public sector
management and power sector reform programs (mainly because of a refocusing of ADB's
assistance towards less advanced states), the Gujarat experience nevertheless served as a
useful pilot for subsequent reform programs. In Madhya Pradesh, despite poor infrastructure
and a limited industrial base, there has been a strong and long-standing political commitment to
social development and reducing the high poverty levels, out of which the urgency for fiscal and
related power sector reforms had grown. There have been issues with regard to the
effectiveness of fiscal, social expenditure, and state-owned enterprise (SOE) reforms promoted
under ADB-supported reform programs, although there was remarkable success in the creation
of an enabling environment for private infrastructure investment and power sector reforms.
Overall, ADB's selection of this state was appropriate, given its characteristics and the large
number of follow-on transactions that materialized. In Kerala, earlier ADB concerns about less
than full political commitment to fiscal consolidation turned out to be warranted, and an anti-ADB
movement in the state has delayed other ADB operations. In general, ADB's approach to
selecting focus states was appropriate and, with the exception of Kerala, largely achieved the
objectives associated with it, particularly with regard to the successful implementation of
mutually reinforcing reform programs and improved ADB-counterpart relationships and
implementation efficiencies.
28.      In response to the GOI's request to extend state-level assistance to some of the poorer
states to help contain growing interregional disparities, especially in the remote northeastern
states, ADB selected new focus states6 according to the following criteria: (i) having higher than
average poverty incidence, (ii) being a new state or a state important for regional cooperation,
(iii) exhibiting a strong commitment to reform, and (iv) having the capacity and willingness to
take loans from the central Government. The revised strategy chose to enhance the poverty
reduction impact of ADB operations by prioritizing assistance to states with high poverty
incidence rather than states with large numbers of poor people. This decision was not based on
any in-depth analysis of relative poverty reduction effects (i.e., ADB had not undertaken a
poverty assessment for India), but rather on the GOI's desire to strengthen connectivity to some
of the more backward states, particularly in the northeast, and draw them into the mainstream of

5
    Gujarat was chosen in 1996 as a pilot state because it was assessed to best fit the criteria established in the COS. A
    further six states (Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan, and Tamil Nadu) were
    subsequently identified during 1997 discussions with the GOI about potential ADB assistance, from which ADB
    selected a low-income state (Madhya Pradesh) and a relatively more advanced state (Karnataka) using the COS
    criteria. A mixed blend of states was to balance state-level political and implementation risks for ADB operations.
    Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan were excluded, as they were either seeking or had received substantial external
    assistance from the World Bank for undertaking pubic sector management or power sector reforms, and ADB saw its
    involvement in both sectors as crucial for sustained high levels of support to states' reform efforts. For Tamil Nadu,
    political risk at that time was judged to be too high to warrant large levels of policy-based lending. Kerala's willingness
    to raise tariffs and user charges, improve nontax revenues, and privatize state-owned enterprises was assessed to be
    lower than Karnataka's, but unlike in Karnataka, other major funding agencies were not providing reform assistance in
    that state. ADB support for Madhya Pradesh went ahead in 1999. Assistance for Karnataka was later substituted with
    assistance for Kerala, as the World Bank had expanded its support for Karnataka power sector reforms to levels that
    ADB could not match.
6
    In 2001, Assam and Chhattisgarh were selected from a shortlist of four states that also included Sikkim and Bihar.
    With the 2003 CSP, assistance to other northeastern states and Uttarakhand was added. Other states with high
    poverty levels, for which assistance is being programmed, include Orissa and Jharkhand.
10


development. As a result, although 35% of all ADB state-level lending from 2003 to 2006 was in
states with a high incidence of poverty,7 and 33% was in states with a medium incidence of
poverty, 81% of ADB's state-level financial assistance was provided to states with low levels of
absolute poverty,8 as states in the northeast have comparatively small populations (see Tables
A6.1 and A6.2). This has not necessarily reduced the potential poverty impact of ADB
assistance, as even general (i.e., untargeted) infrastructure investments that improve transport
connectivity and basic urban services in states with high rural and urban poverty incidence are
likely to reach and benefit the poor. By comparison, support for large states with medium or low
incidence of poverty, but high numbers of poor, would have likely required more strategic
approaches involving targeted interventions--including projects in the social sectors, where
ADB does not have activities in India--to reach the vulnerable and marginalized parts of the
population. There is not enough evidence yet, given the fairly recent operational shift to poorer
states, to assess whether poverty reduction impacts of ADB operations there have been more
significant than those in other states, although Assam displayed one of the highest elasticities of
poverty reduction to GDP growth among Indian states. Over the CAPE period, ADB has mainly
provided funds to the states with medium incidence of poverty and low and medium levels of
absolute poverty (see Figures A6.1 and A6.2).
29.     Despite its selection of focus states, ADB's state-level activities since 1996 have not been
limited to such states. ADB has also provided assistance to other states and local governments,
for example to Karnataka, Rajasthan, and Kolkata/West Bengal (for urban development); and to
Tamil Nadu and Jammu and Kashmir for emergency support in the wake of natural disasters. In
addition, ADB has continued to provide support for national programs in the transport sectors and
for central public utilities in the energy sector, as well as financial sector assistance, which has
been utilized without any geographic limitations. ADB project activities have therefore taken place
in most Indian states, with the exception of Jharkhand and some of the smaller ones.
30.      This large geographic spread has reduced the resources available for each state in
which ADB operates. Only Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh received assistance in excess of $1
billion since 1996. Kerala, Assam, and Karnataka have received between $300 million and $1
billion, and the remaining states less than that, which indicates comparatively low levels of
potential impact, considering the sizable populations of many of these states. For recent (and
future) assistance, there is a discernable trend to provide more assistance (in terms of both
numbers and value) to comparatively small states like Assam, Chhattisgarh, Uttaranchal, and
the northeastern states, which could help increase the relative development impact of ADB's
assistance there. Increasing levels of activity in focus states could also help reduce the level of
project implementation support that ADB has to provide by harnessing synergies across
operations in different sectors. In the past, such activities were rather sector based, and similar
implementation assistance was provided to the various sector agencies without much
consideration for geographic rationalization.
31.     There is not enough evaluative evidence yet to compare the performance of operations
in the newer and poorer states with operations in the initial focus states, or to compare one-off
operations with operations in states with several ADB projects. Nevertheless, it seems likely that
focusing of resources on a limited number of states will improve the development effectiveness
of ADB's assistance. Also, OED sector findings in transport and urban development emphasize
the need to be more cognizant of local conditions when designing projects, to involve local
stakeholders in project design issues, and to improve the frequency and quality of project
implementation support. TA and staff resources are ultimately the constraining factor in any
expansion of operational focus. Operations in the newest focus states have required
7
    High poverty incidence = in excess of 35% of population below the poverty line; medium poverty incidence = 20­
    35% of population below the poverty line.
8
    Low absolute poverty states = states with less than 10 million poor.
                                                                                                 11


comparatively high levels of assistance to develop the institutional capacity to design and
implement fiscal and sector reforms and large-scale investment programs. Loans approved for
the North Eastern Region (particularly Assam) and in Uttarakhand after 2002 in the total amount
of $491.9 million had related TA in the amount of $5.6 million--a TA/loan ratio of 1.14%
compared with ratios of 0.63% for Madhya Pradesh, 0.66% for Kerala, and 0.73% for Gujarat
operations. It has also taken substantially longer to prepare and implement projects. For
example, the time lag between project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA) approval and
loan approval increased from 13 months for projects approved during 2002 to 34 months for
projects approved during 2006 (see Figure A6.3). This implies the need to back up any
operational expansion in low-capacity states with significant staff and TA resource allocations.
       4.      Aid Coordination

32.      The coordination of ADB's India operations with those of other funding agencies has been
effective, as overlap was largely avoided and scarce resources were well leveraged. The three
largest sources are the World Bank which provided $10.7 billion in new funds to the country
during the last 5 years, Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) ($5.2 billion), and ADB
($5.4 billion). Since annual aid consultative meetings ceased in 2003, the development partners
have had no formal coordination. However, frequent informal contacts reportedly take place as
required and at all levels within the respective organizations--involving staff at ADB headquarters
and at the India Resident Mission (INRM) with their counterpart representatives and offices of the
World Bank, JBIC, and the Department for International Development (DFID) of the United
Kingdom. From 1991/992 to 2004/2005, the World Bank and ADB selected the states they would
assist between themselves and focused their state-level operations in those states. There was a
tacit understanding between the two institutions that if one institution was lending in a particular
state, the other institution would not lend there. This allocation of turf was not necessarily
encouraged by the GOI, but it largely managed to avoid duplication. More recently, there has
been some potential for overlap with World Bank activities in urban development in Madhya
Pradesh, where the World Bank has had a long-standing involvement in the water sector and in
rural road and national highway development. However, efforts under these programs were
mainly complementary rather than duplicative in nature, thanks to substantial coordination efforts.
In 2001, ADB developed a coordinated assistance strategy for the road subsector jointly with the
World Bank. The other large aid provider, JBIC, provides support mainly for infrastructure, rural
development, and environmental improvement. Given the size of the larger states, their enormous
investment needs, and the comparatively small share of external assistance in the overall
development expenditures, there would appear to be scope for multiple aid agency involvement in
the infrastructure sector.
33.     Faced with its own limited TA resources and increasing TA needs to support its lending
operations in India, ADB had to look for ways of leveraging TA funds from other sources. ADB
has increasingly relied on DFID to meet TA needs arising from its lending operations--32 of 54
ADTA operations were financed or cofinanced by DFID from 2003 to 2006--leading to a
substantial alignment of the two organizations' infrastructure-related operations. For example,
DFID provided $15.7 million in financing for 15 of the 28 state-level ADB ADTA activities
approved during that period in India. In addition, ADB managed to mobilize $15 million from
DFID to finance assistance for project processing and capacity development of EAs. Also, DFID
and other large bilateral and multilateral TA providers that are operating in India have been
directly implementing sizable TA programs at the state level, which have complemented a
number of ADB's lending operations, for example, for urban development projects in Madhya
Pradesh and Kolkata (Canadian International Development Agency, DFID), tsunami-related
assistance (several agencies), and power sector reforms in Madhya Pradesh (DFID). The
Madhya Pradesh operations were examples of successful coordination, whereas the Kolkata
and tsunami efforts were not so well rated by the cooperating development partners. Overall,
12


the 2006 ADB perceptions survey9 of stakeholders in India found ADB's ability to bring different
partners together and work effectively with other development partners helpful in assisting the
country to meet its development goals and objectives.
34.    The size of the country and the fact that many sectors are the responsibility of state
governments do not easily lend themselves to the preparation of sectorwide approaches to
cooperation among the various development partners at the national level, although this might
be easier at the subsector or state levels. Nevertheless, the preparation of a rural roads
subsector assistance plan is under consideration by the ADB, GOI, and the World Bank. It might
be helpful for aid agencies, as well as India, if preparation of more sectorwide approaches were
encouraged by the GOI.

B.        ADB Contribution to Development Results

          1.      Impact

35.    ADB's potential for creating development impact in countries as large as India is
comparatively small in absolute terms. What is being rated is how effectively ADB utilized the
scope that it had for realizing its thematic objectives and making contributions to national
development results. In this sense, the overall contributions of ADB assistance to development
impact areas is rated modest on the high side with the breakdown shown in Table 1 weighted
according to relative importance in ADB country programs.
                   Table 1: Impact Rating for ADB Strategic Pillars and Themes
                              Pillar/Theme                    Weight      Rating (0­8)   Score
                   Sustainable Economic Growth                0.40             6          2.4
                   Inclusive Social Development               0.20             4          0.8
                   Good Governance                            0.10             6          0.6
                   Capacity Development                       0.15             4          0.6
                   Private Sector Development                 0.10             5          0.5
                   Environmental Improvement                  0.05             2          0.1
                                   Total Rating                                           5.0
                  ADB = Asian Development Bank.
                  8 = high, 6 = substantial, 4 = modest, 2 = low, 0 = negligible.
                  Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.

                  a.       Contributions to ADB Strategic Pillars

36.     Economic Growth. More than half of ADB's India operations in terms of numbers and
value have been targeted at fostering economic growth (see Tables A6.3 and A6.4). Projects
with this classification include infrastructure projects and assistance for fiscal and sector reform
programs.
37.     The bulk of ADB operations in the country have focused on the provision of
infrastructure in the transport and energy sectors. The contributions of ADB's assistance to
investments in roads and electricity generation and transmission capacity and upgrading, at
both the national and state levels, have been substantial. Completed ADB-supported
investments accounted for 11.2% of added railway capacity between 1991 and 2007, 4.1% of
completed national road and 14.9% of state road improvements during 1998­2003, 13.3% of
increases in installed power generating capacity from 1995 to 2003, and 11.1% of new
transmission line capacity and 4.8% of new substations from 2000 to 2007. Contributions under
ongoing projects are at similar levels.


9
    ADB.2006. Asian Development Bank Perceptions Survey of Opinion Leaders 2006. Manila.
                                                                                                                            13


38.     There is wide recognition that strong relationships exist between good physical
infrastructure and economic growth, and between economic growth and poverty reduction.10 By
promoting connectivity of producers and markets, lowering transaction costs, and improving
people's access to services, improvements in physical infrastructure have helped India to attain
high growth rates. A regression analysis undertaken by Credit Rating Information Services of
India Limited in conjunction with the CAPE confirmed that both roads and electricity have a
positive bearing on gross domestic product (GDP) and thus growth. A percentage change in
total road length or in installed electricity capacity is estimated to increase GDP in year "t+4" by
0.19% and 0.05%, respectively.11 The study could not find gross irrigated area to be a
determinant for growth, although this could be attributed to the fact that there has not been a
major change in irrigated area over the years. Assuming that ADB-financed infrastructure
investments are sustainable (and there is some doubt about a number of road projects), it can
be inferred that ADB's support for investments in transport and energy has contributed to long-
term growth.
39.      Sector reforms in the financial, public resource management, and power sectors can
also reasonably be assumed to have supported growth. The gradual deregulation and
liberalization of financial markets has helped mobilize additional resources and made financial
intermediation more efficient, thereby having positive effects on economic activity. The short-
term economic impact of ADB's assistance for public resource management has been modest.
However, either during or after program completion, all four states involved entered into
contracts with the central Government committing to a legal and administrative fiscal reform
framework for at least 5 years. The GOI utilized the experience gained with ADB-supported
public sector resource management programs in Gujarat and Assam to formulate the Fiscal
Responsibility Act, which is providing the basic reform framework for fiscal reforms at the state-
level. Also, the influx of private investment in upgrading infrastructure has been a key factor in
stimulating economic growth, with the success in Gujarat being the most obvious. In the power
sector, financial restructuring together, with tariff restructuring, and lower costs have reduced
the incidence of subsidies, leaving more fiscal resources available for other purposes.
40.     While ADB has undertaken little analysis of the process or the pattern of growth in India
and how growth would trickle down to create a sustainable environment for poverty reduction,
there is nevertheless some evidence from OED's evaluations of direct and indirect benefits from
infrastructure investments. Apart from indirect transmission mechanisms via increases in
economic growth, rural transport and energy infrastructure investments have benefited the poor
as well as the nonpoor by creating opportunities to increase the productivity of poor farmers in
rural areas and for nonfarm and landless poor households to find income-generating
opportunities. Power sector reforms and investments have provided additional and more reliable
supply to rural areas. For example, in Gujarat, villages were connected with 24-hour access to
power by rescheduling power supply from agricultural connections to off-peak periods,12 while in
Assam 78,000 new rural consumers were connected. Rural roads have had a positive impact on
employment opportunities, access to credit, access to health and education facilities, farmgate
prices and availability of agricultural inputs, and access to urban areas, although the transport



10
   At the national level, from 1983/84 to 1993/94, each unit increase in gross domestic product growth, reduced
   poverty by 2.01%. The reduction of poverty for the period from 1993/94 to 2004/05 was 1.31%, according to
   elasticity-based analysis conducted by Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited.
11
   The regression analysis quantifies the impact of the level of infrastructure on the level of GDP. The following
   variables were used: (i) road length; (ii) installed capacity in electricity; (iii) gross irrigated area; (iv) fixed capital;
   and (v) human capital index.
12
   Subsequently, the quality of power to both sectors improved. ADB. 2007. Energy Sector in India ­ Building on
   Success for More Results. Manila.
14


sector assistance program evaluation findings13 suggest that the presence of an all-weather
road is a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for local socioeconomic improvements.
41.     Another ADB study carried out in Gujarat14 shows that improvements in roads, ports,
and energy infrastructure have significant effects on poverty at the household, village, and
community levels. These impacts accrue to both the poor and nonpoor and include growth in
existing economic activities and emergence of new employment opportunities. Other benefits
included improved access to health care and education facilities, and improved availability of
news and information. Recent research for India has indicated that investment in roads might
provide the highest returns in terms of poverty reduction, above all other public investments in
health, education, agricultural research, irrigation, or target antipoverty programs.15 The poverty-
reducing potential of infrastructure investments was also confirmed by a study carried out by
Datt and Ravallion,16 which found that Indian states with relatively low levels of rural
infrastructure were less able to translate growth into poverty reduction than those with higher
levels of infrastructure.
42.     Inclusive Social Development. India has made progress towards meeting its MDG
targets and improving its human development indicators (see Tables A4.2 and A4.3). ADB has
contributed to this process, albeit at a modest level. Nearly a third of all ADB projects approved
since 1991 (but only 17% in terms of value) have been classified as having human
development/inclusive social development objectives. These comprise mainly support for urban
development and housing finance, as well as social service delivery under the Madhya Pradesh
Public Resource Management Program. Urban development projects have proven to be effective
mechanisms for addressing social development concerns. For example, ADB's urban projects in
India will provide more than 10 million people with improved water supply and more than 14
million people with improved sanitation services. That should improve their quality of life and
related health indicators in the respective cities. About 1 million slum dwellers will have benefited
from an upgrading of their areas. These projects can have important demonstration effects for
other cities if sustainability issues can be resolved. The potential to address social concerns in
other sectors--for example national highways through better safety standards, education on
HIV/AIDS17 for truck drivers, containing the trafficking of women and children, and livelihood
projects for resettled communities--has not been realized, although such initiatives were featured
in the project designs that were approved by the ADB Board.
43.     Governance and Corruption. During recent years, the GOI has embarked on reforms
to strengthen governance. Decentralization efforts have increased the responsibilities of state
and local governments for service delivery, which will help strengthen public sector
accountability. Fiscal reforms have provided impetus for the more efficient use of public
resources through rationalization of government expenditures, revenue reforms, the
restructuring of state enterprises, sector restructuring, increased participation of the private
sector, and administrative reforms.
44.    ADB has supported this process through assistance for strengthening public resource
management, power sector restructuring, financial sector reforms, and strengthening of financial
and project management capacity. Core governance interventions have been limited to TA for

13
   ADB. 2007. Sector Assistance Program Evaluation Study for the Transport Sector in India ­ Focusing on Results.
   Manila.
14
   ADB. 2005. Assessing the Impact of Transport and Energy Infrastructure on Poverty Reduction. Asian
   Development Bank Study. Manila.
15
   Thorat, S. and S. Fan. 2007, 24 February. Public Investment and Poverty Reduction: Lessons from China and
   India. Economic and Political Weekly.
16
   Datt, Gaurav, and Martin Ravallion. 2002. Is India's Economic Growth Leaving the Poor Behind? World Bank.
   Policy Research Working Paper No. 2846. Washington, DC.
17
   Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
                                                                                                   15


improving the administration of justice in India. About 16% of ADB-financed projects (in terms of
number and value) approved during 1996­2006 had governance objectives.
45.     ADB-supported public resource management programs in Assam, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, and Kerala assisted those state governments to realign their service delivery role. The
programs gave impetus for reforming ineffective and inefficient public enterprises, which is a long-
term and politically difficult process. They also supported the simplification of the taxation system,
computerization of expenditure treasury and debt accounts, establishment of independent utility
regulatory authorities, closure of loss-incurring public enterprises, and increases in scope for
private sector participation.
46.      ADB's governance assistance has been most effective at the sector level. In the energy
sector, governance has improved significantly in the three state electricity boards where ADB
provided assistance. The creation of independent regulation was a significant help in reducing
political influence from tariff setting and in creating an environment in which the power sector
can become more commercially focused. Regulators are increasingly demonstrating
independence and are using the internet and other public disclosure mechanisms as ways to
enhance transparency, an important step in improving governance. Appointment processes are
sound, and regulators are moving towards financial independence by collecting revenues from
the utilities rather than through state budgets. State and central regulators are increasingly
taking a performance-based approach to setting rates, although the major revenues portion is
still established on a cost-plus basis. To improve the transparency of their management and
accounts, the distribution companies are starting to computerize their financial and management
information systems with the initial focus on billing. Looking forward, the following governance
issues still need to be addressed: (i) remaining shortcomings in independence, (ii) a lack of
autonomy of distribution companies in setting tariffs or procuring power, (iii) separation of the
finances of distribution companies, (iv) sharing of human resources between distribution
companies, and (v) the absence of adequate risk management systems and practices.
47.     In the transport sector, governance has undergone a positive change with the gradual
development of an enabling environment that allows the entry of the private sector into the
rehabilitation and maintenance of transport infrastructure. This is apparent in the ADB-supported
evolution of the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) from a developing and operating
agency to a catalyst for private sector participation. The GOI has increasingly decentralized
responsibilities in the transport sector to encourage wider participation in decision making. The
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana program for rural roads is based on a decentralized process
of project identification and implementation. State governments have increasingly corporatized
specific activities to make them more efficient and effective, and to improve service delivery. The
ADB-supported of the Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation, which resulted in an
examination of innovative means of improving services, among them customized build-operate-
transfer contracts that include various aspects of traffic enforcement like axle load control, is a
step in this direction.
48.    Corruption is one of the most damaging consequences of poor governance. The less
reform-minded states in India, as reflected by better investment climates, power sector
performance ratings, and fiscal performance, are also the states that were ranked, in general,
by Transparency International as the more corrupt states in the country (see Table A6.5).
49.     The 10th FYP noted that corruption had assumed endemic proportions and needed to be
addressed through better design of projects, greater accountability, and more streamlined and
transparent implementation procedures. Some of the measures initiated during the 10th FYP
period to strengthen governance are being reinforced during the 11th FYP period. The Right to
Information Bill, which was passed in 2005 in an effort to improve governance and eliminate
corruption, accords all citizens greater access to public documents. Corruption investigations
16


have substantially increased in many states. Although Transparency International still ranks
India among those countries with perceived high levels of corruption, its ranking gradually
improved from 69th among 90 countries and a score of 2.818 in 2000 to 70th among 163
countries and a score of 3.3 in 2006. Among ADB developing member countries (DMCs) that
borrowed from ADB, only Bhutan, Malaysia, and Thailand have a better rating than India.
Addressing corruption is a difficult, long-term process, but these findings indicate that India is
making positive progress in this area.
50.      ADB's governance assistance at the sector level has helped reduce the scope for
corruption. For example, in the power sector, the major sources of corruption have been
significant theft of electricity causing nontechnical losses (39% in the case of Madhya Pradesh),
procurement kickbacks, and politically driven interventions. Theft of electricity is being
successfully reduced through (i) governance measures, which include matching of feeder loads
and meters; (ii) unbundling of utilities, which allows for comparisons of financial performance
and the disaggregation of costs and revenues by utility functions; and (iii) introduction of
consumer inclusivity by regulators, which promotes and enforces consumer interests in
transparent decisions. These measures are relatively permanent, as they are applied at the
institutional level. Procurement is being made more transparent, for example through the use of
more transparent international competitive bidding; through ADB's monitoring and control
systems; and, where deemed necessary, by using international procurement experts with
specific industry knowledge.
51.     Pilot schemes are being supported with ADB assistance to demonstrate the effects of
monitoring and reconciling billing with meters, decentralized transformer maintenance and parts
procurement, and customer service centers. The benefits of increased metering and monitoring
are being realized through the faster identification of nontechnical losses and matching
transformer data with computerized billing of meters. A pilot project in Assam reduced losses in
a feeder, with mainly industrial customers from over 65% to 6% in only 4 weeks after the
controls were established. A similar pilot project reduced transformer failures in one district from
an average of 12% to zero over a 22-week implementation period. Other innovative ideas are
being implemented to try to reduce losses such as franchising supplies, with the franchisee
undertaking billing and collection.
52.     Most of ADB's sector-based anticorruption efforts in India have not been the result of
specific strategies. Analysis of sector-specific corruption potential and mechanisms, and
incorporation of commensurate anticorruption strategies in sector roadmaps might further
enhance ADB's effectiveness in this area.
53.     Through assistance for the incorporation of best practices for procurement and financial
management in the implementation of its projects in India, ADB has not only sought to address
corruption at the project level, but has also increased awareness at the EA level. There is some
evidence that ADB's efforts to insulate its projects from corruption are effective. Based on data
collected by the Integrity Division of ADB's Office of the Auditor General, ADB projects in India
score comparatively low at about 7% in terms of number of project-related allegations filed ADB-
wide from 1998 to 2006. While only two cases were filed from 1998 to 2002, India cases have
consistently accounted for over 8% of all cases from 2003 onwards. Most allegations were
made by outside parties and related to corruption and fraud in loan projects. Of the 53 filed
cases, 50 have been concluded, and 3 are still open. Only four cases (8%) resulted in
sanctions, compared with 16% of filed cases ADB-wide. Also, the Integrity Division concluded


18
     Scores relate to the perception of corruption among business people (both resident and expatriate), academics,
     and risk analysts, and range from 10 (highly clean) to 0 (highly corrupt). The India rating is based on the findings of
     10 surveys.
                                                                                               17


that a greater proportion of Indian cases (66%) did not merit investigation after screening, than
ADB-wide (34%).
               b.     Contributions to ADB Themes

54.     Capacity Development. Many Indian government institutions, particularly at the lower
levels, have capacity problems that affect their ability to formulate policy and deliver services.
Problems stem from deficiencies in the overall enabling environment, lack of incentives, poor
financial resources, outdated systems and management practices at the organizational level,
and an aging work force and lack of newly skilled entrants due to recruitment freezes. Also,
decentralization efforts since the 1990s, which significantly enhanced the powers of state and
local governments including their financial and administrative authority, increased the need for
capacity development efforts at all levels.
55.     Prior to 1996, ADB provided comparatively little capacity development support to India.
Only 30 of the 51 ADTA operations approved during that time had capacity-related components,
and there was little policy-based lending, which could have addressed enabling environment
constraints to improving institutional capacity. After 1996, many projects, particularly in the
infrastructure sectors, sought to enhance the organizational capacity of government agencies
and the policy environment in which they operate, primarily with the aim of improving corporate
and financial governance, as well as their service delivery. Another increasingly important
concern in the context of the country's decentralization process and the expansion of ADB
operations to new states and municipalities has been strengthening the implementation capacity
of EAs for ADB-financed investment projects.
56.     In terms of value, annual TA allocations for capacity development increased from an
average of $1.3 million during 1985-1995 to $5.5 million during 1996-2002 and to $6.3 million
during 2003-2006. Slightly over half of the 103 ADTA grants approved from 1996 to 2006
included related capacity­building components. Every second of these TA operations sought to
improve the implementation capacity of EAs for ADB-financed investment loans by providing
advice for strengthening their planning function, financial management, management
information systems, and environmental impact assessment capacity, or assistance for
upgrading project management and technical skills. A large number of TA activities also
supported the implementation of ADB-supported sector reform programs, mainly by providing
advisory services for the formulation of policy options and measures that helped address
constraints to the effectiveness and efficiency of sector institutions. Only about one third of TA
grants with capacity development components provided nonlending related capacity building,
usually in the law, economic management, public policy, and financial sectors.
57.     ADB's assistance has made significant contributions to the capacity development of a
number of sector organizations and EAs, especially at the state and local levels, where such
assistance is most needed. An OED review of capacity development assistance provided to
Madhya Pradesh, Assam, and Uttarakhand generally confirmed the effectiveness of ADB's
assistance. The fieldwork found that ADB helped identify critical issues for capacity
development and helped design policy and institutional changes to address them. However,
although projects generally achieved what they were set up to do, a number of EAs stated that
they would like to have had more assistance for the implementation of these changes and skills
training. At the sector level, most capacity building assistance provided in conjunction with
public resources management and power sector reform programs has been successful, while
experience with capacity development support for urban development authorities has been
mixed. Proposed systems changes for a number of roads and highways authorities were not
fully operationalized and institutionalized, as they apparently did not meet the needs of the
clients, although ADB assistance for the development of NHAI capacity has been highly
successful.
18


58.     ADB's current country strategy acknowledges the significant and sustained effort that is
required to build capacity in several weak states and to familiarize their EAs with ADB's rules
and procedures. Despite suggesting an increase in resources for capacity development, the
current strategy does not delineate a clear approach to capacity development, beyond the
strengthening of project implementation with a focus on ability to comply with ADB policies,
rules, and procedures. Procedural compliance is an important enabling function, and there are
capacity spillovers in that EAs are exposed to sophisticated procedures. However, this
somewhat limited approach to capacity development stays below the aspirations of ADB's 2007
Medium-Term Framework and the Action Plan for Integrating Capacity Development into
Country Programs and Operations. These documents stress the need for a strategic approach
to capacity development based on country ownership and leadership.19 While it is too early to
look for implementation of these principles to be filtering through, the evidence provided by
recent projects reviewed by OED suggests a more ad hoc, pragmatic approach focused on
delivery and performance of the ADB portfolio, than on `the ability of people, organizations, and
society as a whole to manage their affairs successfully," as defined by the 2007 strategy
document. This is not to say that ADB has not considered or covered other aspects. In fact,
most of the loan project reports reviewed for India projects over the last 10 years included a
fairly detailed examination of the institutional and organizational environment within which loan
support was envisaged. A number of enabling environment and organizational issues were also
addressed. However, the scope and time horizon of most assistance was usually limited to the
immediate requirements of ADB's financial assistance, and was not based on a mutually agreed
upon strategy for addressing the long-term capacity needs of the counterpart institution. Also,
ADB has generally provided assistance only for the design of new policies, systems, and
processes, but not for their implementation. All components that affect EA performance need to
be looked at. For example, in the urban and transport sectors, the weak capacity of private
sector contractors and consultants remains a major issue. The next Indian country partnership
strategy should include sector­specific strategies for capacity development in focus states and
in key sector agencies with which ADB works. Given its operational focus on lending, the
scarcity of its TA resources, and the GOI's reluctance to borrow OCR funds for TA, ADB has to
continue its efforts to link up its assistance with the programs of bilateral donors that can
support long-term capacity efforts.
59.     The need to implement loan programs quickly and efficiently often meant that loan
implementation structures relied heavily on consultants and project implementation units (PIUs)
and were inadequately integrated into the host organizations. PIUs have been used in India
mainly for low-capacity EAs, particularly at local levels. While expediency of loan
implementation should not be completely compromised, a slower approach that allows
implementation structures to be built into host organizations can help create a pool of staff and
an institutional structure for long-term sustainability. Where PIUs are staffed by internal
postings, there is more likelihood that new capacities will be sustained. However, where such
organizations operate as temporary and parallel agencies with staff seconded from outside the
agency responsible for future O&M, there is every chance that new capacities, processes, and
systems adopted for the project will cease once the project has been completed. If external
staffing of a PIU represents a temporary arrangement to address staff shortages, it will be
essential to provide mechanisms that will counter the tendency on the part of the host agency to
perceive such arrangements as outsourced and therefore of little relevance to routine service
delivery activities. Even when projects have been directly implemented by EA staff, high

19
     Key elements include (i) a shared view of capacity development, based on effective dialogue between the funding
     agency community and developing countries; (ii) attention to both the individual and organizational dimensions of
     capacity; (iii) consideration of the enabling environment, institutional capacities, and political economy; (iv)
     development of a public sector performance and results orientation; (v) inclusiveness and accountability in the
     delivery of capacity development; and (vi) a gradual change management process and systems orientation.
                                                                                                                   19


movements of responsible counterpart staff has reduced the sustainability of capacity
development assistance.
60.     Private Sector Development. Since India embarked on structural reform programs
during the 1990s, there has been increased scope for private sector participation in the
economy. Despite the emphasis given in various COS documents to private sector
development, only 3.3% of all public sector ADB projects (5.5% in terms of value) approved for
India since 1991 have had private sector development objectives. Private sector development
was mainly supported through assistance for public resource management, financial,
hydrocarbon, and power sector reform programs that, among other things, promoted the
privatization of public enterprises (although not very successfully), and private sector
participation in the respective sectors. However, although most of the assistance did contribute
to a growth of private sector activity in these sectors, certain unresolved issues continue to
constrain more participation (for details see Appendix 7, para 25). ADB also provided financial
assistance to private enterprises under its private sector window, either directly for industrial or
energy projects, or indirectly via financial institutions and capital market vehicles. ADB's
attempts to support private infrastructure development through financial intermediaries have not
been successful, as this assistance did not address demand-side problems.
61.     ADB made a positive contribution to the development of the enabling environment for
the private sector in transport. For example, the NHAI adopted PPP guidelines for attracting the
private sector to national network development. There was little evidence of the effectiveness of
ongoing TA for the development of high-density corridors under PPPs, however. PPP
components have also been introduced under ADB's urban development projects, whenever
possible. In general, implementation of PPPs in India has been significantly below GOI
expectations and has been limited to a few states due to substantial regulatory, institutional, and
legal constraints. These need to be properly analyzed and addressed before financial
assistance in this area can be contemplated. Overall, ADB's contributions to private sector
development in India have been modest to substantial, but need to be better strategized and
coordinated in the future to enhance impact.
62.     Environmental Improvement. India's economic growth has created significant
challenges for managing pressures on natural resources and the environment. Resolving these
issues is necessary for sustaining growth. It looks likely that India will not meet its MDG targets
for carbon dioxide emissions and consumption of ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons. There
are estimates20 that environmental costs reduce GDP by 4.5% per annum, mainly due to lost
productivity from death and disease. In addition, rice productivity in southern India is falling as
pollution blocks out sunlight. To deal with these impacts, India has developed a comprehensive
set of environmental laws and institutions, including an active judiciary. However, despite this
policy and institutional framework and some successes, environmental degradation has not
been arrested on a large scale. India's current spending on environmental protection is in the
order of 0.5% of its gross national product-- well below the average of 1-3% in developed
nations.
63.     ADB's contributions to improving environmental conditions in India have been modest at
best: a number of urban development, energy efficiency, and renewable energy projects, and
TA for the implementation of environmental impact assessments. Only 6% (in terms of value) of
ADB projects approved after 1991 were classified as having environmental objectives. Some of
the urban projects promoted environmental improvement through support for (i) urban waste
management, (ii) creating an enabling environment to improve slum conditions, and (iii)
municipal management for improved environmental conditions. A number of related TA activities

20
     According to Dr. Shreekant Gupta, Delhi School of Economics, as quoted in "Choking on Pollution in India," Spiegel
     Online edition. July 2007.
20


were conceived to address environmental issues at the regulatory and policy levels but had no
follow-up from ADB. ADB did not promote new environmental technologies (e.g., waste to
energy, decentralized power generation) and their adoption by users. Some of ADB's earlier
energy projects addressed efficiency concerns. However, while the Indian Renewable Energy
Development Agency renewable energy project and the energy efficiency project at the Bureau
of Energy Efficiency have led to demonstrable and replicable projects, the outcomes of other
ADB efforts were only partly successful. The lack of success can be attributed in part, to the
choice of the financial intermediation modality, which did not address underlying structural
issues. Low energy prices, which prevailed during most of the evaluation period, and
weaknesses in the policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks did not provide the incentives for
companies, households, or governments to invest in these areas. Demand-side management
initiatives were also constrained by (i) scarcity and high cost of energy-efficient products and
services; (ii) limited indigenous technical skills in this area; and (iii) lack of commercial
incentives for, and commitment to, such programs.
64.    ADB's level of environmental assistance, and consequently its overall impact, have been
small. There appear to be several explanations for ADB's waning interest in environmental
improvement issues, including (i) the discontinuation of specific quantitiative targets for projects
with environmental or social objectives; (ii) ADB's 2002 Environment Policy, which focuses on
environmental safeguards rather than environmental improvement; and (iii) organizational
changes within ADB that dispersed scarce staff with environmental expertise across a number
of departments and divisions.
65.     A World Bank study21 concludes that, given the high population density, vulnerable
ecology, extreme climate, and significant share of the economy heavily dependent on the
natural resource base, environmental sustainability might well be the next great challenge along
India's development path. As the country moves into the second decade of strong economic
performance, infrastructure investments, urban development, and industrialization, the issues of
managing the environmental impacts associated with this rapid growth are capturing public
attention. Another major set of challenges arises from emerging global environmental concerns
such as climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion, and biodiversity loss. Recognizing these
challenges, the GOI has prepared the National Environmental Policy (2006), which calls for a
fundamental shift in the priority given to the environment and the regulatory approach to
environmental management.
66.     ADB is developing new modalities to better position itself to support energy efficiency,
renewable energy, and the clean development mechanism, and to promote the development of
cleaner technologies to help address the energy/environment nexus. There is scope for ADB to
do more to promote technology adoption and sharing of best practices in the region. This is
particularly important in the context of energy-efficient technologies and best practices regarding
pollution control in developed economies of Asia like Japan, Republic of Korea, and Singapore.
Energy efficiency improvement and expanded renewable energy production could help reduce
the country's reliance on imported fuels and its carbon dioxide emissions. In devising
appropriate assistance mechanisms, it needs to be considered, however, that the GOI is of the
opinion that any additional costs arising from the use of alternative technologies in providing
energy, should be financed from special grant funds. ADB could also consider working with the
GOI to address greenhouse gas emissions in future transport operations. Economic growth,
urbanization, economic liberalization, rising incomes, and higher aspirations of people living in
India have all led to increased mobility and greater motor vehicle ownership. As a result,


21
     World Bank. 2007. Strengthening Institutions for Sustainable Growth: Country Environmental Analysis for India.
     Washington, D.C.
                                                                                                                      21


transportation sector greenhouse gas emissions are increasing,22 and policy interventions to
address this are needed.23 In urban sector infrastructure projects, promoting waste to energy
concepts could help minimize the gap in present power supply and demand and solve waste-
related problems. ADB knowledge products could include policy papers and strategies
concerning issues related to environmental and resource mismanagement in the country to help
prioritize ADB's funding focus in the future and align its programs with emerging environmental
needs.
67.     Regional Cooperation. India is a founding member of the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC), established in 1985 to provide a platform for free trade and for
solving environmental issues among Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and
Sri Lanka. Not much progress has been made by SAARC in these areas. Consequently regional
cooperation objectives have not figured prominently in ADB's India operations. All of ADB's
programmed assistance for regional cooperation in the country was cancelled for various
reasons. The development of a regional power grid and enhanced regional power sector
cooperation have long been discussed through SAARC. The limited level of cooperation
achieved to date reflects political tensions between some countries in the region. If these can be
overcome, there is significant potential and need to enhance such regional approaches.
68.     Gender Equality. A number of gender-related human development and MDG indicators,
particularly in education, reveal that India's progress in this area has been slow. Although most
surveyed stakeholders think that ADB could make useful contributions to addressing gender
issues in India, none of the projects funded by ADB was classified as having this thematic
objective. With the exception of the Madhya Pradesh urban project, the Chhattisgarh irrigation
project, and the tsunami assistance, no projects included gender-specific measures to ensure
that women benefit from project outputs and outcomes.
         2.       Value Addition

69.      ADB can potentially add value to national development efforts through the provision of
financial resources, risk mitigation, support for project design and implementation, policy
dialogue, and the provision of nonlending products and services. Taking into consideration the
limits that India's size poses on the potential for value addition, ADB's contributions were rated
as modest on average due to lack of proactive risk mitigation and high-quality knowledge
products and services (see Table 2).




22
   A recent ADB workshop on Climate Change Mitigation in the Transport Sector estimated that energy use by the
   transport sector in India will grow by 5­8% per year.
23
   Possible measures include (i) adopting fuels with lower greenhouse gas emissions; (ii) reducing fuel consumption
   per passenger- or freight-km traveled; (iii) increasing the distance traveled per unit of fuel for individual vehicles;
   (iv) using taxes, incentives, and fiscal instruments to encourage environmentally friendly behavior; (v) ensuring that
   the cost of pollution is borne by the polluter; and (vi) better spatial planning, particularly in urban areas.
    22


                                                                           Table 2: Value Addition Rating
                                           Item                         Potential for Value Addition          Realization of Value Addition by ADB                                                   Rating
                                                                                   by ADB
Provision of Financial Resources                                                    Low                                       Substantial                                                              5
Risk Mitigation                                                                    Modest                                      Modest                                                                  4
Support for Project Design and                                                  Substantial                                   Substantial                                                              6
Implementation
                                                                           Low (at national level)                   Modest (at national level)
Policy Dialogue                                                           Substantial (at state level)              Substantial (at state level)                                                       5
                                                                                                                              Modest
Provision of Knowledge and                          Substantial                                              (Low for Knowledge Services/Substantial                                                   4
Advisory Services                                                                                                      for Advisory Services)
Average Value Addition Rating                                                                                                                                                                         4.8
ADB = Asian Development Bank
8 = high, 6 = substantial, 4 = modest, 2 = low, 0 = negligible.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.


                                                   a.        Provision of Financial Resources

    70.     Line ministries and EAs acknowledge that the availability of ADB financing provides a
    stable funding source. From a state government or EA perspective, access to finance per se
    (and, in many cases, GOI grant funds) has been a clear benefit of ADB involvement in projects.
    However, at an aggregate level, ADB's net resource transfers to the country since 1988 have
    amounted to only $893.3 million. Due to loan cancellations and significant prepayments, net
    resource transfers from ADB to India were negative from 2000 to 2004, but turned positive
    during 2005 (see Figure 2).


                                                           Figure 2: India: Loan Approvals, Disbursements, and Net Resource




                                                                                                                                                            Net Resource Transfer/Loan Prepayments
          Loan Amount Approved/Disbursed




                                                                           Transfers (Public Sector), 1988-2006
                                           1600                                                                                                    2,000
                                           1400                                                                                                    1,500
                    ($ million)




                                           1200
                                                                                                                                                   1,000




                                                                                                                                                                           ($ million)
                                           1000
                                                                                                                                                   500
                                           800
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                           600
                                                                                                                                                   -500
                                           400
                                           200                                                                                                     -1,000

                                             0                                                                                                     -1,500
                                                  1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006


                                                   Disbursement            Loan Approvals            Loan Prepayments             Net Resource Transfer

                            Source: Asian Development Bank database.


    71.    Cofinancing mobilized in conjunction with ADB projects in India has been below the
    average ADB leveraging ratio of 40%. Only $3.95 billion in cofinancing from all sources was
    generated to complement more than $16 billion of ADB financing to the country, translating into
    a leveraging ratio of 24%. About 35% of this amount was provided for private sector projects,
    mostly from commercial sources. The energy sector received 87% of all cofinancing. The
    comparatively low cofinancing volumes are partly due to the absence of a proactive cofinancing
    strategy.
                                                                                                                  23


72.     Most public sector EAs have regarded the availability of long-term maturities that match
the funding needs of infrastructure projects as an important benefit for working with ADB.
Interestingly though, access to long-term funds from ADB has been of lesser importance to
commercial Indian infrastructure financiers in an environment, that until recently, was
characterized by declining interest rates, where most projects were financed with medium-term
loans, mostly on a floating rate basis with the option to convert to fixed term later. Also, many
private borrowers prepaid longer term loans received under ADB-financed lines of credit to
financial intermediaries.
73.     Pricing of ADB funds compared with other sources of funds has not been an important
factor for most public sector line ministries and EAs in deciding whether to avail of ADB
financing. This situation may change, given the GOI's new back-to-back lending arrangements
for most states, according to which all costs associated with external borrowings will be passed
on to the recipient state governments, and increasing access of the better national utilities to
capital markets. India's increasing creditworthiness, which has been reflected in a recent
upgrading of its sovereign debt to investment grade, has reduced the relative attractiveness of
ADB funding, particularly if other costs associated with ADB loans (e.g., those related to
compliance with safeguards and fiduciary requirements) are considered. Recent international
bond issues by quasisovereign entities have come closer to rates that ADB can offer.24 For
financial intermediation loans and private sector operations, where borrowers have ready
access to domestic and international capital markets, ADB pricing has become an issue,
although with interest rates rising in Indian markets, nonsovereign borrowers are expected to
use foreign sources including ADB to raise low-cost capital, at least in the short term. Initially,
the local currency credit rating is still below investment grade, which affects infrastructure
development, as 60% of India's infrastructure needs will have to be met by local funding.
                    b.       Risk Mitigation

74.      This is an area where the potential for value addition has been small, but is bound to
increase. Only one partial credit guarantee was provided for a public sector power project. On
the public sector side, the need for GOI counterguarantees and GOI pricing of the
counterguarantees made such credit enhancements largely uncompetitive. For private sector
operations, there has been little demand for guarantees. While there is not likely to be much
interest in political risk guarantees, there is substantial scope for partial credit guarantees in
conjunction with infrastructure financing to help stretch maturities of funds or share the risks
during the construction and start-up periods. Use of the complementary financing scheme
modality was limited to $60 million for one public sector operation and to $230 million for a
nonrecourse financing for the National Thermal Power Corporation and a private sector loan.
Reasons for the low utilization of this modality include (i) lack of suitable underlying
transactions, particularly in the private sector; and (ii) pricing that was not competitive, given
fairly liquid market conditions and low interest rate margins until recently. ADB's financial
participation in private sector projects through investments and loans of about $1 billion helped
mobilize more than $3 billion of financing from other sources.
                    c.       Support for Project Design and Implementation

75.    About 80% of EA/implementing agency survey respondents stated that they found
assistance in the preparation and design of investment and non-investment proposals
beneficial, and 90% felt that ADB had helped with project implementation (see client perception

24
     In February 2006, the National Thermal Power Corporation issued 10­year notes at 140 basis points above 10
     year US treasury paper. Floating rate notes of the State Bank of India issued in February 2007 were priced at 38
     basis points over the 3­month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR). In July 2007, ICICI Bank issued a 2­year
     floating rate note offered through its Singapore branch at 40 basis points above LIBOR.
24


survey, Appendix 8). ADTA helped strengthen institutional capacity for project preparation and
design. Several transport sector agencies including the NHAI and state public works
departments adopted more efficient systems and practices for project selection, processing, and
design as a result of ADB's involvement. In the energy sector, there was initially less need for
project design or implementation support, especially in well­established technical areas such
generation and transmission planning. ADB assistance was particularly appreciated for the
design of complex state power sector restructuring and reform programs. In the urban sector,
project design assistance was crucial, particularly for smaller municipalities. ADB TA was also
instrumental in the establishment and institutional strengthening of state-level urban
development authorities, which, in the case of Gujarat and Karnataka, now have the capacity to
design urban infrastructure investments independently.
76.    The majority of agencies surveyed (80%) felt that ADB-assisted projects were
implemented more efficiently than other projects undertaken by the same agency. Most
respondents believed that ADB provided timely service, worked closely with project managers,
and helped ensure that procurement and disbursements were not substantially delayed. ADTA
operations also helped improve procurement processes and contract management and
monitoring. ADB's guidelines for procurement of goods and consultants were acknowledged to
have contributed to transparency and competition in procurement. The use of good and
transparent procurement processes was seen as one of the main benefits of ADB assistance by
survey respondents. A number of EAs, among them the Gujarat State Disaster Management
Authority, indicated that they were considering adopting some of ADB's procurement standards
and practices for their own purposes.
77.     ADB's efforts to introduce improved standards and practices for financial reporting
through relevant covenants and TA generally increased the transparency of ADB-financed
project and programs, although several EAs initially regarded such requirements without
enthusiasm. The availability of reliable and updated financial information enabled better control
of costs and helped increase accountability. There were also problems when financial reporting
covenants did not reflect the capacity of the agency to comply.25
78.     ADB's safeguard policies and other requirements enhanced the sustainability and
development outcomes of funded projects, notwithstanding delays and difficulties encountered
from time to time. The majority of survey respondents (73%) stated that ADB's resettlement
policies had helped in providing fair and satisfactory treatment for project-affected areas and
communities, enhancing the project's development contributions. A number of agencies
involved in ADB assistance in Kerala said that they were considering integrating some of the
provisions of ADB social safeguards requirements into their own guidelines.
                    d.       Policy Dialogue

79.    ADB's contribution towards shaping and influencing macroeconomic and sector policies
has been comparatively limited in India because of the modest size of its assistance in relation
to the country's investment needs and the distribution of ADB assistance across numerous
agencies with concomitant loss of continuity, relationships, and dialogue. At least until the early
1990s, there was general resistance on the part of decision makers and senior GOI officials to
accept ideas from outside the Government. While the GOI appreciated the more hands-off,

25
     For example, the Energy Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for India found that the establishment of new
     companies in conjunction with state power sector restructuring necessitated a splitting of accounts of former state
     electricity boards, which resulted in unavoidable delays in the completion of accounts and preparation of financial
     statements. During 2006, 6.7% of projects did not comply with audited project accounts and audited financial
     statement covenants (compared with 5.8% ADB-wide).
                                                                                                     25


flexible, and nonprescriptive approach of ADB in policy matters--the survey results also indicate
that ADB's policy advice was generally found to be responsive to country conditions and
cognizant of the social impact of reform programs--in practice, the GOI has looked to the World
Bank first among its development partners when it needed external inputs for formulating its
reform agenda. However, the maturity of the GOI­ADB relationship, and ADB's extensive
involvement in certain sectors and states has raised the GOI's expectations on policy inputs
from ADB operations.
80.      In recent years, and especially after the shift in operational focus to state governments,
ADB has had more involvement in policy dialogue due to (i) ADB's assistance carrying higher
weight in the context of state finances than at the national level; (ii) the availability of significant
TA resources to help prepare program loans and facilitate meaningful policy dialogue; (iii) focus
on fewer sectors (power, roads, urban development) in selected focus states, which allowed
deeper relationships with counterpart organizations that have extended over many years; and
(iv) perhaps most importantly, a growing receptiveness of policy makers at the central and state
levels to policy ideas and suggestions from nongovernment sources. Not surprisingly, ADB's
value addition in the policy area has been greatest at the state levels, where it helped to identify
critical policy issues and design and implement policy responses, particularly in the public sector
resource management and power sector. There is a clear view among the ministries and EAs
that ADB needs to complement its financial assistance with high­quality analytical and empirical
policy work if it wants to be a more effective development partner in the future. There is demand
for assistance to (i) help identify policy options and related international experience, and (ii)
develop implementation capacity for reform programs (currently most assistance is focused on
the design of reform measures).
81.     ADB's in-house expertise on policy issues is perceived by clients to have been
comparatively limited, probably because ADB relies greatly on TA consultants to develop much
of its policy and advisory input. This modus operandi has not only affected ADB's ability to
develop sustainable capacity on policy issues (since a lot of the experience gained in the course
of ADB-financed operations leaves with the consultant), but has also reduced its ability to
quickly respond to government requests for policy advice whenever it is needed, and to engage
in long-term dialogue. Proactive policy dialogue requires (i) an excellent institutional knowledge
base on key sector policy issues, (ii) the capacity to identify and disseminate successful reform
experience from within and outside the region, (iii) access to highly qualified expertise, (iv) staff
with the ability to conduct policy dialogue at the highest levels of government, and (v) sustained
in-country presence. While ADB has accumulated substantial policy reform experience through
its operations in the region, it has not always been able to analyze, compile, disseminate, and
communicate this experience sufficiently. Access to highly qualified external expertise has been
affected by inflexible consultant recruitment modalities that do not encourage assignments on a
retainer basis, and, increasingly, by uncompetitive remuneration levels.
               e.      Provision of Knowledge and Advisory Services

82.     There is significant demand for knowledge services in subject areas where ADB has
related operations including private sector participation in infrastructure development,
infrastructure regulation, public sector resource management, rural development, and bond
market development. ADB's contributions to the internal debate on these issues have been
limited to the provision of TA, which was not leveraged into proactive sustained dialogue with
relevant stakeholders. This is due to a combination of factors that are not specific to ADB's India
operations, including the following: (i) most of ADB's knowledge products have been generated
by TA or staff consultants rather than staff, which has not increased ADB's visibility or helped
build up institutional capacity on sector issues; (ii) TA and staff resources and incentive systems
have usually been focused on the design and delivery of ADB's lending program and related
26


information needs of individual counterpart agencies; and (iii) ADB has not been very good at
anticipating emerging sector issues and needs, proactively offering solutions to address them,
and maintaining related dialogue including through seminars and other discussion forums.
83.     ADB's economic and sector work (ESW) in India has been less than effective in
supporting ADB's sector operations or in raising its profile. As in other countries, much of this
work in India has been generated to further ADB's own understanding of sector issues and to
help strategize assistance approaches (see Table A5.5). Most of ADB's macroeconomic
reviews and modeling work, sector studies, and analyses of state policies and conditions fall
within this category. Other work in this area has been fairly limited, given the lack of TA
resources for this purpose and the lack of adequate staff resources (in terms of expertise and
numbers). Recent ESW that was available for evaluation included a series of policy research
papers produced under the INRM­managed TA for Policy Research Networking to Strengthen
Policy Reforms in India.26 The papers cover pertinent policy issues in a wide range of
subsectors and themes, some of which are relevant for ADB operations, whereas others are not
(e.g., agriculture and trade policy­related topics). While the overall concept of the TA is a very
good one, its effectiveness might have been further enhanced by (i) focusing scarce TA
resources on a few policy topics that are relevant for ADB's lending operations, and (ii) involving
key sector agencies and ADB sector leaders in the scoping of suitable research topics. An ESW
strategy that is incorporated in ADB's country strategy would lead to a more strategic use of
ADB research in support of overall operational objectives. This would also help coordinate
similar work generated by the Asian Development Bank Institute, and other ADB departments
such as the Economics and Research Department and the Regional and Sustainable
Development Department.
84.     Access to advisory services under TA is now seen as an important benefit of
cooperating with ADB. This has not always been the case. Compared with the People's
Republic of China (PRC), where ADB seems to have succeeded in the transfer of technology,
policy, and other sector expertise and modern project management practices, ADB's record in
India is uneven and mainly confined to recent assistance to state-level institutions and to the
financial and public resource management sectors. Perhaps it is the level of government
ownership that made the difference. Unlike the GOI, the PRC was clear from the start that it
wanted access to better technologies and practices along with financing from ADB, and then
systematically pursued its agenda through thorough preparation of TA and funding proposals for
ADB consideration, which clearly specified government objectives and expectations from the
operation. India's main objective for cooperating with ADB, particularly during the first decade of
operations, was to obtain ADB financing, not expertise and knowledge.

85.     This situation has, however, changed, and now several government agencies consider
that ADB should be more proactive in analyzing and disseminating policy experiences and best
practices from the Asia and Pacific region, and in facilitating the exchange of ideas. There is
also a growing awareness on part of client agencies of the need for external advisory inputs in
implementing complex reforms at the sector and state levels. The GOI and ADB need to ensure
that a process of policy support becomes an important part of future ADB operations, by
identifying and agreeing upon the candidate policy issues to be addressed in programmed
operations during or ahead of project preparation.
86.    Since 1996, ADB has provided many TA grants that have involved advisory services for
the design and implementation of investment and policy reform programs and other forms of

26
     The main purpose of the TA was to provide assistance for developing policy research networking capacity to build
     support for and consolidate the reform process. Networks have been built to discuss issues, remedies, and best
     practices through dialogue among experts and policymakers on policy reform issues. The reports cover five priority
     themes for policy research on key economic policy issues and reform roadmaps and are to be published.
                                                                                                 27


capacity development, mostly in conjunction with its lending operations. These TA oprations
have generally been successful in achieving desired outputs and outcomes and were well
received. Feedback on consultant performance has been generally positive, although there
have been issues with the quality of a number of international and domestic consultants. This
reflects, in part some instances when there were difficulties in recruiting highly qualified
consultants at the rates offered by ADB. Local salary levels for qualified management
consultants, financial services professionals, and engineers have substantially increased in
recent years. In addition to its ADTA oprations, ADB's lending activities have nevertheless
provided a conduit for the TA resources of other development partners.
87.     In many cases, the dissemination of knowledge generated in conjunction with ADTA has
been limited to the EA concerned; TA findings and recommendations have not been
systematically shared with other interested parties. Also, comparatively little effort has been
made to write up positive loan project experiences (e.g., related to the Madhya Pradesh
transport sector institutional reforms, Gujarat in-situ earthquake reconstruction efforts, Gujarat
public resources management reforms, and Assam power sector restructuring), and
disseminate them to other states and agencies to promote replication of this success. Recently
there have been concerted efforts to facilitate visits of new EAs to successful ADB-supported
projects and programs.

C.     ADB Performance

88.    ADB performance is measured by how well ADB has (i) managed its relationship with
the GOI and other stakeholders; (ii) used its resources and harnessed synergies to address
development needs; (iii) applied its policies, business processes, and products; and (iv)
managed its loan portfolio in India.

       1.      Relationship Management

89.       Overall, ADB's relationship management in India has been adequate, although there
were periods, particularly during 1998­1999 and 2001­2005, when relations deteriorated and
the GOI expressed reservations about ADB appreciation of country conditions and priorities.
However, ADB usually responded with efforts to address identified issues, which resolved most
problems in a satisfactory manner within the overall constraints of ADB's policies and resources.
The relationship with the current INRM team has been characterized as outstanding by GOI
representatives. Recently, more emphasis has been given by ADB to consulting with a variety of
government and nongovernment stakeholders during country programming and project
preparation, and to involving civil society organizations in the implementation of ADB-financed
projects. There is, however, scope for doing more in this area to ensure that the concerns of
those affected by projects are fully reflected in project design and to facilitate implementation of
difficult reform measures.
               a.      Responsiveness

90.    The GOI has identified ADB's key strengths vis-a-vis other external assistance providers
as (i) ADB's short response time to emergencies and new requests; (ii) its flexibility in adding
more sectors to its operations; and (iii) its better understanding, as a regional development
bank, of country needs.
91.    ADB has displayed considerable responsiveness to meeting the GOI's urgent needs.
ADB was quick in delivering assistance to India during the balance-of-payments crisis in 1991.
To start with, ADB provided Special Assistance of $150 million as a single-tranche, quick-
28


disbursing loan in April 1991, within 3 months of developing and adopting an enabling policy.27
A few months later, in December 1991, ADB provided another $250 million in quick-disbursing
assistance through the two-tranche Hydrocarbon Sector Program loan.28 ADB also arranged for
cofinancing from Japan in matching amounts for both these operations. ADB thus made
available to India $550 million in balance-of-payments support through its own operations and
the cofinancing it arranged, when India faced a shortage of foreign exchange (1991). Indian
officials familiar with the operations advised the Operations Evaluation Mission that the fast and
timely assistance from ADB was much appreciated by the GOI at that time. While the size of the
support provided by ADB may be considered modest in relation to India's needs, it did help the
GOI in overcoming the crisis and contributed to stabilizing the economy together with assistance
from other sources.29 Similarly, ADB provided emergency assistance for the rehabilitation of the
damaged infrastructure assets soon after major natural calamities (earthquake in Gujarat and in
Jammu and Kashmir, and the tsunami) struck India. The Gujarat project was approved within 17
weeks of the earthquake, the assistance to Jammu and Kashmir within 15 weeks, and the
assistance for the tsunami-affected states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala within 27 weeks. Such
assistance was timely and substantial, and was designed to complement the total external
assistance being made available by all major sources. ADB also responded quickly to the
launch of major reforms in 1991 by providing a program loan in 1992 to assist the GOI in
restructuring the financial sector, which was identified for urgent priority reforms by the GOI.
ADB was also receptive in shifting its focus to state-level assistance and added new states to its
operations at the request of the GOI.
92.     However, responsiveness needs to be balanced with capacity to deliver. Otherwise,
ready accommodation of GOI requests can create problems. A case in point was the GOI's
desire to substantially increase its borrowing from ADB during the late 1990s, when, uncertain
about replenishment of International Development Association funds, India approached the
World Bank and ADB about additional nonconcessional funding to fill the anticipated gap of
$800 million to $900 million per annum. From 1995 to 2000, ADB's annual lending to India
averaged below $600 million. ADB agreed to increase its lending, but it took several years to
double its lending volume. Lending not only went up in terms of value, but also increased in
number (16 loans were approved during 2000 and 2001 as compared with a total of 22 during
1995­1999). However, ADB had limited capacity to identify and process projects for
substantially increased lending volumes. Some projects were not adequately prepared and were
rushed to approval. As ADB had not increased its staffing or simplified its processing
procedures to enable a sudden expansion of lending, procedural delays pre- and post-approval
continued. More importantly, the GOI felt that new loans to the NHAI and the Power Finance
Corporation were pushed prematurely before they were ready, or even before the previous
loans had become effective. Although lending approval volumes doubled, disbursement
volumes did not. Rising commitment fees (see Figure A6.4) prompted the GOI to delay loan
signing for more than 6 months on average after ADB approval (see Table A6.6). In contrast,
World Bank lending increased from a little over $1 billion to about $3 billion during the period. At
the same time, the World Bank disbursement ratio also went up from 20% to 30% because of
effective coordination between the GOI and World Bank Country Office staff. This situation
contributed to a temporary deterioration of the relationship between ADB and the GOI and
eventually slowed down new lending to only 17 loans during 2003­2006, down from a total of 27
loans approved in1999­2002.



27
   "Bank Assistance for Countries Affected by the Gulf Crisis" (IN.6-91, 11 January 1991).
28
   India's gross foreign currency reserves (without the International Monetary Fund borrowing of $1.80 billion) had
   fallen below $40 million by March 1991.
29
   ADB. 2001. Project Performance Audit Report on the Hydrocarbon Sector Program Project in India. Manila.
                                                                                                                    29


93.      GOI concerns about the lack of project readiness and quality at entry eventually
prompted the South Asia Department (SARD) to (i) adopt and enforce project readiness filters
with a statement of project readiness in all project reports and recommendations of the
President; (ii) increase the number of missions during the PPTA and project processing stages;
and (iii) increase the use of multidisciplinary project processing teams that included staff with
project implementation experience.
94.     GOI concerns about lengthy processing times, the payment of commitment fees for
ADB-approved projects or project components that were not ready for implementation, and the
lack of flexibility in project design to respond to changing conditions also contributed to ADB's
introduction and use of new products under the Innovation and Efficiency Initiative (IEI),
particularly the Multitranche Financing Facility (MFF), which permits greater flexibility in the
submission of subproject proposals for approval, thereby reducing the time lag between loan
approval and disbursements. India is the first DMC where these new ADB products are being
used widely. In fact, India has accounted for 34.8% of all approved MFFs so far, and for 57.1%
of planned approvals during 2007­2009. Within a few months of policy approval, ADB
processed the Second Rural Roads Project, Uttaranchal Power Project, North Karnataka Urban
Development Project, and the Uttaranchal State Roads Project using this modality. The new
modality has also provided authorities, particularly at the state level, with a certain degree of
assurance that external funding for long-term investment programs will be forthcoming.
                    b.       Consultation with Other Stakeholders

95.       In recent years, ADB has been more proactive in involving nongovernment stakeholders
in the design and implementation of its projects and programs in India. OED's Special
Evaluation Study (SES) on Involvement of Civil Society Organizations in ADB Operations30
found that nongovernment organizations (NGOs) were involved at all stages of consultation
during formulation of the 2003 India country strategy. Feedback from NGOs during the country
programming process included the need for (i) increased consultation with NGOs and civil
society at the project design stage, and (ii) greater involvement of socially excluded groups in
ADB operations. The first point mirrors evaluation findings for this study based on discussions
with selected NGOs, which felt that there had been a lack of adequate community consultation
in several urban development (sub)projects (including those in Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka,
and Kerala), particularly during the project design stage, which had affected stakeholder
ownership in the projects. Although ADB recognized the need for proactive stakeholder
consultation and information campaigns in conjunction with policy reform programs that involved
tax or tariff issues (particularly in the power and public sector resource management sectors)
and included related TA, efforts had mixed success, mainly because they came too late in the
process. Experience in India shows the importance of involving consumer groups in reform
design to improve project acceptability and ultimately sustainability. ADB is perceived to have
difficulties in identifying and working with grassroots NGOs, which is seen as a necessity for the
success of policy reform projects and for work in rural and tribal areas. There would also appear
to be scope for ADB to expand consultations with relevant private companies and financial
institutions in the identification of issues that deter greater private sector participation in
infrastructure development and in the formulation of operational strategies to address these.
                    c.       Effectiveness of the India Resident Mission (INRM)

96.    Established in 1992, INRM has generally improved ADB's client services and
understanding of country conditions, although there was a brief period when conflicts between
the GOI and senior INRM staff temporarily contributed to a worsening of the ADB-client

30
     ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study on Involvement of Civil Society Organizations in ADB Operations. Manila.
30


relationship. INRM's initial mandate was narrowly focused on facilitating project implementation
and ADB interactions with the GOI and other stakeholders, external relations and information
dissemination, aid coordination, and the provision of logistical support for headquarters
missions. Since 2002, INRM has also led the preparation of country strategies. About half of
approved loans have been delegated to INRM for implementation, usually those requiring
substantial supervision or those for which there has been strong INRM capacity (e.g., urban
development projects, emergency assistance, financial intermediation loans, a number of
transport loans), but also energy projects, although INRM has no international staff in this area.
Rural roads projects, and all MFFs (with the exception of the Jammu and Kashmir rehabilitation
project) are administrated from headquarters, despite significant supervision needs, as are all
active program loans. Almost all new loans are processed by the headquarters divisions. This
explains, in part, the reluctance to delegate to INRM important loans for implementation for
which there is potential for follow-on lending. This partial delegation of sector projects for
implementation appears to be creating a certain amount of confusion among various
stakeholders, as it is often assumed that INRM has full responsibility.

97.     INRM is generally seen by line ministries and EAs to be doing a good job with regard to
the functions delegated to it. However, many ADB clients felt that more authority for project
implementation-related issues, particularly in the areas of procurement and safeguards (e.g.,
resolution of land acquisition issues/preparation of resettlement plans), should be given to INRM
to speed up decision making and expedite the preparation of priority projects. While the
delegation of approval authority for procurement up to $10 million to the country director
addresses some of these concerns, there appears to be scope for further enhancing INRM's
effectiveness and speed in responding to procurement and safeguard issues by having
designated procurement and safeguard specialists within INRM and by delegating authority to
approve technical evaluations under large contracts to resident missions.

98.     INRM's role in country programming has contributed to a better appreciation of country
needs and conditions in country strategies and to better coordination with development
partners. However, outside the central Government, INRM has not been very successful in
raising ADB's visibility among other country constituents, presumably because, unlike the World
Bank (see Table 3), it does not have the resources (in terms of funds or staff skills) to conduct
substantial research, information exchanges, or public relations activities. By design, INRM's
role in shaping or implementing ADB's sector policy dialogue has been modest at best. With
regard to the projects delegated to it, there would appear to be substantial scope and need for
policy dialogue in the urban development area. Policy discussions in other sectors have been
handled exclusively by headquarters staff. This arrangement foregoes the substantial benefits
that arise from regular interactions with key stakeholders and opinion leaders on important
sector issues. Although the GOI has not called for a stronger role and involvement of INRM in
policy discussions and the development of sector strategies, it is likely that dialogue on sector
policy and institutional reforms, particularly at the state level, and PPPs as well as nonlending
products, will become more important in the future. When this happens, a different skill mix will
be needed at INRM that will include a number of staff who can interact with senior officials, civil
society organizations, and media and develop practical solutions to complex issues.
                                                                                                                 31


      Table 3: Comparison of Staffing and Workload of the India Resident Mission and the
                                  World Bank Country Office
                              Item                                ADB India Resident         World Bank India
                                                                       Mission                Country Office
 International Staff (no.)                                                  7                        29
 National Officers (no.)                                                   17                       108
 Administrative Staff (no.)                                                21                        76
 Total Staff (no.)                                                         45                       213
 Loans Administered by the Resident Mission (no.)                          17                        35
 % Administered by Resident Mission to Total Loan Portfolio              53%                       51%
 Loans under Processing (no.)                                         3 (2007)             16 (from 2007-2009)
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
No. = number.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team based on information from the Asian Development Bank and
         World Bank.

99.    Within the current organizational setup of ADB, there would appear to be little benefit in
substantially delegating project processing and implementation (the two cannot be entirely
delinked) to INRM, as most matters still have to be referred to ADB headquarters for decision.
However, in light of evolving challenges and opportunities, particularly a potentially significant
increases in business volumes in India, greater decentralization of functions and resources
together with more delegation of decision-making authority to INRM should be considered. This
is an ADB-wide matter that has to await the outcome of the review of ADB's Resident Mission
Policy by the Strategy and Policy Department and Budget, Personnel and Management
Systems Department.31

           2.       Resource Management
100. Overall, given the comparatively low levels of staff resources allocated to operations in
India, which has not been in line with lending volumes, and foregone opportunities for creating
synergies through better internal coordination, ADB's resource management is rated modest.

                    a.      Resource Utilization
101. Efficiency and effectiveness of resource utilization are a function of how well the level
and quality of resources have matched operational demands and have been allocated to
maximum effect between project processing and implementation, between headquarters and
INRM, and among headquarters divisions. In terms of absolute staff inputs for India operations,
staff resources increased in 2006. About 6.7% of ADB's professional staff resources in regional
departments were allocated to work on India in 2006, up from about 5% during 2002­2005.
However, the percentage of staff working on India has been below the share of India projects in
the total number of ADB projects under processing or implementation. Despite lower staff to
project ratios for the India program compared with other countries, loan processing missions
were generally adequately staffed in terms of numbers, increasing from an average of five (for
1996­2002) to seven team members (2003­2006), which indicates that staff resources working
in India are comparatively stretched. This is supported by findings of the SES on Performance
of TA,32 which estimated that staff involved in processing TA in India had a multiple of the
workload of staff working on other countries in other regions. The work with new weak-capacity
states and increased project implementation activities have further put a strain on staff
resources.


31
     OED is evaluating the Resident Mission Policy as an input to the policy review process.
32
     ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study on the Performance of ADB's Technical Assistance. Manila.
32


102. In terms of allocation of resources between processing and implementation, there have
been substantial increases in staff time spent on project implementation during recent years.
While ADB-wide the number of staff days spent on project administration missions has been
consistently higher than the number of staff days spent on project processing missions, for
operations in India the reverse was true. Only in 2006, significantly more staff resources were
allocated to loan administration. The shift from processing to implementation support also
reflects the use of the MFF modality.
103. In terms of allocation of resources between INRM and headquarters, despite gradual
increases, less than one third of international professional staff working on India are currently
posted at INRM. Considering client demands for enhanced in-country presence of expertise on
key issues, and increasing difficulties associated with scheduling and mounting missions to
India on short notice due to lack of available flights and hotel accommodation during certain
periods of the year, it might make sense to selectively base more senior international staff or
staff consultants at INRM in an advisory capacity. Also, in comparison with the World Bank
Indian Country Office and other development partners, INRM has a comparatively small number
of national officers. There would appear to be scope to leverage international staff more
effectively by increasing the numbers of national sector specialists. National officers could also
act as focal points for the states. However, it has been increasingly difficult to attract
international and national staff to work in INRM, and as a result a number of vacancies have
been difficult to fill.
104. With regard to staff quality, although the vast majority of processing missions were led
by senior (i.e., level 5 or 6) staff members, the GOI expressed concern about ADB processing
staff lacking experience, or not being familiar with India's systems or ADB's policies and
procedures. While some ADB staff were perceived to do outstanding work, the client felt there
generally was a shortage of staff with in-depth technical expertise, knowledge of country sector
issues, and the ability to draw on relevant experiences from other countries. There appear to be
several explanations for this perception: (i) SARD took on a number projects in India for which it
did not have adequate in-house expertise and had to rely on consultants (e.g., in railways); (ii)
the 2002 reorganization of ADB dispersed scarce technical skills and sector expertise; (iii)
mission leaders tend to have good loan processing skills, rather than in-depth sector expertise;
(iv) crucial TA providing inputs for policy and institutional reforms has often been managed by
junior staff, as senior staff have been occupied with loan processing; and (v) particularly in the
infrastructure sectors, the focus of assistance has broadened from the provision of financial
support for investment projects requiring an understanding of engineering, procurement, and
construction contracting to support for policy reforms, capacity development, and private sector
participation, which requires different types of expertise. In addition, the client felt that
processing staff were preoccupied with safeguards rather than technical issues, although an
increasing share of PPTA funds (about 20% for PPTA operations approved from 2003 to 2006)
has been spent on environmental impact studies and resettlement issues. While some of these
issues can be addressed by the concerned regional department, others are a reflection of
ADB's overall organizational structure, human resource policies, staff incentives, and use of TA
rather than staff resources. These issues are not unique to ADB's India operations.
               b.     Operational Synergies

105. Given limited resources, their effectiveness can be enhanced if properly coordinated.
Prior to 1995, there were substantial synergies between ADB's public and private sector
operations in the financial sector due to the integrated organizational structure of operations
within ADB under the former Private Sector Department. As a result of ADB's 1995
reorganization and the creation of a separate unit for processing private sector operations,
these synergies were lost, and the volume of private sector operations dropped substantially
                                                                                                  33


despite a more conducive environment for such operations in India. In the absence of
coordinated assistance strategies, there were numerous occasions when the public and private
sector sides of ADB were addressing similar issues related to SME development, mortgage
securitization, housing finance, and resolution of nonperforming loans, but without much
interaction. Consequently, the opportunity to leverage each others' operations was foregone.
106. Partly prompted by the introduction of nonrecourse lending--which necessitated closer
cooperation between the public and private sides of ADB--personal efforts by staff on both
sides (particularly in the infrastructure area), and the improving scope for private infrastructure
in India, operations have begun to be better coordinated, as evidenced by several nonsovereign
loans that were jointly processed. Further cooperation is needed to help identify appropriate
measures for the establishment of conducive regulatory frameworks for private sector
operations and to enhance ADB capacity for PPP-related issues. The preparation of a joint
business strategy under the next country strategy should help strategize and optimize such
collaborative efforts. There is also need to rethink incentive systems to encourage more
coordination in a systematic fashion, for example through joint accountability of PSOD and
SARD for private sector operations in India.
107. Cooperation among the various divisions within SARD with regard to India operations
seems to be generally working reasonably well. However, there is scope for further improving
synergies between ADB's interventions across different sectors. ADB operations within a state
tend to be managed on a sector basis. For example, OED's SES on Performance of TA found
that the state roads project in Chhattisgarh is supported by a 3­year, $1.6 million capacity-
building ADTA, principally to establish operations and maintenance (O&M) systems. There were
concurrent loan projects in rural roads and in agriculture involving agencies that were
administratively weak. There was thus not only an opportunity for addressing public sector
weaknesses in a number of agencies in Chhattisgarh but, more specifically, for concurrently
introducing O&M systems in both the state and rural roads agencies. There is need to have
state-based as well as sector-based assistance strategies that could harness synergies better.
Operationalization of such a strategic framework could be facilitated through the creation of
local focal points, possibly operating under INRM, for geographically based ADB interventions,
to help (i) represent ADB with senior stakeholders, (ii) ensure that it is well positioned for future
work, and (iii) deal with any problems.
       3.      Suitability and Application of ADB Policies, Business Processes,
               Products, and Instruments

108. ADB's policies, processes, and instruments and their application have generally been
adequate within the context of ADB's operations in India, but improvements are required in a
number of areas to respond to client concerns. The client believes that ADB safeguard
requirements differing from national standards add significantly to transaction costs in India, not
least due to the way they have been applied. ADB's safeguard policies appear to have
increasingly had the perverse effect of excluding from ADB financing environmentally sensitive
projects or projects with land acquisition issues. Business processes could be further
streamlined and more authority delegated to INRM for project implementation to increase client
responsiveness. With the exception of the financial intermediation loan modality, the application
of other ADB business products has been mostly successful in India. The new IEI modalities
have had ready take-up, but more experience is needed to assess their effectiveness and
eventual impact.
               a.      Policies Including Safeguards

109. Most of ADB's policies and sector and thematic strategies are generally deemed to be
suitable and responsive to India's needs. By contrast, a number of issues were raised about
34


ADB's environmental and social safeguard policies. While the positive impact of these policies
in raising the awareness of these important themes is acknowledged by the line ministries and
the EAs themselves, the following concerns were voiced about the scope and the detail required
under the policies, as well as the manner in which they are administered by ADB: (i) safeguard
requirements exceed national and state laws and practices; (ii) information needed for
compliance is too detailed and time consuming to obtain, and increases the cost of doing
business; (iii) safeguards are not customized to take into account country conditions, capacities,
and the size and nature of projects/subprojects; (iv) ADB applies the covenants in a mechanical
and rigid manner, and takes too much time for processing submissions and queries; and (v)
ADB staff do not explain compliance requirements in detail during project formulation, and often
fail to recognize the potential implications of their application in the respective project
environments.
110. A number of EAs considered that ADB had applied its resettlement policies in a
bureaucratic and undifferentiated manner. For example, the Power Grid Corporation of India
Limited maintained that ADB requirements regarding land compensation and resettlement were
inappropriate for a transmission company like itself, which does not acquire land as in most
other projects. The Railways Ministry felt that the resettlement and land compensation
standards prescribed by ADB substantially exceeded the relevant practices in India, and that
ADB's insistence on rigid compliance with its requirements had delayed an important subproject
(track doubling of the Raichur-Guntkal section). Although ADB's and the GOI's resettlement
policies are becoming more closely aligned, differences remain in the respective compensation
requirements for affected persons,33 which often cause problems for EAs. While OED's SES on
ADB's Involuntary Resettlement Policy34 found comparatively high procedural compliance for
selected India projects, it also noted the difficulties that EAs face when negotiating settlements.
For example, a number of ADB's urban development projects experienced problems when the
land acquisition process and the compensation packages did not meet the expectations of
affected people, mainly because market prices for land varied significantly from registered
values that were used under national policies to estimate replacement costs. There is not
enough evaluative evidence to assess compliance with, and concerns about, ADB's Indigenous
Peoples Policy in the context of India operations, although this is likely an important issue, given
that recent ADB operations have focused on many states with comparatively high shares of
tribal populations, including Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Assam, and the other northeastern
states.
111. A number of EAs (for example, in Kerala) felt that the social safeguards were generally
reasonable and useful, but considered that environmental safeguard requirements were
excessive. Most surveyed agencies stated that national environmental standards were
adequate and should be utilized instead. The India country study conducted in conjunction with

33
    India adopted a National Policy for Involuntary Resettlement and Rehabilitation in February 2004, a major step
   forward from the situation in which the Land Acquisition Act of 1894, amended in 1984, was the main legislation
   governing resettlement issues. In India, existing laws do not make the payment of relocation and transfer expenses
   mandatory, nor assistance for transition and livelihood support; special assistance to vulnerable people;
   reestablishment of agricultural and business production; assistance for income restoration; and restoring social
   services, social capital, community property, and resources, although this is partly covered by the Urban
   Development and Housing Act. The policy, in fact, mainly refers to large resettlement operations, significantly
   different from ADB's criterion of mandatory need for a resettlement plan and special measures in case of
   anticipation of 200 affected persons that will experience a loss of livelihood greater than 10%. District collectors
   award compensation for land at registered value (perhaps 40% of actual market value), not actual land
   replacement value, as could be calculated by independent assessors. Courts in India in the last few years have
   been quite specific in opposing any "reward" of assistance to squatters when this is demanded by them, which
   poses a special problem for the application of the ADB policy. There are also differences between ADB and
   government standards pertaining to the compensation of affected persons who do not own the land they occupy.
34
   ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study of ADB's Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards. Manila.
                                                                                                 35


OED's SES on ADB's Environmental Safeguards Policy35 found that India has a well­
developed, comprehensive legal basis and institutional framework for environmental
safeguards. The Indian system does not distinguish between category "A" and category "B"
projects, but between projects requiring comprehensive environmental impact assessments and
those needing only a rapid environmental impact assessment. While India is considered to be
one of the stronger DMCs in terms of engineering and environmental impact assessment
capacities, OED's review of the initial environmental examination reports for four selected
project case studies found (i) a lack of sufficient analysis of alternatives, partly due to the fact
that environmental impact assessments were conducted after project design had been finalized;
and (ii) limited prediction and assessment of secondary and off-site impacts. While adequate
monitoring plans covering suitable mitigation measures were developed, their implementation
was lacking due to inadequate EA ownership and ADB supervision (there is no environmental
safeguards specialist at INRM).
112. Concerns of the GOI and EAs regarding the scope and detail of safeguard requirements
are becoming a factor in their perceptions of ADB assistance. Safeguard-related issues are
seen to cause substantial implementation delays, particularly in the transport sector. As ADB
proposes to expand and extend its sector operations to include more state and rural roads,
concerns related to safeguards (among other factors) will likely become more frequent. Some
agencies indicated that they may reduce future use of ADB assistance if mutually satisfactory
arrangements cannot be achieved. The transport sector assistance program evaluation36
observed that GOI and ADB officials try to avoid projects with major
environment/resettlement/land issues and focus, for example, on rehabilitation projects, which
can be categorized as category "B" projects, rather than on new roads. Environmentally
sensitive projects are usually financed domestically using national/local safeguards. Despite the
heavy focus of ADB's portfolio on infrastructure projects, only 1 of the 45 category "A" and "B"
projects approved by ADB for India since 1997 was categorized as "A", i.e., as having significant
adverse environmental impacts.
                    b.      Business Processes

113. A number of issues have been experienced in India with regard to ADB's business
processes and practices related to loan processing, including the lack of project readiness prior
to approval, lack of flexibility, and safeguard requirements. Issues related to the lack of project
readiness and flexibility are in the process of being addressed including through the use of new
lending modalities, particularly the MFF. However, the increased use of the new MFF, which
comes with comparatively untested implementation guidelines, has created some procedural
uncertainties with regard to the processing of subsequent subprojects for ADB approval, at least
in the short term.
114. With regard to project implementation processes, the slow speed of decision making
related to procurement and consultant recruitments, the inflexible interpretation of ADB
procurement and consultant recruitment guidelines, the reassignment of approved projects to
inexperienced staff for implementation, as well as the implementation of safeguard measures
have been identified as the key areas of concern. There is also confusion about which loans or
matters are dealt with by INRM, and which are exclusively dealt with by ADB headquarters. This
has resulted in duplication of effort and unnecessary communications, causing delays in
resolving issues. The large majority of ministries, EAs, and other entities appreciate the role
played by INRM, and want more decision-making authority to be given to it to reduce the delays
and difficulties experienced in getting decisions from Manila. Comparisons have been made

35
     ADB. 2005. Special Evaluation Study: ADB's Environmental Policy. Manila
36
     ADB. 2007. Transport Sector in India ­ Focusing on Results. Manila.
36


with the resident missions of other development partners, especially the World Bank, and it has
been pointed out that the World Bank Country Office enjoys far greater autonomy, which in turn
facilitates more expeditious decision making.37 By comparison, only since 2006 has the ADB
Country Director been authorized, without referral to the procurement committee, to approve
procurement packages of up to $10 million for projects that are delegated to INRM in line with
ADB's new streamlined procedures for procurement. This and other procedural changes in the
recruitment of consultants should go some way to address earlier concerns.
                     c.       Business Products and Instruments

115. Project and Sector Loans. Project loans have been the most common lending modality
in India, accounting for 48% of all loans in terms of number and 47% in terms of value. The
sector lending modality was used for 11 large national road, power transmission, railways, and
tsunami assistance projects, accounting for 19% of total lending. Most (18 of 26) project loans
reviewed by OED were successful (69%, which is in line with ADB-wide success rates for OED-
rated project loans) compared with one of five reviewed sector loans (20%). Differences in
development effectiveness between the two modalities are probably due to the limited number
of available sector loan evaluations (which did not include any OED assessments for projects in
the more successful power sector) and to inherent selection bias, rather than to other causes.
The MFF has effectively replaced the existing sector lending modality in addressing long-term
sector investment needs in India. Identified weaknesses of project and sector loans were mostly
related to lack of efficiency and sustainability (in the case of transport and urban development
projects). Only a few relevance-related issues were identified which involved sector investments
that became obsolete over time (in the case of the telecommunications projects).
116. Program Loans. Program lending in India started in 1991 as support for the GOI's
commitment to structural adjustment measures in response to the balance of payments crisis.
Since then, program lending has continued in sectors of fundamental importance to GOI reform
efforts. Twelve program loans were approved from 1991 to 2006 for a total of $3.075 billion,
accounting for 19% of the total lending volume to India. With the exception of the initial special
assistance loan in 1991, which effectively provided balance-of-payments support, the program
lending modality has been strategically and effectively used to further policy dialogue in critical
sectors, and to help bring about both policy and institutional reforms in finance, economic
management and public policy, transport, and energy, thus enhancing domestic resource
mobilization and allocation processes as well as the effectiveness of infrastructure investments.
The power and transport sector programs were made in conjunction with investment loans
under the sector development program modality. Of the 11 program loans evaluated by OED,
73% were rated highly successful or successful, mainly because they supported priority GOI
and state reform initiatives, which ensured a high degree of ownership. By comparison, the
ADB-wide success rate for OED-rated program loans is only 45%. Policy areas that caused
implementation problems were related to politically contentious expenditure reforms
(Modernizing Government and Fiscal Reform in Kerala and Madhya Pradesh Public Resource
Management programs), SOE reform (Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management
Program), privatization (Hydrocarbon Sector Program), and tariff reforms (Madhya Pradesh
Power Sector Development Program). Program loans have been most successful when fully

37
     For example, the World Bank Country Office has an internal procurement team (which includes one international
     procurement specialist) that has the authority to approve consultant contracts of up to $2 million under International
     Development Agency­financed TA and, for consultant contracts above $2 million undertakes initial review and
     analysis of the reports received from the borrowers before submission to headquarters. The threshold for single­
     source selection is $500,000. The procurement team has full powers to approve consultant contracts for World
     Bank operational work financed under World Bank trust funds or its own resources except for single-source
     selection, for which the above threshold applies. The World Bank Country Office can clear works contracts of up to
     $15 million and goods contracts of up to $7.5 million.
                                                                                                                  37


aligned with the national reform agenda. The GOI sees a continued need for this modality and is
considering expanding it to other sectors that are undergoing reforms, for example urban
development.
117. Financial Intermediation Loans. The 23 financial intermediation loans provided by
ADB to India were mainly for onlending to the energy sector and for private sector infrastructure
development, industry sector and small business development, and housing. Of these, five
loans were cancelled, and another five loans disbursed less than half of the approved loan
amount. Overall, 37% of the approved loan amounts were cancelled. The success rate for
evaluated noncancelled financial intermediation loans was 53%. If cancellations are considered,
the project success rate drops to 22%. The failure of this lending modality has been largely due
to a lack of effective demand caused by (i) underlying structural problems of targeted sectors,
e.g., regulatory and tariff constraints, and legal problems affecting the commercial viability of
private infrastructure projects, which reduced the number of viable subprojects/borrowers; and
(ii) noncompetitive pricing.38
118. Innovation and Efficiency Initiative Products. The MFF modality has been heavily
utilized by India in the infrastructure sectors, with the existing long-term sector planning
approaches at the state and national levels providing the appropriate frameworks for multiyear
sector investments and reform. India has accounted for more than 34% of the MFF uptake since
it was introduced as a pilot in 2005. MFF provides for a better integration of project processing
and implementation, particularly if mission leaders do not get changed during the duration of the
project­, and improves portfolio performance indicators. However, assistance will need to be
made available to lower capacity EAs to help with their preparation of subsequent investment
proposals under MFF projects.
119. Other new IEI products have not been utilized as much to date. It is expected that there
will be significant demand for local currency financing in the future from both public and private
sector clients. State governments have expressed interest, which should increase in view of
back-to-back repayment conditions for external loans, under which they carry the foreign
exchange risk. The proceeds of ADB's first local currency bond in India in February 2004 have
been fully utilized for three private sector projects. ADB has also generated local currency
through swaps. Market conditions have varied over the last few years, but with tightening
liquidity resulting from Reserve Bank of India measures to curb inflationary pressures, ADB's
rupee loan pricing has become more competitive. The extent of future utilization of this modality
will likely be determined by the amount of local currency the Reserve Bank of India and the GOI
permit ADB to raise in the market, rather than by demand conditions. The GOI has approved
additional rupee mobilization by ADB through bond issues or swaps, but has also expressed
concern about the potential for ADB to crowd out domestic financial institutions by offering
cheaper rupee financing thanks to its tax-exempt status.
120. There have been two nonrecourse financing transactions, one for a large public utility
(National Thermal Power Corporation) and one for a public financial institution (Small Industries
Development Bank of India) to help them finance programs that would have previously been
financed by ADB and other multilaterals with public sector loans. Given their large investment
needs, there would appear to be substantial scope to expand lending to public utilities with a
triple-A rating, a number of which have been or are planning to be listed on the stock exchange.
However, care needs to be taken that ADB actually leverages rather than substitutes other
commercial sources of finance. Unless ADB can provide value addition over and above the
provision of cheap funds, for example through risk mitigation or reforming their governance,

38
     The GOI fee of 120 basis points for guaranteeing foreign exchange risk resulted in ADB financial intermediation
     loans being more expensive than other domestically available funds at the time, particularly if subborrowers also
     had to factor in transaction costs associated with ADB's safeguards and procurement requirements.
38


support might be difficult to justify. Subsovereign lending to state or local governments could
prove to be more challenging. For example, fewer than 15­20 municipalities in India are
deemed creditworthy by domestic lenders.
121. Private Sector Operations. Despite the importance that ADB's country strategies have
given to private sector development, private sector operations in India until recently have
remained well below the exposure limit of 25% of outstanding private sector finance volumes
ADB-wide (see Figure A6.5), This reflects particularly (i) ADB's limited capacity in terms of
number and expertise of staff, (ii) limited familiarity with ADB's products or lack of interest on the
part of potential borrowers and sponsors, (iii) lack of a conducive environment for private
infrastructure investments, (iv) PSOD's difficulties in identifying suitable projects in the
infrastructure sector for which the GOI would like to see support from ADB's private sector
window, and (v) difficulties in obtaining Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India approval
for non-infrastructure transactions. By comparison, the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
which has a large presence in the country, managed to undertake a multiple of ADB's
transaction volume and value in the finance, industry, and service sectors. However, IFC
participated in only a few infrastructure transactions until 2005, which indicates that ADB
probably could not have done many more deals in these sectors, given the lack of suitable
investment and financing opportunities. In anticipation of a significantly larger future deal flow in
this area, IFC has plans to substantially expand its in-country infrastructure project financing
expertise.
122. Most of ADB's private sector operations (26 of 32 rated loans and investments) have
had satisfactory, albeit comparatively small, developmental impacts (see Table A5.4). ADB's
main contribution has been to support fledgling private financial institutions during a critical
stage of their development and to help financial institutions and energy companies mobilize
funds from commercial sources. The developmental impact or value addition associated with
some of ADB's earlier private equity fund and industry investments are less clear. In terms of
financial performance, only 9 of 17 rated ADB equity investments in India have had satisfactory
returns, which reflects that ADB has not always selected the best partners and investments
among potential industry targets in the country. Nevertheless, the investment portfolio has so far
generated $114 million in net investment profits for ADB. By comparison, all of the private sector
loan facilities have been fully repaid or are current in their repayments. Stakeholders see a
much larger role for ADB's private sector operations, particularly in supporting private
infrastructure projects and developing innovative financial structures. It will be important to have
staff with related expertise in INRM. For ADB to play a meaningful role, it might be necessary to
rethink the country exposure limits39 (which currently also include all nonsovereign lending
under the IEI), given the size of most infrastructure projects in India, unless ADB's nonsovereign
and private sector transactions can be significantly expanded in other countries and existing
loans can be sold to increase headroom for new lending. Care also has to be taken that
nonsovereign loans to established utilities do not crowd out innovative true private sector
operations. This is an ADB-wide issue that has become particularly pertinent in ADB's India
operations, as India is ADB's largest private sector operations client.
123. Technical Assistance. TA has generally been used strategically and concentrated in
sectors with lending operations. However, more than half of the TA operations approved in
2001-2005 were not included in the country programs. This raises concerns about the way ADB
plans the use of TA. Some of the sector roadmaps of the 2003 CSP included TA strategies,
most notably in the transport sector, for which a framework for programmatic support was
developed. Due to the comparatively high level of alignment between lending and TA operations

39
     For example, country exposure limits for private sector operations in other international financial institutions are
     calculated as a percentage of capital rather than a percentage of total exposure.
                                                                                                                    39


and to strong government ownership and involvement, TA operations in India have generally
been relevant. Most reviewed ADTA activities have been effective in reaching their envisaged
outputs and outcomes, whose sustainability was enhanced through mutually reinforcing
capacity­building measures, in particular the creation of a conducive policy framework within
which TA results can be sustained. Based on available evaluation reports and rapid review
findings for one third of ADB's ADTA portfolio, 69% of ADTA in India is assessed to be
successful or highly successful, compared with an overall success rate of 63% for
postevaluated TA ADB-wide. The 69% success rate is close to the 70% benchmark that ADB
has established to rate TA operations successful.
124. A review of 18 PPTA grants in India undertaken in conjunction with OED's SES on
Performance of TA found that 33% were less than successful, mainly due to lack of
sustainability, particularly related to capacity development for project design and
implementation. There will be a continued role for PPTA in the states with weaker capacity.
Also, the use of the MFF will necessitate considerable assistance for the preparation of
individual investment proposals.
         4.       Portfolio Management

125. Based on feedback provided to ADB during the middle-income countries consultation
and the CAPE process, the slow speed of project implementation and resulting disbursement
problems have been key concerns. Prior to 1995, disbursement ratios40 for India project loans
were lower than ADB-wide disbursement figures (see Figure A6.6). After significant
improvements during the 1990s, disbursement ratios again fell below ADB averages from 2000
onwards. This downward trend was caused partly by rapid increases in project loan approval
volumes from 1999 to 2002. However, recent disbursement ratios have stabilized at a level that
is slightly below the ADB average for project loans, although the differences are more
pronounced when India loans are compared with other OCR-funded projects (see Figure A6.7).
Undisbursed project loan balances steadily increased from $867 million in 1999 to $3.5 billion at
the end of 2006, mostly due to recent loan approvals (see Figure A6.8). This represents a
significant cost for India in terms of commitment charges, estimated at $14.2 million in 2006,
which compares to the INRM budget of $3.5 million in 2006.
126. An analysis of past implementation delays revealed three major causes: (i) delays in
awarding procurement contracts (affecting 50% of ADB projects);41 (ii) poor performance of
contractors or suppliers (affecting 46% of ADB projects in India);42 and (iii) EA-related issues
(affecting 30% of ADB projects).43 Many of the issues in the last group could have been
foreseen at the project design stage. Examples include policy revisions (as in the case of the
two telecommunications projects, whose implementation was on hold while new sector
strategies were being developed), delays in obtaining the necessary permits and investment
approvals (as in the case of the North Madras Power and the Power Transmission projects),

40
   The disbursement ratio is the ratio of total disbursements in a given year over the net loan amount available at the
   beginning of the year plus the amount of newly approved loans that became effective during the year.
41
   Procurement delays were caused mainly by (i) delays in awarding of contracts due to delays in obtaining approval
   from authorities, (ii) the EAs' lack of familiarity with the ADB's Guidelines for Procurement, (iii) litigation and
   representation by some bidders, and (iv) cumbersome government procedures on importation and slow approval of
   import licenses.
42
   Problems with contractors/suppliers included (i) insufficient management skills and weaknesses in advance
   planning; and (ii) cash flow problems, which affected their ability to make timely payments to suppliers and
   subcontractors.
43
   Aside from the lack of familiarity with ADB procurement procedures, other EA-related issues included (i) lack of
   project management system and capabilities; (ii) poor coordination with other government agencies in
   preconstruction activities such as acquiring and clearing land, and relocating utilities; (iii) lack of experience in
   managing contracts and sites; and (iv) high turnover of key personnel.
40


and capacity or financial problems of the EA (Road Improvement, Unchahar Thermal Power
Extension). Changes in design or project scope, problems with implementation consultants,
natural calamities, and law and order problems played only minor roles in delays. Land
acquisition issues affected 16% of ADB projects.
127. Significant implementation delays occurred mainly in conjunction with transport sector,
multisector, and earlier power sector projects. Delays in urban development projects have been
in part due to their complex nature and the large number of different project components and
procurement packages. Although the average implementation duration of about 6 years for
urban development projects in India is in line with ADB averages, delays have been a source of
GOI concern as ADB's calculation of commitment charges is biased against projects that have
longer implementation periods.44 Delays in the transport and urban development sectors have
been due mostly to performance problems of consultants and contractors and to difficulties in
hiring qualified domestic engineering and design expertise. The implementation of ADB's initial
power sector projects was adversely impacted by problems of weak SEBs, which acted as
project EAs. However, as a result of institutional reforms in these sectors and greater familiarity
with ADB procedures, implementation performance improved for projects approved after 1996
compared with those approved a decade earlier. Average implementation delays were reduced
over that period from 2.1 to 0.49 years in the power sector, and from 3.28 to 0.86 years in the
transport sector. Loans closed between 1996 and 2002 had, on average (weighted by loan
value), delays of 2.77 years, whereas for loans closed during 2003­2006, delays were reduced
to 1.57 years. The latter compares with 2.11 and 1.92 years, respectively, for all of ADB's OCR
loans closed during these periods (see Table A6.6). By comparison, loan closings for loans
made to the PRC were delayed by 1.28 years during 2003­2006.
128. In response to GOI concerns about implementation delays, recent ADB initiatives to
improve implementation performance have included (i) increases in TA for implementation-
related capacity development based on EA capacity assessments, (ii) increases in staffing at
INRM (yet to be implemented), (iii) a doubling of input levels for project administration missions
between 2005 and 2006 (staff-days per project were 23% higher than the ADB average in
2006), (iv) quarterly portfolio review meetings of ADB staff with officials from the Department of
Economic Affairs (DEA) and EAs to discuss and resolve implementation problems, and (v)
preparation and monitoring of sector and project implementation action plans and of project
administration review plans. ADB's new consultant recruitment and procurement guidelines
have also helped, as have the Central Operations Services Office's and SARD's efforts to brief
EAs in new focus states on their use. Particularly, the quarterly sector-focused tripartite portfolio
sector meetings, which are jointly chaired by ADB and DEA, have had a significant impact on
portfolio performance. Contract awards and the contract awards ratio substantially increased
from $550 million and 13% in 2004 to $1,037 million and 22% in 2005, and to $1,715 million and
55% in 2006. The 2006 contract awards ratio for India project loans compared with an ADB-
wide ratio of 25% (see Figures A6.9 and A6.10). The number of projects at risk (mostly due to
significant disbursement delays and above-average problems in meeting development
objectives) was reduced from eight for 2004 and 2005 (representing around 35% and 60%,
respectively, of ADB's total loan portfolio at risk in terms of value) to two in 2006 (or 11% of
ADB's total loan portfolio at risk) (see Table A6.7).
129. ADB's portfolio management, considering the entire evaluation period, is rated modest,
but on the high side considering recent improvements and satisfactory performance. The India

44
     A commitment fee of 0.75% per annum is levied on undisbursed balances of all public sector loans, beginning 60
     days after signing of the applicable loan agreement and accruing when the loan becomes effective. For project
     loans, the commitment fee accrues on the following increasing portions of the total loan amount (less cumulative
     disbursements and cancellations): 15% in the first year, 45% in the second year, 85% in the third year, and 100%
     thereafter.
                                                                                                    41


experience shows the benefits of proactive portfolio management by ADB, and the need to
involve government in its effort. To further help address implementation delays, government
institutions probably need to consider changes in their systems and procedures. This should
help to improve project management in the country as a whole, since non-assisted GOI projects
reportedly face even longer delays.
130. Proactive results-based portfolio management also involves continuous self-evaluation
of projects and programs to help identify lessons for future sector engagement. Little of this has
been undertaken for ADB's India operations. For example, for the roads sector, only one project
completion report and two technical assistance completion reports have been prepared over the
last 20 years. This indicates an inadequate amount of self-evaluation and learning from the past
to improve future operations.

D.      Overall Strategic/Institutional Rating
131. The overall strategic/institutional rating is successful, but on the low side (see Table 4).
Rating weights used were determined on the basis of perceived importance of the various rating
subcategories.
                             Table 4: Overall Strategic and Institutional Rating
  Item                                                                           Rating Summary
  Positioning                                                                      Substantial
  Alignment with Government and Corporate Priorities                                Substantial
  Sequencing and Continuity                                                    Modest on the high side
  Sector and Geographic Selectivity                                                 Substantial
  Aid Coordination                                                                  Substantial
  Contribution to Development Results                                         Modest on the high side
  Impact                                                                       Modest on the high side
  Value Addition                                                               Modest on the high side
  ADB Performance                                                             Modest on the high side
  Relationship Management                                                      Modest on the high side
  Resource Management                                                                 Modest
  Application of Policies, Business Processes, and Products                    Modest on the high side
  Portfolio Management                                                         Modest on the high side
  OVERALL STRATEGIC AND INSTITUIONAL RATING                                       SUCCESSFUL
                                                                                  on the low side
 ADB = Asian Development Bank.
 Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.

                      III.       EVALUATION OF ADB'S SECTOR ASSISTANCE

132. This section presents an assessment of ADB's lending and nonlending program by
sector according to the evaluation criteria of sector positioning/relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency, sustainability, and sector impact. Sector assessments are based on sector
assistance program evaluation findings (for energy and transport), OED's evaluation of public
sector resource management, and sector assessments for the urban development and finance
sectors prepared for this study (see Appendixes 9 and 10). Underlying project ratings are based
on available project performance evaluation reports (for 16 projects) and technical assistance
performance evaluation reports (for 17 TA grants), and on rapid OED project assessments
under the above studies and the SES on Performance of TA. The comparatively low success
rate for loan projects (56%) (see Table 5), is due mainly to implementation and sustainability
problems experienced in transport projects, political resistance to fiscal measures in a number
of public resource management programs, and the failure of many financial intermediation
loans. This compares with an average project success rate for postevaluated projects ADB-wide
of 61.7%. However, the rating for the India portfolio is somewhat skewed, as a number of likely
successful energy projects (according to project completion report findings) have not been
       42


       directly reviewed by OED. Even if available project completion reports--of which there are only
       a few--are considered for projects that do not have an OED assessment, the success rate only
       marginally improves to 59%, which is well below the ADB benchmark of 80% for satisfactory
       outcomes.
                                                     Table 5: Project Ratings
                             Public       Projects                                  ADTA          ADTA
                             Sector      Assessed                                   Grants       Grants
            Sector          Projects      by OED              OED Ratings          Approved     Assessed            OED Ratings
                           Approved         (no.)                                    (no.)       by OED
                              (no.)                    HS        S       PS    U                  (no.)       HS      S       PS      U
  Transport and                 24            19        ­            9     8   2      31             19        4          6     7      2
     Communications
  Energy                        21             9          1          5    3    ­      36             17         2      13      2       ­
  Finance                       12             8          ­          4    3    1      20              9         3       4      2       ­
  Urban Development              7             5          ­          4    1    ­      17              4         ­       4      ­       ­
  Public Sector                  4             4          ­          2    2    ­      18             13         2       5      5       1
     Resource
     Management
     Subtotal                   68            45          1      24      17    3     122             62       11       32     16       3
  Others                         3             ­                                     32               ­
 ADTA = advisory technical assistance, HS = highly successful, OED = Operations Evaluation Department, PS = partial successful, S =
successful, U = unsuccessful.
 Source: Various operations evaluation missions.

       A.         Transport45

       133. Sector Challenges and Government Strategies. The transport sector in India
       expanded in the first 50 years after independence, both in geographical coverage and in
       capacity. Along with this increase in quantity, there have been some quality improvements, such
       as the beginning of the emergence of a multimodal container transport system, a reduction in
       the use of obsolete assets, and improvement in the self-financing capacity of the sector. Despite
       this progress, the GOI realizes that the country's transport system is far from adequate in
       service quality, coverage, and capacity. Poor transport infrastructure is widely recognized as a
       major constraint on sustained, rapid economic growth. The GOI is making a massive effort to
       expand and improve the transport network to meet the demand, but the billions of dollars
       needed exceed its funding capacity. Private investment must, therefore, complement public
       funding. Appropriate governance systems need to be put in place to build an enabling
       framework for the private sector. While recent experience shows that the private sector has
       responded to some projects under the National Highways Development Program, it has
       understandably been less interested in projects in which there are concerns about financial
       viability.
       134. ADB Assistance. This has aimed at helping the GOI address the country's transport
       needs. At the beginning of lending to India in 1987, ADB placed emphasis on transportation
       systems and infrastructure. In the early 1990s, ADB turned to institutional capacity building,
       agency restructuring, and policy reforms, including the promotion of private sector participation.
       Then, as the GOI's priorities changed, so did ADB's operational strategy, reflecting the need to
       remove infrastructure bottlenecks and augmenting transportation capacity to reduce poverty
       through economic growth. ADB's involvement in the road sector expanded from national
       highways to state and rural roads. Increasingly, too, ADB advocated ways of dealing with the
       related social issues (e.g., HIV/AIDS, trafficking of women and children, road safety, public
       awareness), although this focus was generally not reflected in actual project implementation.

       45
            For a more comprehensive discussion, see Sector Assistance Program Evaluation: Transport Sector in India ­
            Focusing on Results. Manila.
                                                                                                               43


135. Starting with its first road (1988) and railway (1987) projects, ADB's involvement in the
transport sector has been extensive--25 public sector loans until end-2006 totaling $5.28 billion,
about one third of ADB's public sector loan portfolio in India. The total of ADB TA for the
transport sector amounted to $34.67 million as of 2006. The 27 ADTA grants, valued at $16.99
million, were for sector restructuring, institutional capacity building, system planning, tariff reform,
and asset revaluation. The PPTA grants, totaling $17.67 million, supported project formulation for
national and state highways, rural roads, ports, and inland waterways.
136. Sector Positioning and Relevance. ADB's transport sector program in India is rated
well positioned and relevant. First, the sector strategies were consistent with ADB's overall goal
of pro-poor growth and with the country's evolving priorities. Expansion of physical infrastructure
was the priority for both ADB and the GOI at the start of ADB's involvement, and the strategy
and projects at that time were in line with this thinking. Later, recognizing the growing
importance of policy changes in improving the enabling environment for the transport sector,
ADB broadened its focus to include institutional and policy reforms. Second, while continuing to
focus on physical infrastructure because of the comparative advantage of its assistance, ADB
has adjusted its assistance in light of the growing private sector participation. Third, coordination
with development partners has been related largely to the geographic distribution of project
areas. However, ADB may in some cases have overestimated the demand for transport
infrastructure;46 placed too much emphasis on civil works relative to social systems, planning,
and coordination requirements in the transport sector; and perhaps been too optimistic in
assessing institutional capacity, particularly at the state level and within the road construction
industry.
137. Effectiveness. Overall, ADB's transport assistance has been generally effective. But
there have been several shortcomings in implementation. ADB and the GOI have the
opportunity to rectify the implementation issues. Delays in implementation are a systemic
problem common to projects funded by the government, ADB, and other development partners.
Like ADB-funded projects, World Bank-sponsored road projects in India are similarly delayed.
Contributing reasons relate to complex government procedures and weaknesses in the
construction industry. Among the problems faced by the Indian construction industry are the
following: (i) only a handful of the major Indian contractors can undertake large infrastructure
projects, and all of these contractors have full order books; (ii) qualified professional engineers
with road and railway construction experience are scarce; and (iii) commercial risks, security
issues, and poor living conditions make it difficult to staff projects in remote areas.
138. ADB's road assistance has been targeted primarily to increase capacity. Besides the
capital investment, most of the projects have promoted private sector participation in rehabilitation
and maintenance activities. This is a positive development. The benefits from the roads and
highways projects include shorter travel times, savings in vehicle operating costs, and less
congestion. National highways have a larger impact on the regional economy than on the local
economy. Discussions with villagers served by the rural roads indicated that better roads
improved connectivity, i.e., better access to markets, medical facilities, and education. Overall, the
roads and highways projects are expected to make important contributions to improving India's
transport capacity.
139. ADB's assistance in the early 1990s generally helped to increase the capacity of rail
infrastructure and, hence, railway revenues. Although there were limited improvements in the
1990s, the operating performance of Indian Railways has improved in the last 2 years. Long-
term, strategic benefits could come if ADB continues its recent initiative of taking the lead in
supporting structural reforms in Indian Railways. However, at present, those benefits are not
certain to be achieved. Although Indian Railways has improved its customer orientation,
46
     This is apparent for national highways, where actual traffic has been less than the appraisal forecast.
44


increased private sector participation, and rationalized tariffs, it has a long way to go before it
can operate as a commercial entity.
140. Efficiency. The efficiency rating for completed projects is based on their EIRRs, and
that for ongoing projects (accounting for two thirds of the transport portfolio) on a combination of
projected and expected EIRR as observed by the Operations Evaluation Mission (in mid-2006).
Although for several projects, actual traffic was lower than forecast, all the completed projects
had EIRRs higher than the benchmark rate of 12% at completion, and are therefore rated
efficient. For all ongoing projects, the EIRRs estimated at appraisal were higher than the 12%
benchmark. Lower-than-anticipated traffic and implementation delays leading to cost overruns,
which could adversely affect the EIRRs at completion, are common concerns for most of the
ongoing projects. The transport sector program is therefore rated less efficient at the current
stage, although this assessment could change once projects are completed and their efficiency
can be adequately assessed.
141. Sustainability. Inadequate funding for maintenance has been a perennial problem in
India as it has been in most other countries in Asia. In the short term, NHAI has the financial
and managerial capability to implement the National Highways Development Program and
attract private sector participation. However, its capability to effectively implement the seven
phases of the program needs strengthening in the medium term, and there are major gaps in
funding. For state highways, the funding needs are relatively lower and must be met from public
sector sources as well as private sector participation. But sustainability in terms of ensuring
adequate funds for maintenance remains an issue. For rural roads, funding inadequacies
persist. The current rural roads program is massive in scale. It is not clear how it will be
supported with sufficient monetary and administrative resources. Overall assistance to the road
subsector is rated less likely to be sustainable because of concerns related to adequate funding
for O&M and the completion of the envisaged network programs.47
142. The operating performance of the railways has improved since 2004. Gains in operating
ratio and revenues have strengthened their financial position. The improvements, however, hide
institutional deficiencies--unsustainable employee costs and high-cost borrowings. On the
operational side, consistent with the experience in many other countries, Indian Railways has
been gradually losing its share of the transport market to roads. Institutional and implementation
issues reduce the likely sustainability of the capital projects funded by ADB. The reforms begun
in 2003 could address these issues, but implementation has been problematic. Overall, without
institutional and policy changes, the sustainability of railway assistance is rated less likely.
143. Impact. The sector impact of ADB's assistance has been modest but on the high side.
Besides helping to improve the capacity of the national agencies and targeted state
governments in road and railway sector planning and management, ADB's policy dialogue has
had a positive impact on issues such as policy reforms, sector restructuring, private sector
participation, and socioeconomic considerations. Completed TA activities generally achieved
positive results, with indications of enhanced NHAI capacity for contract and environmental
management. A program loan to Madhya Pradesh established the Madhya Pradesh Road
Development Corporation as an efficient road management agency. There is a need to ensure
that these outcomes are sustained. An ongoing TA is supporting the reform program in Indian
Railways, drawing attention to the policy reforms needed to commercialize operations.


47
     Although most of the four-laning projects of the National Highways Development Program are planned to be
     developed on a Build Operate Transfer or annuity basis, and an increasing number of civil works contracts for state
     and rural roads incorporate 5-year maintenance clauses, sustainability of sector assistance will only be enhanced if
     O&M provisions under such arrangements are adequately monitored and enforced, which, based on OED's
     evidence, has not always been the case.
                                                                                                                         45


However, Indian Railways has been slow to accept the scope of its recommendations and the
implementation time frame.
144. Overall Rating. ADB's assistance to the transport sector, in general, is rated partly
successful but on the higher side. This rating may change upwards if project implementation
performance improves. Given its strategic importance, ADB can continue to be involved in the
transport sector if satisfactory measures are taken to learn from past experience to address the
problems that have been experienced in the transport portfolio. The completed TA operations
have met with mixed success because of inability to mainstream new systems and adopt the
resulting recommendations, and due to ineffective follow-up by ADB. On the positive side,
specific capacity-building contributions were evident in some areas. For example, the
development of private sector participation was well supported, and there was more awareness
of the need to commercialize. However, road safety, transport regulation, and capacity building
in the construction industry need to be strengthened.
145. Recommendations for Future Operations. The following suggestions are directional
and are designed to provide guidance for the formulation of the next India country partnership
strategy and future operations in the transport sector: (i) ADB needs to work more closely with
the EAs in both the roads and railways sectors to identify and resolve problems that lead to
implementation delays, both in individual projects and at the strategic level; (ii) ADB supervision
of projects needs to be improved, with more importance being given to loan administration and
adequate staffing; (iii) project design quality needs to be improved, taking into account local
variations in implementation capabilities and making better use of past experience to improve
the design of future projects; (iv) ADB support for policy reforms to promote private sector
involvement in the transport sector needs to continue, at a higher level, to enable more
innovative contract arrangements to be developed to maximize the benefits of private sector
participation; (v) the railway policy reform program needs to be reviewed in light of the changed
environment and delayed progress; while reforms should be structured and implemented by
Indian Railways, ADB needs to be a more proactive catalyst, and (vi) ADB should broaden its
policy agenda in the transport sector to include a more intensive dialogue on road safety, sector
governance and corruption, institutional coordination, and mitigation of climate change impacts.
B.          Energy48

146. Sector Challenges and Government Strategies. While installed electricity capacity in
India increased from 42,585 megawatts (MW) in 1985 to 118,419 MW in 2005, investments in
capacity expansion have been insufficient to keep pace with the economic growth and energy
needs of the country. India's current power sector has insufficient generation capacity and lacks
optimal utilization of generation resources; transmission between regions is limited; distribution
facilities are ageing and increasingly unreliable; losses in transmission and distribution, and the
effects of theft create large financial losses in the system; the pace of rural electrification is slow;
and there is widespread inefficient use of electricity. The GOI has been seeking to address
efficiency problems through a succession of reform measures starting in 1991 with a resolution
of the state power ministers, which envisaged (i) the creation of profit centers with full
accountability; (ii) handing over local distribution to local government and user associations, as
necessary; and (iii) privatization of distribution. In 1995, Orissa was the first state to introduce
major power sector reforms by passing legislation that helped establish separate generation and
transmission companies and an independent regulatory body. The 2003 Electricity Act49 aims to

48
     For further details, see ADB. 2007. Energy Sector in India ­ Building on Success for More Results. Manila.
49
     The provisions of the Act include the introduction of a National Electricity Policy, extension of rural electrification,
     open access in transmission, phased open access in distribution, mandatory establishment of state electricity
     regulatory commissions, license-free generation and distribution, power trading, mandatory metering for all
     consumers, and stringent antitheft measures.
46


introduce competition to the power sector, provide power for all, and create an enabling
framework for the accelerated and more efficient development of the power sector.
147. ADB Assistance. Since it began energy sector operations in India in 1986, ADB has
supported 21 public sector project loans totaling $4.6 billion (20% of ADB's total lending to the
sector in the region). ADB provided an additional $337 million to finance four private sector
loans for energy sector projects. Lending was supported by 50 TA grants valued at $23.5
million.
148. Sector Positioning and Relevance. Energy sector assistance was well positioned and
is rated highly relevant. Both ADB strategies and the GOI's national plans recognized the
importance of increased supplies for India's overall economic development. During the 1980s
and early 1990s, ADB supported investments mainly in power generation and in oil and gas
development with an emphasis on addressing supply bottlenecks. Since the 1990s, there has
been a consistent focus on transmission and distribution, and more recently a greater focus on
power sector restructuring. ADB public sector lending has exited from generation and upstream
hydrocarbons, consistent with the changes in ADB's energy policy directions. Private sector
operations are now taking a larger role in financing generation. ADB assistance has also
supported the development of renewable energy and energy efficiency initiatives.
149. Since the passage of the 2003 Electricity Act, ADB and the Government have pursued
fully consistent policies that are clearly aligned with ADB's Energy Policy and GOI priorities.
ADB's support for the GOI's reform agenda has focused largely on the weakest link in the
provision of electricity, i.e., the SEBs. Any lending for physical investments was linked to policy
reforms of these bodies. As a result, since 2000, ADB's energy sector lending program has
focused primarily on policy-based lending to states committed to reforming and restructuring the
power sector. This included an emphasis on improving the policy, institutional, and regulatory
frameworks so as to enhance the efficiency of public sector operations and to encourage private
investment.
150. Support for policy reform was properly sequenced. There was a considerable period of
time before lending commenced to the states targeted for assistance. Financial assistance was
preceded by extensive policy dialogue, which developed clear roadmaps and consensus among
ADB, the SEBs, and state and central governments concerning the expected outcomes of the
assistance. This was followed by TA to ensure sufficient capacity development for the major
program and projects to follow. TA, with a few minor exceptions, has contributed to sector
reform and performance improvement.
151. Effectiveness. ADB assistance has been effective in removing many bottlenecks to the
delivery of power to businesses and households through improvements in generation capacity,
the grid, and local distribution systems. However, the overall objectives of the program, in terms
of making good quality, reliable power available to all consumers, have never been met,
because demand has always moved ahead at least as fast as supply capacity and often faster.
Although ADB-financed projects performed to the expected technical levels, overall sector
performance, in terms of delivering a high-quality and reliable power supply, continued to
deteriorate. Only since 2000 has ADB's sector assistance addressed the fundamental structural
weaknesses of the power system. ADB's assistance for power sector reforms has increased
competitiveness and created demonstration effects, adding momentum to the GOI's impetus for
reform. The effects of reforms are incremental, rather than "big bang," and follow a country-led
development model rather than one imposed by outside assistance agencies. The reforms are
gradually shifting the financial risks from the consumer to the management of the electricity
sector. The least effective measures under ADB's restructuring support have been related to
changing human resource development strategies, attaining the desired level of governance in
the distribution subsector, and implementing best-practice management and accounting
                                                                                                   47


practices. The concurrent development of expertise, regulators' transparency, and consumer
advocacy is removing political interference and providing a balance between the needs of
consumers and those of the industry. This has led to consumer involvement and a shift to a
service focus from a supply focus across many of the states. The demonstration effects of
renewable energy projects have made some of this sector self-sustaining.
152. Efficiency. ADB's energy sector assistance is rated efficient. ADB has had a
considerable positive impact in the three states in which it has actively pursued policy changes,
and has led the way for further improvements in the financial viability of power entities.
Institutional change has contributed to improving sector governance at the state level, and in
some cases there was clear evidence of a reduction in electricity theft. The EIRR for evaluated
projects exceeded 12%, implying economic efficiency in resource allocation and use.
Implementation delays did not have a significant impact on the economic viability of the projects.
The well-focused assistance program, which took into account EA capabilities, has been a
major factor in the timely completion of most lending projects as well as TA activities.
153. Sustainability. The sector assistance is likely to be sustainable. While the first power
projects during the 1980s and early 1990s helped address serious infrastructure gaps, their
sustainability was negatively affected by the precarious financial position and lack of
autonomy/accountability of most of the SEBs, which reinforced technical and organizational
inefficiencies. By contrast, the assistance that ADB has subsequently provided to central power
utilities such as the Power Grid and the National Thermal Power Corporation is clearly
sustainable in that the companies are well run, operating on a commercial basis, and
increasingly able to access funds from market sources as well as development partners. The
sustainability of change in some of the state power sectors is inevitably a little uncertain. While
Gujarat no longer requires significant support, there are continuing issues in both Assam and
Madhya Pradesh over the ability of the utilities to complete reforms. Reforms in these states are
still under implementation, although substantial progress has been achieved. Success cannot
be defined at the level of the individual utility; it must also be considered at the level of the
sector, where there are continuing financial shortfalls. Institutional changes have been made
across the sector with the backing of state and central government policies. The observed high
level of ownership of the changed institutional structures points towards a sustained effort to
increase efficiency and governance in the power sector.
154. Impact. The impact of sector assistance on sector development has been substantial. In
particular, ADB's efforts to help create successful, replicable models for policy and institutional
power sector reform, including in low-capacity states, have had a major demonstration effect for
reform efforts in other states.
155.   Overall Rating. The overall rating for ADB's energy sector operations is successful.
156. Recommendations for Future Operations. India has to manage three conflicting goals
in its energy sector: (i) meeting security of fuel and energy supplies, (ii) increasing the efficiency
of supply and financial operations, and (iii) minimizing the environmental effects of the increased
supply needs. India's continuing shortage of energy supplies (both for fuels and generation
capacity) threaten its economic and social development goals. The energy sectors' viability
needs to be improved through better governance and operational efficiency. There is also a
need to minimize the environmental impacts of increased generation growth that is needed to
meet the growing energy demand. The weakest links in attaining these goals are at the state
level, where there are major deficiencies in operational and technical efficiencies and continuing
financial losses. As this sector provides the primary revenues for system expansion,
restructuring the state electricity sector to be self-sustaining should be the highest priority for
assistance. In parallel, general electricity system expansion, transmission, and generation
should be addressed to balance supply and demand, as their viability will be assured with
48


reliable revenues from the restructured state sector. Concurrently, environmental concerns must
be integrated through (i) state system upgrades that reduce losses from the overloaded
systems, (ii) rehabilitation of existing older generation plant, (iii) greater emphasis on energy
efficiency, and (iv) a strategic environmental focus on the development of the system.
Supporting these efforts, there should be continued emphasis on improving the operational
efficiency of the state electricity sector through better governance and the development of
independent regulation.
C.         Finance50

157. Sector Challenges and Government Strategies. Prior to 1991, financial markets in
India were characterized by government ownership of the banking system, administrated
interest rates, mandatory credit allocations to priority sectors and other statutory preemptions, a
captive market for government securities, reliance on central bank financing, and capital
account restrictions. Capital markets lacked a proper regulatory and institutional framework. In
1991, the GOI embarked on a gradual process of phased and coordinated deregulation and
liberalization of financial markets, which has led, among other things, to the commercialization
and partial privatization of government financial institutions, the introduction of more market-
determined interest and exchange rates, phased capital account liberalization, the introduction
of an auction-based system for the government securities markets, the establishment of a
regulatory framework for capital market institutions and insurance companies, and the
development of an adequate infrastructure for capital market operations. Taken together, these
are substantial positive developments.
158. ADB Assistance. Since beginning its financial sector operations in 1986, ADB has
approved 3 program loans for $1.55 billion and 16 ADTA grants for $7.7 million supporting the
reform process. ADB also supported 11 financial intermediation loans under 6 public sector
projects involving a total value of $1.07 billion, which were accompanied by 3 ADTA grants for
$1.7 million. In addition, three projects in the amount of $700 million involving eight multisector
financial intermediation loans for infrastructure were approved. An additional $400.3 million in
loans and investments for 17 financial institutions and 7 funds were provided under ADB's
private sector window.
159. Sector Positioning and Relevance. Overall, ADB's sector assistance is rated relevant.
ADB's policy-based loans were fully consistent with the GOI's reform programs. ADB has
addressed critical and difficult reform areas in banking and capital market development. It also
identified the need to develop domestic debt markets and an institutional investor base, and has
actively promoted assistance for mutual fund, pension, and insurance reforms. While ADB's
technical and financial assistance for financial sector reforms has been well positioned and
highly relevant for addressing sector problems, the use of stand-alone, supply-driven financial
intermediation loans for housing, infrastructure, and industry and SME finance was generally
less relevant, as the provision of funds per se did little to address underlying structural problems
in these sectors, which adversely affected effective demand for financing, or was sometimes not
needed in the first place, considering the ready availability of similar funds in the domestic
market.
160. ADB's traditional support for housing finance development has been through the
provision of financial intermediation loans to housing finance institutions. Although there might
be some merit in capacity-building measures to help build up specific lending capabilities, there
has been little need for ADB funds lately. Recent ADB assistance to promote mortgage-backed
securitization through TA and investments and the provision of credit enhancements for issuers
of such securities is more relevant, as it helps create additional headroom for new mortgage

50
     A more detailed assessment of ADB's financial sector assistance is provided in Appendix 7.
                                                                                                49


financing by banks. ADB's investment in a mortgage guaranty company is in line with this new
focus.
161. Despite the comparatively large outreach of the banking system, ADB's policy support
for the restructuring of rural credit cooperatives would appear to be relevant, although it is
unclear how tens of thousands of small organizations can be operationally restructured over a
short period of time, given limited financial and personnel resources.
162. ADB's private sector operations have complemented reform efforts on the public sector
side by supporting private financial institutions during a critical stage of their development. The
developmental relevance of some of ADB's earlier private equity fund and industry investments
is less clear.
163. Effectiveness. ADB's financial sector assistance overall has been less effective. The
rating reflects that only 60% of approved funds under the financial intermediation loans, which
accounted for 53% of all resources ADB provided to the financial sector, were actually
disbursed. This means that a large number of sector projects have not achieved their intended
outcomes. The rating is on the higher end, however, as program loans, TA, and investment in
capital market institutions and private banks in India helped (i) enhance competition and
diversity in the bank and nonbanking sectors, (ii) enhance the autonomy and financial
soundness of banks, (iii) develop the equity market, and (iv) lay the groundwork for the
development of an institutional investor base and debt markets through the identification of
pertinent policy issues and options. Partial progress has been made in (i) enhancing private
access to financial savings, (ii) developing corporate bond markets, (iii) further reducing
government ownership in the banking system, and (iv) eliminating remaining allocative
distortions including priority credit requirements.
164. A number of relevant TA and policy recommendations are yet to be implemented. For
example, the level of government ownership in financial institutions, its role in determining
interest rates, large fiscal deficits, lack of transparency about macroeconomic/monetary targets
of the Reserve Bank of India, and the underdeveloped institutional investor base continue to
impede the development of bond markets. Mutual fund development is constrained by a lack of
tax incentives and shortcomings in the regulatory framework, including the lack of an effective
self-regulatory structure. The effectiveness of some TA projects in the capital market area would
have likely been higher if relevant regulatory institutions rather than the Ministry of Finance had
been more involved in TA design and implementation.
165. Sustainability. Overall, the immediate outcome of ADB's financial sector assistance is
rated likely sustainable. The basic thrust and direction of ADB-supported financial sector reform
programs have been maintained and expanded. There has been no reversal of policy direction
or content. But the sustainability of individual lines of credit is mixed. In some cases, ADB
programs prompted financial intermediaries to build up capacity in a particular business
segment that they did not service before. In most other cases, assistance had no long-term
institutional impact and created no sustainable lending mechanisms.
166. Impact. The sector impact of ADB's assistance is rated substantial. Although the GOI
would have proceeded with most reforms without ADB support, the three program loans helped
(i) define and shape the scope of the reform programs, and (ii) facilitate continuing dialogue with
the GOI in difficult reform areas. Particularly with regard to capital market development,
institutional investment/pension reform, and nonperforming loan resolution, ADB-funded TA
provided significant inputs for policy discussions and reform implementation.
167. Overall Rating. Sector assistance is rated partly successful, mainly due to the poor
performance of a large number of financial intermediation loans. However, the rating is on the
50


high side, considering the relevance, effectiveness, and impact of ADB's support for financial
sector reforms.
168. Recommendations for Future Operations. Taking into consideration the favorable
macroeconomic environment, and the need to prepare the financial system for India's
envisaged capital account liberalization and the mobilization of substantial long-term resources
for infrastructure development, the GOI is likely to embark on a next round of reforms. This
could include measures to increase competition in various financial market segments,
strengthen the enforcement capacity for financial regulators, develop corporate bond markets,
develop the institutional investment base, enhance corporate governance, improve accounting
and audit standards and practices, and remove impediments to rural credit. ADB could (i)
continue its financial and technical support for financial sector reforms, as required; (ii) identify
and financially support innovative financing mechanisms and credit enhancements for
infrastructure projects under its public and private sector operations; (iii) discontinue those
financial intermediation loans for which there is no effective demand or value addition by ADB,
and instead support domestic resource mobilization through assistance for capital market
development; and (iv) continue its support for the development of asset-backed securitization in
India.

D.         Urban Development51

169. Sector Challenges and Government Strategies. India's urban population grew from
75 million in 1961 (or 19% of the total population) to 285 million in 2001 (28%). Since much of
the urban growth has been built on inadequate and obsolete urban infrastructure, almost all
major cities are experiencing serious infrastructure stress and, in some cases, investors have
begun to move their investments to less congested cities and suburban areas. Although India is
set to meet its MDGs for potable water supply, poor quantity and quality of infrastructure and
basic services are cited as the major impediments for sustainable urban growth. The rapid
urbanization of many cities in India has placed a considerable burden on the urban
environment. Many cities are thought to currently have populations several times the size that
they can comfortably accommodate. Limited coverage of sanitation, inadequate solid waste
collection and disposal, faulty drainage systems, and congested roads have resulted in
pervasive air, water, and soil pollution. Low levels of wastewater treatment have polluted water
bodies and caused visible environmental degradation in and around the urban centers. A lack of
housing has forced many of the poor to illegally occupy public lands, such as the banks of
drainage canals, which constricts flows and leads to further environmental pollution.
170. Lack of funding has been a major constraint for new investments. Fiscal resources for
this purpose are limited, particularly at the local level. About 90% of urban investment funds are
expected to come from sources other than central budgetary support, such as state transfer
payments, tax revenues, user charges, external assistance, the private sector, and institutional
financing.
171. To address resource mobilization issues, the first generation of urban sector reforms
started with the promulgation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992, which provided
the institutional framework for administrative decentralization and fiscal and financial devolution
of urban local bodies, and the 1996 Central Government Guidelines for "Urban Development
Plans Formulation and Implementation," which is aimed primarily at improving the fiscal health
of urban local bodies by rationalizing urban service subsidies and placing urban development
projects and infrastructure investments on commercial formats. The second generation of urban
reforms then focused on increasing market financing and private sector participation in resource

51
     See Appendix 9 for a discussion on ADB's assistance for urban development.
                                                                                                                  51


mobilization and urban management. The model Municipal Act recommended by the central
Government includes modification and simplification of municipal bylaws, provision for
enhanced market borrowing, and fixation of market-based tariffs and cost recovery. To provide
financial incentives for urban governments to reform, the GOI has introduced the Jawaharlal
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, which links the provision of central government grant
funds for urban development to improvements in resource mobilization and management.
172. ADB Assistance. Since beginning urban sector operations in 1995, ADB has supported
seven projects with loans totaling $1.28 billion. Four of these projects have been completed or
are nearing completion. In addition, two other projects (Multisector Project for Infrastructure
Rehabilitation in Jammu and Kashmir, and Tsunami Emergency Assistance) with a $350 million
supported mainly urban infrastructure development or reconstruction. In the urban sector, 14 TA
grants for $5.95 million were also provided. ADB had no private sector operations in the sector.
173. Sector Positioning and Relevance. ADB's urban sector assistance has been well
positioned. While the World Bank was the main agency supporting urban sector development
projects in India during the 1970s and 1980s, its urban sector interventions declined during the
1990s following its growing concerns about project quality and sustainability. ADB entered the
sector during the 1990s, after the reform process had started. Contrary to other aid agencies,
which generally supported large urban transport, water supply, and sanitation projects in large
cities, ADB has pursued an integrated multisector and multitown approach to align its urban
sector operations with national urban development programs and in response to demand from
state governments, which viewed the externally aided project as a one-time opportunity to help
finance a wide range of investment needs in many sectors. Complex project designs associated
with this approach have meant long implementation periods and the need for substantial
implementation support. Although these projects have been successful, ADB has attempted to
somewhat rationalize the investment scope52 in subsequent projects to further enhance
effectiveness and efficiency in achieving the project outcome, albeit with limited success. Social
infrastructure and community empowerment project components have almost invariably been
included, as they not only improve the quality of life of poor communities, which are often
marginalized by more market-based approaches, but are seen as a necessary (although not
sufficient) condition for gaining acceptance by the local communities and politicians for the fiscal
and financial reforms required to ensure the sustainability of urban investments.
174. ADB urban sector projects in India are rated relevant for improving the quality of life in
urban areas through capital investments in basic physical and environmental infrastructure.
Most projects have been aligned with national and state urban sector strategies and
development guidelines. ADB projects have also been consistent with the GOI's new urban
sector initiative to promote investment in conjunction with institutional and operational reforms,
and most ADB loan covenants reflect the overall thrust of fiscal and financial reforms promoted
by the GOI. However, institutional capacity issues affecting project sustainability have not
always been adequately addressed by ADB at the project design stage.
175. Effectiveness. Most ADB projects in the sector are being implemented satisfactorily and
are rated effective. While projects increased the availability of basic urban infrastructure
services including water supply, sanitation, and transport, and helped upgrade slum areas, they
have usually been less successful in improving the financial and asset management capabilities
of urban local bodies. Delays in procuring project management and design and supervision
52
      While ADB's first urban development project in India incorporated very diverse components (e.g., urban water
     supply, drainage and sanitation, roads and traffic management, low-income housing, slum improvement, residential
     and industrial sites and services, truck and bus terminals, microcredit mechanisms, and community development),
     more recent urban projects have focused primarily on water supply and sanitation infrastructure, transport
     infrastructure, and community development, although a number have also included income-generating
     development and slum improvement for the urban poor.
52


consultants due to institutional and budgetary constraints have invariably affected the timing of
project design, procurement of consultants, preparation of tender documents, and tender
awarding processes. Barring the initial implementation delays, all projects, with the exception of
the Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project, have generally achieved their envisaged
outputs/targets satisfactorily without significant cost overruns and within reasonable time.
176. Efficiency. Sector assistance is rated likely efficient, but on the low side due to concerns
about potential overdesign and cost overruns. As only one project has been fully completed, the
rating was arrived at by assessing the soundness of EIRR calculations at appraisal and the
continued validity of underlying assumptions. For the completed Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development Project, the project performance evaluation report calculated EIRRs between 16%
and 45% for the various project components with the exception of one water supply component
that was overdesigned. Although most ongoing urban sector projects are expected to achieve
economic returns in excess of 12%, the Calcutta Environmental Improvement Program has
already experienced significant cost overruns, and a number of investments under other
projects had comparatively low EIRRs at appraisal.
177. Sustainability. ADB's urban development projects in India are less likely to be
sustainable. The financial feasibility analyses of the various investments undertaken in the
projects are based on a few basic component-specific assumptions such as (i) institutional and
operational capacity to introduce cost recovery through rationalization of water tariff/user
charges; (ii) improved cost recovery management; (iii) introduction of sewerage and drainage
charges; and (iv) private sector participation in the management of facilities such as sewerage
and wastewater treatment plants, landfills, door-to-door collection, and disposal of solid wastes.
Financial viability is dependent on household affordability and fiscal viability, which requires (i)
property tax reforms including improved tax collection, (ii) improved fiscal and financial
management to meet debt-servicing and service-solvency obligations by the municipal bodies,
(iii) political will to increase user charges or rationalize property taxes, (iv) improved technical
capacity of the urban local bodies to manage the assets on their own or their willingness to use
the private sector to manage the new assets, and (v) state government's willingness to meet the
financial gap through fiscal transfers in the medium term. Most of these assumptions have been
reflected in loan covenants. However, some assumptions turned out to be unrealistic in the
medium term, particularly when local political conditions resulted in a number of local municipal
councils and state governments backtracking on fiscal and tariff reforms. Many urban local
bodies felt that the states imposed investment decisions and the related debts upon them, and
as a result there is a general unwillingness on their part either to introduce new taxes/user
charges or to introduce improved cost recovery measures.
178. Another issue challenging project sustainability is the poor institutional and operational
capacity of some urban local bodies to operate and maintain the assets created under the
projects.
179. Impact. Sector impact is rated modest but on the high side. ADB's projects have had a
significant impact on how similar projects are designed and implemented. The Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development Project was the first major "integrated" multicity urban investment
project in India in many years. As such, it generated substantial experience and led to further
statewide and country-wide policy initiatives. ADB TA provided inputs for the preparation of the
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. ADB assistance also helped build capacity
in urban management bodies. However, unless funds are available to maintain physical
investments in operating condition, the overall impact of sector assistance will be reduced.

180. Overall Rating. Sector assistance, although relevant and effective in delivering physical
outputs, is rated partly successful on the high side, as sustainability concerns offset the other
more positive ratings.
                                                                                                                   53


181. Recommendations for Future Operations. There is substantial need for urban
infrastructure improvements, and ADB could continue its operations in this sector if effective
ways could be found to improve sustainability in the future. To help finance the massive related
investment requirements and to ensure sustainability of operations, urban fiscal reforms and
resource management issues need to be more proactively addressed. Discussions with the
various stakeholders revealed that ADB should support (i) improved and innovative
infrastructure lending, PPPs, and municipal bond market development; (ii) transfer of
international and regional best practices and long-term capacity development for policy reforms,
asset management, and project design and implementation; (iii) alignment of ADB's reform
agenda with the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission and improved consultation
with stakeholders at the project design phase to facilitate political buy-in and reform
implementation; (iv) local governments that have demonstrated commitment to the required
fiscal and institutional reforms; (v) policy-based lending for urban sector reforms; and (vi) use of
the MFF for complex multisector projects.

E.       Public Sector Resource Management53

182. Sector Challenges and Government Strategies. The stabilization and structural
adjustment reforms initiated in 1991 required containment of fiscal deficits at both the central
and state levels. At the state level, in addition to containing deficits, reforms had to address the
issue of enhancing allocative and technical efficiency in public spending and creating an
enabling environment for private sector participation in accelerating economic growth. Economic
liberalization required creation of a competitive environment for domestic manufacturers. The
hardening central finances reduced resource transfers to states. A policy change in the mid-
1990s allowed reform­oriented states to negotiate loans from multilateral institutions. Given that
fiscal reform was an inherent part of loan negotiations, allowing states to borrow from
multilateral institutions could achieve the objectives of improving their finances, augmenting
outlay on social and physical infrastructure, restructuring public enterprises, and creating an
enabling environment to attract private sector involvement in infrastructure development.
However, following the public sector pay increases in FY1999, the finances of all state
governments sharply deteriorated. Stagnant tax revenues and declining central transfers
relative to the state domestic product were compounded by increasing deficits and debt on the
one hand, and rising interest rates on the other. In response, the central Government introduced
a medium-term fiscal reform program that required the states to reduce the ratio of revenue
deficits to their total revenues by 5 percentage points every year to be eligible to receive a
portion of grants. Problems in the design of this performance-linked grant program led the
Twelfth Finance Commission to recommend an incentive-based debt restructuring program to
be outlined in a fiscal responsibility act.54 This would provide a binding legal and administrative
framework guiding fiscal consolidation efforts and would entitle states that passed such an act
to restructure and consolidate market and central government loans at substantially reduced
interest rates, and from 2006 waive loan repayments due until 2011.
183. ADB Assistance. The GOI's policy change coincided with a significant strategic shift in
ADB's 1996 country strategy for India that opened the opportunity to support state governments'
reform efforts. ADB led other multilateral finance institutions in India and globally at this level
using policy-based public resource management programs as an entry point, preparing the
ground for future loans assisting sector-specific reforms. This strategy was implemented in
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and Assam. Complementing the loan portfolio were a

53
   For a more comprehensive discussion, see ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study of Selected Public Resources
   Management Programs in India. Manila.
54
   In 2003, Kerala was one of the first states in India to pass a fiscal responsibility act; Assam, Gujarat, and Madhya
   Pradesh passed their acts in 2005.
54


number of stand-alone TA operations supporting national-level policy reforms (taxation,
pension, and budgeting) and in selected states (Karnataka, Sikkim, and West Bengal) to help
prepare for fiscal reform. Since the mid­1990s, ADB has supported public resource
management programs in four states through four program loans (totaling $825 million),55 with
TA accompanying each loan (a total of 12 TA grants valued at $6.958 million), and a $25 million
TA loan in the Assam program package.
184. Sector Positioning and Relevance. Overall, ADB's public resource management
program in India is rated relevant. The three policy-based loans and associated TA activities
were rated relevant, with the ongoing Assam program being potentially relevant. At a strategic
level, the public resource management programs enabled ADB to support the GOI's policy to
encourage multilateral banks to assist in the urgent need for subnational fiscal consolidation.
Consequently, state-level public resource management programs were designed to support
fiscal reforms defined by the states, and complementing the GOI's nationwide reforms. Support
from a multilateral finance institution for states to implement fiscal reforms provided external
recognition and at times cover for more politically difficult reform measures. The need to
develop institutional capacity to manage complex reform processes was recognized and
addressed through TA. However, the scope and timing of at least one TA in each state limited
its relevance. By leading in assisting subnational governments to implement fiscal reforms, ADB
developed a comparative advantage, sharing lessons and coordinating with the World Bank as
it approved similar programs in three other states in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The
national-level TA, which focused primarily on tax administration capacity development, was
assessed as relevant.
185. All four policy loans had common structural features, with interventions addressing
revenue, expenditure, and service delivery reforms. Design differences reflected implementation
lessons, the evolving fiscal conditions including central government policies, and state level
priorities. For example, the Assam program design incorporated lessons including the
importance of pension reform, performance-based budgeting and expenditure monitoring, and
the need to reduce the specificity of conditions associated with public enterprise reform. The
Kerala government's concern to prioritize governance reform resulted in a large number of
service delivery initiatives dominating the program.
186. Effectiveness. Overall, the public resource management program, including national-
and state-level TA, is rated effective. An important element in assessing the effectiveness of the
public resource management program is improvement in the state's fiscal condition. Although
the analysis of revenue and fiscal deficits showed significant interstate variations, the overall
change in fiscal positions over the last decade in the four ADB-assisted states has been
positive. This is despite external factors such as an earthquake and commercial disturbances in
Gujarat, bifurcation and floods in Madhya Pradesh, and national salary increases, which put
pressure on state budgets.
187. Significant progress was made with regard to improving tax administration, including
measures supporting the introduction of a value-added tax; reducing power sector subsidies;
and reforming public enterprises, with a number of poorly performing enterprises divested or
operationally closed. Perhaps the most effective and far-reaching measures have been the
small number of critical legal, policy, and institutional reforms to establish utility regulatory
authorities and enable significant private sector investment in the power and transport sectors.
188. Only the Kerala and Madhya Pradesh programs had an explicitly stated poverty
reduction outcome or output. As the projected fiscal space was not created, social sector

55
     This is the total disbursed amount, including the full $125 million of Assam subprogram 1, and excluding the $100
     million Kerala subprogram 2, which was not approved.
                                                                                               55


allocations in these states did not increase, and the outcomes were not achieved. However, in
all states a combination of protecting social sector budgets from expenditure compression, and
significant central government vertical programs in health, education, and poverty reduction,
ensured that the generally poor level of social development indicators did not worsen. The
Gujarat program outcome of promoting industrialization was achieved, and the Assam
program's fiscal consolidation target looks likely to be achieved.
189. Sustainability. Overall the public resource management program is rated likely
sustainable. Although the sustainability of individual policy and technical interventions has been
mixed, some reforms have significant implications. By providing state governments with an
opportunity to chart their direction, and by improving institutional capacity to implement complex
fiscal reforms, the public resource management program has helped to change attitudes toward
reform, increasing the likelihood that the broader reform agenda will be sustained.
190.      Impact. The overall impact of ADB's public sector management assistance is likely to
be substantial. The short-term economic impact of the program has been modest. However,
either during or after program completion, all four states committed to develop a legal and
administrative fiscal reform framework for at least 5 years. The influx of private investment in
upgrading infrastructure has been a key factor in stimulating economic growth, with the success
in Gujarat being the most obvious. Assisting the state government to realign its service delivery
role, particularly in the many ineffective and inefficient public enterprises, is a long-term and
politically fraught process to which these programs gave a much needed impetus. TA impact
was varied, but where it was successful (e.g., establishing a nodal agency for infrastructure
development and managing public enterprise reform in Gujarat, computerizing tax
administration in Madhya Pradesh and nationally), it was also most likely sustainable.
191. Overall Rating. Sector assistance is rated successful, considering the substantial
achievements in improving tax administration.
192. Recommendations for Future Operations. There is considerable need for continued
public sector resource management and fiscal reform. Implementation will be a lengthy and
often a politically contentious process. ADB should continue to support such reforms in selected
states in India. To improve the effectiveness of public resource management programs (i)
sufficient time and resources are required for policy dialogue and communications campaigns
involving all stakeholders in formulating and implementing long-term fiscal reforms in the face of
short-term electoral cycles; (ii) program design should be internally coherent, focusing on key
elements of the government's fiscal reform agenda, until fiscal consideration measures are in
place, avoiding broader governance reforms; (iii) sufficient TA resources should be made
available over the long term to respond to the changing nature of reform processes; and (iv)
implementation arrangements should be based on existing institutional structures and provided
adequate resources, including technical advice.
F.     Overall Rating of Sector-Level Performance

193. The overall rating for sector performance is successful, but on the low side (for rating
methodology see Appendix 1). See Table 6.
             56


                                                               Table 6: Sector Ratings
     Sector            Positioning/         Effectiveness            Efficiency           Sustainability         Sector Impact                 Overall
                        Relevance
Transport                Relevant              Effective            Less Efficient         Less likely               Modest             Partly successful
                                                                                        (on the high side)      (on the high side)      (on the high side)

Energy                    Highly               Effective               Efficient               Likely              Substantial              Successful
                         Relevant
                                                                           a
Finance                  Relevant           Less effective                ­                    Likely              Substantial          Partly successful
                                          (on the high side)                                                                            (on the high side)
Urban                    Relevant              Effective           Less efficient           Less likely              Modest             Partly successful
Development                                                      (on the high side)                             (on the high side)      (on the high side)
                                                                          a
Public Sector            Relevant              Effective                 ­                     Likely              Substantial             Successful
Resource
Management
                                                                                                                                           Successful
OVERALL SECTOR PERFORMANCE RATING                                                                                                        (on the low side)
a
 Economic efficiency is difficult to determine for program loans in these sectors. Therefore, no rating has been provided for efficiency, and weighting of sector
 impact was doubled instead.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.

                                                        IV.       OVERALL ASSESSMENT

             194. The overall rating for ADB's country operations and programs is successful, which is
             based on successful sector and strategic/institutional ratings.

                                    V.        CONCLUSIONS, ISSUES, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

             A.        Lessons and Conclusions

             195.      This evaluation draws several key conclusions:
             (i)       Even when ADB's assistance toward the overall investment requirements in a large
                       country like India is small, ADB support can make significant contributions to the
                       development process, not only through financial resource transfers, but more importantly
                       through support for project design and implementation, introducing best practices for
                       project management, procurement, and financial management; and through policy
                       dialogue and associated capacity development assistance for the identification and
                       implementation of appropriate policy options. A large number of ADB-financed projects
                       contributed to best practice development at the sector level.
             (ii)      The external financial environment has changed. India can increasingly access
                       international markets for financing on attractive terms. Accessing knowledge and skills is
                       easier today in a globalized and information technology-linked world. At the same time,
                       ADB's adoption of more complex loan processing, implementation, and safeguard
                       requirements, while important, has increased the nonfinancial costs of borrowing. This
                       has increased the pressure on ADB to offer value-addition unique to its character as a
                       provider of development assistance, such as (i) objective analysis and advice on policy
                       and operational issues; (ii) capacity development; and (iii) support for increased supply
                       of public and semipublic goods including infrastructure networks, energy efficiency,
                       clean environment, inclusive development, and regional cooperation. ADB is just one of
                       many sources of finance and knowledge that are available to India. To be effective in
                       this competitive environment, ADB will need to clearly understand and respond to the
                       needs of India, which is one of its largest and most important clients. Box 2 summarizes
                       key suggestions made by a number of GOI officials when asked how ADB could improve
                       its partnership with India.
                                                                                            57


(iii)   Prospects of enhanced effectiveness are increased when assistance is focused on
        relatively few areas than when scattered over a large range of sectors and states.
(iv)    Project implementation performance can be dramatically improved, if proactive portfolio
        management approaches are adopted by regional departments. Particularly the
        allocation of adequate staff and TA resources for project preparation and
        implementation, timely capacity development support for new EAs, and the initiation of
        regular sector-based tripartite project implementation review meetings have contributed
        to a turn around in implementation performance.
(v)     Assistance programs can succeed if the client demonstrates strong ownership of and
        commitment to the establishment of a conducive policy and institutional environment for
        sector development. This commitment needs to be shared by other stakeholders to
        ensure sustained effectiveness.
(vi)    The relationship between India and ADB is stronger today than it was a decade ago, but
        there is ample scope and need for both sides to raise it to a higher level and make it
        more rewarding for both. This goal needs a review of mutual expectations and
        objectives, and proactive efforts for their realization by ADB as well as the GOI.
58
                 Box 2: Government Views on Development Partnership with ADB

 Assistance Size. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is an important and responsive development partner. As
 the Indian economy is now on a higher growth path, ADB should increase its support for India's development from
 its level of $2.0 billion in 2006 to $4 billion over the next few years in line with growing investment requirements.
 Assistance Scope. To more effectively support the Government of India's (GOI) objectives of achieving equitable
 growth and reducing regional disparities, ADB should consider expanding its operations to include assistance for
 public-private partnerships (PPPs) in health and education and for rural development initiatives in the following
 areas: (i) financial infrastructure, (ii) tourism infrastructure (which promotes local employment for white collar and
 semiskilled workers in rural areas and is deemed to create more jobs per rupee invested than other sectors in a
 comparatively short time), and (iii) agrobusiness development. ADB should also add more states to its portfolio,
 including those assisted by other development partners.
 Knowledge Products. ADB should expand operations qualitatively by adding value through provision of
 knowledge products, especially for addressing the new challenges faced by the economy. These include, among
 others, the need to develop high levels of infrastructure capacity, and attracting and managing large amounts of
 private investment in infrastructure through PPPs and other modalities.
 Business Processes, Safeguards. A large portion of implementation difficulties and delays are due to ADB
 procurement and safeguard policies and processes. ADB should review its business processes and safeguard
 requirements. These need to be simplified and customized so that they remain congruent with borrower systems and
 capabilities. There is also a need to make their application more client-friendly. ADB should carefully assess
 substantial relevant experience, legal provisions, functioning institutions, and processes available in India, and
 consider their use as the primary instruments for achieving the objectives underlying the ADB requirements. ADB
 should also consider recalibrating its own requirements, especially where these conflict with established national
 legal provisions and practices. Modifications to national systems when necessary to meet ADB's core corporate
 objectives should be mutually discussed. The present practice of discussing these matters in an adhoc, project-by-
 project manner after implementation is seriously affected should be replaced by a high-level, issue-focused dialogue
 between the GOI and ADB as soon as possible. Such dialogue is required particularly in regard to ADB's
 environmental guidelines, policies on land compensation and resettlement of affected populations, and the
 application of procurement guidelines.
 Commitment Charges. Lack of project readiness at the time of approval and implementation delays particulary
 prior to 2005 increased the commitment fees paid by the GOI to high levels. Commitment charges are seen
 primarily as a source of revenue by ADB. ADB should review its current policies to ensure that the level of
 commitment charges reflects actual opportunity costs and encourages implementation efficiency. There might
 also be scope for improving ADB's treasury management systems to bring down commitment charges. While the
 new multitranche financing facility (MFF) modality reduces the burden of commitment charge payments, more
 flexibility is required for disbursement schedules for other types of lending modalities.
 New Instruments. The GOI has adopted new approaches and design features to investment programs to meet
 the changing needs of its growing economy. Wherever practical, sector investment programs now focus more on
 overall sector development than on individual sector projects. This has two implications for ADB operations: First,
 assistance to a sector should have similarly broader scope, perhaps with greater use of instruments like the MFF,
 than traditional project loans covering a single project at a time. Second, the policy ideas and suggestions need to
 be discussed at an early stage of designing the subject investment programs. This should enable ADB to
 contribute to the formulation of the institutional and policy framework and parameters that guide the sector
 investment programs. Once the basic framework and parameters are established, only limited changes can be
 entertained at the level of individual projects.
 Program Lending. While very useful, program loans should have lower spreads and longer maturities to increase
 their attractiveness to state governments.
 Private Sector Operations. ADB's private sector operations should help catalyze more investment from
 commercial sources for infrastructure development and should support GOI initiatives. ADB should enhance
 synergies between its public and private sector operations.
 ADB Staff Quality. Many ADB staff have made valuable contributions to enhancing project performance with
 their expertise, experience, and commitment. There have been, however, a growing number of instances where
 ADB staff's contributions were limited. ADB should ensure that its staff deployed on projects in India possess
 high-quality sector expertise and experience, add value to assisted projects, and become a "resource" for the
 implementing agencies and officials to advance their own competencies.
 India Resident Mission. The India Resident Mission (INRM) has generally played a useful role in supporting
 ADB operations and facilitating the GOI-ADB interface. Its usefulness, however, has been restricted owing to the
 limited authority it has in decision making. ADB operations have continued to remain Manila-centric, contributing
 to longer than necessary response time to client needs. ADB should therefore consider delegating more authority
 and resources to INRM so that it can play a more substantial role in supervising and supporting assisted projects.
 Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.
                                                                                                    59


B.     Key Findings, Issues, and Recommendations

       1.      Improve Strategic Focus of ADB Operations

196. The development effectiveness of ADB's assistance has varied over time and across
sectors, geographic areas, and government levels. What has worked comparatively well has
been ADB's operational shift to state-level operations, where ADB's assistance has achieved
somewhat greater development effectiveness than at the national level. ADB's state-level
operations have been more successful than ADB assistance for national programs and projects
or financial intermediation loans with nationwide coverage. The relative success of state-level
operations is attributable largely to the careful selection of states in line with meaningful criteria,
including willingness to undertake reforms; interaction with smaller counterpart government
entities and EAs, which facilitated more effective policy dialogue and capacity development
support; and a higher degree of receptiveness to external advice on the part of state agencies.
ADB should continue to operate mainly at the state level. It would be prudent to limit
national/central-level support to financial sector reform programs and to programs and projects
in key infrastructure sectors that have a good performance record, committed EAs with proven
implementation capacity, or potential for significant development impact.
197. The number of states and sectors in which ADB operates should be consistent with its
capacity for project design and implementation support. Evaluation findings, particularly for the
transport and urban sectors, indicate a need for ADB to improve its understanding of local
conditions when designing its support and to provide sufficient capacity development assistance
for EAs that have not had exposure to ADB. In general, it has taken longer to design and
implement projects in new locations (particularly in low-capacity states) and in new sectors of
ADB operations.
198. ADB has experienced serious capacity constraints in its India operations. ADB has to
gear itself to satisfactorily develop, deliver, and monitor expansions in operations in terms of
new sectors, states, or increased lending volumes. An implementation plan needs to
accompany the new country partnership strategy to reconcile aspirations with likely staff, TA,
and financial resources. Inadequate resources (in terms of volume and quality) have caused
problems in the past. With existing staff resources, it appears unlikely that ADB will be able to
operate in more than 10 states in addition to the northeast region, or to significantly expand
lending operations beyond current levels. TA funds obtained from DFID have been instrumental
in helping prepare and implement project operations, particularly in the newer low capacity
states. Similar levels of TA will be needed for the next CPS period to maintain, let alone expand,
current levels of operations. The implementation of MFFs requires substantial TA to assist EAs
in the preparation of subsequent investments under these umbrella sector lending modalities.
199. An adequate portfolio mix of more advanced, reform-minded states and low-capacity,
less developed/frontier states should be maintained to reduce the potential for portfolio
performance problems and to facilitate the development and transfer of best-practice
approaches. Current selection criteria can be maintained. Assistance to states without
commitment to the reforms necessary to ensure the economic feasibility and sustainability of
investment projects should be avoided. ADB's support for national programs and projects
should prioritize investments in focus states to increase the impact of ADB assistance. To help
enhance operational efficiency and the development effectiveness of individual projects and to
exploit potential synergies, coordination of the various ADB-supported sector efforts within focus
states could be further improved through the creation of strategic and operational frameworks.
The future country strategy should include strategic approaches to ADB's assistance to
particular states or groups of states at similar levels of development, especially for capacity
60


development, as conditions and state reform and institutional initiatives vary across India.
Consideration should be given to establishing ADB focal points within these states.
200. More sectors are being added to ADB's portfolio in India, including some sectors for
which ADB plans to reduce its institutional capacities in line with its long-term and medium-term
strategy recommendations. ADB's selection of sectors for assistance in the past lacked
sufficient strategic direction and analytical underpinning, reducing the effectiveness of ADB's
sector assistance. Involvement in several sectors (industry, ports, telecommunications, inland
waterways, hydrocarbons) was discontinued after only a short period of operations. ADB's entry
into new sectors should be based on adequate sector analysis and a long-term strategy for its
sustained involvement over the whole range of ADB projects and services, as needs and client
demands dictate, to achieve critical mass and impact. General evaluation findings show that
long-term ADB involvement as opposed to short-term involvement is generally associated with
positive findings about ADB's contributions to the achievement of development results. ADB's
involvement should be limited to those sectors for which (i) ADB expects to have adequate staff
capacity at headquarters and INRM as well as TA resource availability over the medium term,
(ii) there is a high probability of sustained government interest and support, and (iii) no
duplication of effort by other development partners exists. For all active sectors, meaningful
roadmaps should be prepared that, among other things, include related financial, TA, and staff
resource requirements, as well as realistic strategies to address sector-specific
organizational/institutional constraints and governance issues. Sector roadmaps also need to
consider state-specific requirements and thematic concerns. Stand-alone operations to address
environmental issues should also be considered, as this is likely going to be an area for which
there will be increasing demand for assistance in the future and where ADB can potentially add
value.
       2.      Improve the Quality of ADB's Sector Lending

201. Although ADB's sector operations have been only marginally successful overall,
continued emphasis on support for transport, energy, and urban and rural infrastructure
development would be consistent with the evaluation findings. These sectors are performing
reasonably well, and ADB has a better understanding of how to address recurring project design
and implementation problems. Implementation problems are due manly to delays in awarding
procurement contracts and to the poor performance of contractors or suppliers, for which longer
term capacity building is required. Project design and implementation schedules need to be
cognizant of potential problems. ADB needs to do a better job of learning from past experience
to estimate more realistic implementation schedules. Another key concern has been related to
the sustainability of ADB-financed investment projects in the roads and urban sectors, which
have been negatively affected by a lack of O&M funds and by weaknesses in institutional
capacity, particularly at the lower levels of government. O&M issues, including the availability of
funds to finance O&M expenses (e.g., through adequate tariffs/charges that cover such costs,
other revenue measures, fiscal budget allocations, assistance for strengthening financial
management, etc.), need to be addressed at the project design stage. This will require dialogue
on program/project options and related tariff or fiscal requirements with political decision makers
and consumers. Conditionality under ADB-financed projects at the state and local levels could
be aligned with policy measures promoted under national programs and reform initiatives to
improve political acceptance. Also, sufficient assistance for capacity development should be
provided to ensure sustained project/program benefits. For a number of sectors, such as power
generation and transmission, ports, and national highways development, a greater shift from
public to private or nonsovereign sector operations is desirable. Lending to large, well-
functioning public utilities with acceptable credit ratings, like Power Grid and the National
Thermal Power Corporation, should be on a nonrecourse basis. However, to justify ADB's
continued support to these borrowers, which have access to domestic and international capital
                                                                                               61


markets, ADB's assistance needs to involve some value addition, for example, the mobilizing of
funds from other commercial sources through the use of risk mitigation and cofinancing
products. At the same time, ADB's internal capacity for nonrecourse financing needs to be
further developed.
202. Support for fiscal and public sector management, as well as financial sector reforms,
would also be appropriate, given ADB's past performance, experience, and capacity in these
sectors, and its role in supporting sector reforms, creating fiscal space, and generating
sustainable financing for infrastructure investments. However, in terms of lending modalities,
ADB-supported financial intermediation loans have not worked well in India. The failure of this
lending modality has been due largely to a lack of effective demand caused by underlying
sector-level structural problems, which reduced the number of viable subprojects/borrowers,
and by the ready availability of domestic funds at lower all-in costs. It would therefore make
sense to discontinue using this modality and to address structural issues through policy
dialogue, capacity development, and other support measures. ADB should promote domestic
resource mobilization and effective and sustainable financing mechanisms through support for
financial sector reforms.
       3.      Increase the Level of Private Sector Operations

203. ADB's private sector operations in India have not been very significant relative to the
potential demand. ADB's public sector assistance has failed to substantially leverage
investment and financing from private sources. This situation has been partly due to the lack of
a conducive policy and regulatory environment for private infrastructure investments, the
absence of proven PPP approaches, limited in-house capacity for private sector operations, lack
of suitable financing instruments and mechanisms, and inadequate coordination between ADB's
public and private sector operations. The GOI has recently embarked on efforts to encourage
PPP through the establishment of a PPP cell in the DEA, the establishment of the India
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited, the formation of an interministerial group to determine
prequalification of bidders under PPPs, and the preparation of toolkits and model concession
agreements for use by state governments and line ministries. ADB could provide more support
for reforms (particularly financial sector and regulatory reforms) and capacity development, and
identify innovative funding mechanisms that could facilitate private infrastructure investments
and financing. The public and private sides of ADB need to develop a joint operational strategy
for supporting private sector participation in infrastructure development and funding that
proposes focus areas for ADB interventions, financial and advisory assistance measures for
ADB's public sector operations, a business and marketing strategy for private sector operations
in India, and related resource requirements. The strategy should also identify options for
supporting the implementation of PPP approaches in the transport, energy, and urban
infrastructure sectors. If ADB's private sector operations ADB-wide do not grow substantially,
private sector exposure limits might not allow more lending to infrastructure projects in India,
whose funding requirements tend to be large. The Private Sector Operations Department will
have to identify ways of increasing headroom through more proactive portfolio management.
Also, with existing limits that do not distinguish between nonsovereign and true private sector
transactions, care needs to be undertaken to avoid crowding out the latter. The impact of ADB's
involvement in an innovative private infrastructure deal would be considerably more significant
than the provision of nonrecourse financing to an established utility with ready access to capital
markets. In general, ADB funding should help catalyze rather than substitute for funds from
other sources, including through the use of innovative financial structures, credit enhancements,
and loan syndication.
62


       4.      Improve the Relevance and Effectiveness of Nonlending Services

204. ADB's ESW in India has been less than effective in supporting sector operations or in
raising ADB's visibility and profile. The GOI and domestic research institutions and think tanks
do not perceive ADB to be a knowledge leader. The demand for, and relative importance of,
knowledge products within ADB's assistance program for India is likely going to increase in the
medium term. Linkages between economic and sector work and lending operations need to be
improved. Consultation with the GOI is needed to ascertain its priorities and needs in this
regard. It is likely that such work should focus on key issues in priority sectors and other
pertinent concerns including the design of sector development strategies, programs, and policy
reforms; private participation in infrastructure; and the application of PPP approaches. An ESW
plan should be incorporated in the country partnership strategy. Lead sector staff need to be
given responsibility and incentives for strategizing and exercising quality control for ESW, which
should be innovative and involve leading think tanks in India as much as possible.
205. Consultant rates and recruitment modalities need to be reviewed to facilitate the
engagement of exceptionally well-qualified international and domestic consultants in a market
environment that is characterized by rapidly increasing remuneration levels.
206. Capacity development needs to be based on long-term sector and state-based
strategies that cover the implementation of recommended policies, systems regulations, and
institutional changes and that identify related assistance requirements.
       5.      Improve Client Responsiveness

207. While most EAs felt that the INRM was generally doing a good job supporting project
implementation, a number stated that, compared with the World Bank Country Office, INRM
does not have enough delegated authority to operate as effectively and has to refer many
decisions back to headquarters. ADB should review how more decision-making powers
concerning project implementation could be delegated to INRM. The feedback on the INRM's
contributions to policy dialogue and ADB's private sector operations, and its ability to provide
lessons and practices from other countries, has been mixed. For example, INRM does not have
any international staff with power sector expertise, nor a critical mass of qualified staff to support
PPP, private sector operations, or nonrecourse lending in infrastructure. Considering the scale
of opportunities and complexities in India, an in-country presence is required to establish close
relationships with the GOI and the private sector in these areas. While delegation of additional
functions, including loan processing to INRM, is not feasible on a large scale within the current
organizational model of ADB, consideration should be given to selectively strengthening the
staff complement and capacity of INRM for conducting policy dialogue related to infrastructure
regulatory reforms, advising on PPP, and undertaking private sector operations and
nonrecourse lending. In the longer term, particularly in light of potentially significant increases in
lending volumes, consideration could be given to decentralizing more functions and resources,
and delegating more authority to INRM to enable it to function as the primary operational
interface for clients in India and to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of ADB's
operations.
208. ADB's environmental and social safeguard standards and their application have not
proven to be effective, as projects with potentially large negative impacts are not given to ADB
for financing. Arguably, from a development perspective, those are precisely the types of
projects that ADB should be involved in to help mitigate complex challenging risks. Compliance
with two sets of environmental safeguard requirements and the need to negotiate resettlement
compensation packages outside country standards have caused implementation delays and
have been a point of discontent for the GOI and private project sponsors. ADB should move
toward country systems for safeguards over time and assist in building related local capacity. It
                                                                                                 63


should consider applying country systems at the agency and state levels, where equivalence
with ADB safeguard principles and implementation capacity exists. In the meantime, ADB
should harmonize its approach to common safeguard concerns in India. Rather than attempting
to find solutions on a case-by-case basis after implementation problems have occurred, ADB
should elevate the dialogue with the GOI on these issues to higher levels of system and policy
improvements.
209. There is scope and need for ADB to take on board a number of the GOI's suggestions
for improving its effectiveness, and ADB in recent years has already started to do so. At the
same time, the strength of the partnership and the success of the programs and projects that
ADB finances in India depend on the role played by both partners. ADB's reticence in offering
policy inputs with its assistance is essentially a result of perceived or real resistance of the GOI
to external policy advice in the past. The GOI could help ADB to be more proactive in this matter
by spelling out its needs and being more receptive to policy inputs provided by ADB. India can
make a considerable contribution to taking the partnership to its next higher level and making it
more beneficial to both the parties. Along with ADB, India needs to consider changes in its
systems and procedures that would help in addressing the problem of implementation delays.
This should help improve project management in the country as a whole, since the non-assisted
projects of the GOI reportedly face even longer delays. With regard to problems faced in
meeting the safeguard requirements of ADB, India could consider whether the relevant national
systems and practices have kept pace with the progress it has made in social and economic
fields since many of these were put in place. A look at the best practices among regional and
nonregional developing countries or other states within India might be useful in identifying the
needed changes to subject systems and practices. With India's growing importance in the
region, it could also consider contributing more to ADB's regional cooperation efforts, for
example by sharing its experience in information and communication technology development
and other fields for the benefit of other DMCs.
64     Appendix 1



                      EVALUATION APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY

A.     Evaluation Approach

1.       Preparation of this country assistance program evaluation (CAPE) is based on the Asian
Development Bank's (ADB) Guidelines for the Preparation of Country Assistance Program
Evaluation Reports, which combine sector assessments with institutional assessments. The
sector assessments use the standard evaluation criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability, and impact. In assessing effectiveness, the focus is on outcomes, as these, by
definition, are the development results that are largely attributable to ADB's inputs. In terms of
impacts, the discussion is on ADB's contribution to sector-level results rather than attribution, as
usually many other players are involved in their achievement. The institutional assessment
takes a broader view of performance covering the positioning of ADB's assistance (were the
right choices made on resource allocation?), the overall contribution of ADB's assistance effort
to national development results, and the quality and responsiveness of ADB's services (were
things done right?). See Figure A1.1 for the methodological framework for the assessment.

2.      The CAPE was carried out through a combination of desk studies at ADB headquarters
and field visits to India. The evaluation team undertook
        (i)      desk reviews of ADB documents, working papers, and research; relevant studies
                 on India undertaken by national and international research institutions and other
                 development partners, including their evaluation entities; and relevant data and
                 information found on the Internet;
        (ii)     in-country consultations with representatives of government, regulatory agencies,
                 nongovernment organizations (NGOs), relevant research institutions, the private
                 sector, and development partners operating in India;
        (iii)    a structured survey of executing and implementing agencies of ADB projects in
                 India; and
        (iv)     interviews with relevant ADB staff involved in India operations.

3.      The CAPE's assessment of sector operations is based on two full-fledged sector
assistance program evaluations (SAPEs) of the energy and transport sectors, which accounted
for 65% of ADB's total lending to India during the CAPE period; the Operations Evaluation
Mission's (OEM) review of ADB's urban development and financial sector operations; a special
evaluation study (SES) on public sector resource management assistance in India; and country
findings obtained in conjunction with the Operations Evaluation Department's (OED) evaluation
of technical assistance (TA) effectiveness. OED's country studies for its assessments of ADB's
social and environmental safeguard policies provided inputs for the CAPE's discussion on
safeguard issues. OED's country study for its SES on private sector operations helped assess
the development effectiveness of recent private sector operations and ADB's contributions to
private sector development.

4.     CAPE stakeholder consultations with the Government of India (GOI) and relevant NGOs
focused on ADB's general strategic direction and choices, as well as generic issues. At the
beneficiary level, feedback was obtained for selected urban infrastructure projects during the
CAPE process. For other sectors, the CAPE draws on consultations and impact assessments
that were conducted with nongovernment stakeholders and beneficiaries in conjunction with
other OED evaluations in India, particularly the transport and energy SAPEs. For the road
subsector, focus group discussions were conducted with roadside villagers during the field visits
of the evaluation teams to selected road projects, and a socioeconomic (impact) study was
                                                 Figure A1.1: Assessment Framework a


                                                        Development Effectiveness of
                                                            Thematic Assistance

                                                           -       Capacity development
                                                           -       Environmental protection                                       Exogenous
                                                           -       Private sector                                                  Factors
                                                                   development


       ADB                                                                                                                        Results of the
    Corporate                                                                                                                    Interventions of
    Strategies                                                                                       ADB's                        Development
                                                                                                     Contribution to                 Partners
                      Positioning of             Development Effectiveness of ADB Sector             Development
Strategies of         ADB's                                    Assistance                            Results
Development           Assistance
  Partners                                                                                                              Country's
                                                               ·    Relevance                    ·    Impact on        Development
                      ·   Relevance                            ·    Effectiveness                     economic and       Results
                          and
                                                               ·    Efficiency                        social
                          alignment
                                                               ·    Sustainability                    development
 Government           ·   Selectivity                                                                 and
                                                               ·    Sector Impact
Strategies and        ·   Sequencing                                                                  governance
     Plans                and                                                                    ·    Value addition               Results of
                          continuity                                                                                             Government
                                                                                                                                 Interventions
   Country                                                     ADB's Performance
Development
 Issues and                                        ·   Responsiveness                                                              Results of
 Challenges                                                                                                                      Private Sector
                                                   ·   Suitability and application of ADB
                                                       policies, business processes, products,                                     and NGO
                                                       and instruments                                                              Activities
                                                   ·




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 1
                                                       Resource management
                                                   ·   Portfolio management




a
    Shaded areas are addressed by the CAPE.




                                                                                                                                                    65
ADB = Asian Development Bank, NGO = nongovernment organization.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.
66      Appendix 1


undertaken of roads and highways projects in selected parts of Gujarat and Maharashtra, and of
state highways and rural road projects in Madhya Pradesh. For the power subsector, consumer
surveys were conducted in Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Assam. Private sector and other
relevant nongovernment stakeholders such as (potential) project financiers, domestic consulting
firms, investment boards, and sector research institutions were also consulted during the
transport, energy, and private sector operations evaluations. Focus group discussions were also
held in conjunction with OED's country studies for its assessments of ADB's social and
environmental safeguard policies.

B.     Limitations

5.     In India, ADB support represents less than 0.5% of annual investment requirements and
less than 5% of aggregate net resource flows from all sources. While the CAPE considers the
relevance and effectiveness of government development strategies and approaches to help
assess the development effectiveness of ADB-financed investments, the OEM did not evaluate or
rate government strategies and programs. Rather, ADB's operations in India are assessed within
the context of GOI strategic priorities, policies, and institutional framework and practices at the
country and sector levels.

6.       A large percentage of ADB-funded projects in India over the past 20 years have only
recently been completed or are still ongoing. This poses two challenges: (i) not many project
completion reports or project performance assessment/evaluation reports are available as inputs
for the CAPE, and project assessments rely largely on rapid assessments of project effectiveness;
and (ii) project efficiency, sustainability, and impact are difficult to determine, and ratings in these
areas for ongoing projects should be seen only as indicative.

7.      Preparation of the CAPE was somewhat affected by the near absence of nonproject-
related documents and communications on file pertaining to the preparation of country strategies
and programs in India between 1986 and 2002. For some aspects of the review, the OEM had to
rely mainly on the memory of (former) ADB and GOI staff involved in this process.

C.     Performance Ratings

8.      The CAPE performance rating comprises ratings for the development effectiveness of
sector operations with ratings for ADB country positioning and strategy, the contributions of ADB
programs to development results, and ADB performance. Top-down ratings are based on a range
of criteria within these areas: ADB country positioning and strategy (alignment with government
and corporate strategies, sequencing and continuity, and selectivity), contributions to
development results (contributions to Poverty Reduction Strategy pillars and themes, and value
addition), and ADB performance (responsiveness; resource management; suitability of ADB
policies, business processes, products, and instruments; and portfolio management).

9.       Weightings for the standard rating criteria used in calculating sector-level performance
differ, depending on the characteristics of the sector portfolio.

10.    Performance scores for the two key sectors of ADB operations (i.e., transport and energy)
are weighted with a factor of 2, whereas the public resource management; finance; and urban
development sectors are weighted with a factor of 1 each (see Figure A1.2). For the transport and
energy sectors, the SAPE ratings are adopted. For the finance and law, economic management,
and public policy sectors, sector ratings are derived from an analysis of available project
performance evaluation reports, project completion reports, and TA completion reports, and from
                                                                                                        Appendix 1   67

consultant studies conducted under the CAPE. As a number of multisector projects, and water
supply projects relate to urban development, the related portfolio is assessed as a "sector" based
on relevant OED studies including a project performance evaluation report and project
assessments undertaken by the CAPE consultants.

                Figure A1.2: Percentage Breakdown of CAPE Rating Criteria


                                     Strategy and Country Level Performance Rating
                                                   ADB's contribution
                                                to Development Results
                                                        16.7%
                                                                             ADB's Performance
                                                                                   16.7%
                    ADB Strategic Policy
                          16.7%




                                                                             Urban Development
                                                                                    7%


              Transport & Communications                                    Pubic Resource Management
                         14.3%                                                          7%

                                                                  Finance
                                                                    7%
                                                Energy
                                                14.3%


                                           Sector Level Performance Rating

          ADB = Asian Development Bank.
          Source: Country Assistance Program Evaluation team.
68              Appendix 2


            GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES AND STRATEGIES, AND KEY
                        DEVELOPMENT ISSUES AND TRENDS

A.         Development Strategies and Priorities of Indian Governments

           1.        Interventionist Development Model during the 1980s

1.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB) started providing assistance to India in 1986, when
the country was undergoing substantial changes in its approach to economic development. Prior
to the 1980s, a central part of the Government's strategy was the creation and enforcement of a
highly regulated economic system covering all aspects of the economy including trade. A
planned economy was seen as necessary for achieving India's ambitious development goals
while protecting national interests. Core industries were the domain of the Government, and
other industries were heavily regulated with regard to size, operations, and employment.
Agriculture and small-scale industrial production were highly subsidized, and the nationalized
banking system provided financing for these and other priority sectors. By the early 1980s the
highly controlled economy had achieved self-sufficiency (including self-sufficiency in food). A
broad-based, diversified, and fairly advanced industry sector provided most consumer and
many capital goods. Tight import and foreign exchange controls protected domestic industries,
and restrictions on investment insulated much of the Indian economy from global developments.
Lack of competition and exposure to market forces resulted in an inefficient, high-cost, capital-
intensive industrial structure, which generated comparatively little employment. In the three
decades before 1980, gross domestic product (GDP) growth rates averaged 3.5% per annum,
and per capita growth rates were 1% per annum. By the early 1980s, over 45% of the people
were still living in poverty.
2.      The 6th Five Year Plan (FYP) (1980-1985) sought to increase industrial productivity and
growth through infrastructure investments and a relaxation of regulatory controls. The pace of
reform accelerated in the mid­1980s following the 7th FYP (1985-1990), which sought to
develop a modern, technologically progressive economy by removing infrastructure bottlenecks,
easing licensing requirements, reducing government involvement in commodities pricing,
moderating restrictions on intermediate and capital goods imports, and encouraging greater
private sector participation in the economy. It was hoped that accelerating economic growth
would create both additional employment and the fiscal space for social development1 to reduce
poverty. Although there was limited progress in deregulating the economy and opening up the
manufacturing sector to more competition and private sector participation, annual growth rates
rose to over 5% on average between 1986 and 1990, spurred by relatively high public
investment levels (see Table A4.1). The Government of India (GOI) was using various funding
options to finance its investment program, including borrowing from ADB. Higher growth
combined with social transfer payments helped reduce poverty. However, high levels of public
borrowing (both domestic and foreign) resulted in increasingly unsustainable fiscal deficits.
Selective trade liberalization and domestic demand pressures led to high import growth that was
not matched by export growth. As a result, during 1991 the country's balance of payments
rapidly deteriorated to the point of crisis.

           2.        Private Sector Orientation and Reforms in the Early 1990s

3.    The 1991 macroeconomic (fiscal and balance-of-payments) crisis and the growing
awareness on the part of many government officials and political leaders in India of the need to


1
    The attainment of universal elementary education and provision of access to health facilities for all.
                                                                                               Appendix 2      69

adopt a different model for economic management2 led to a new development strategy, which
was introduced in the 8th FYP (1992-97) and continued into the 9th FYP (1997-2002).
Macroeconomic measures, combined with far­reaching structural reforms, either eliminated or
reduced many of the industrial and trade regulatory restrictions. Large parts of the economy
were gradually opened up to the private sector, the role of the public sector in industry was
significantly reduced, and India became more integrated into the global economy.3
4.      To help reduce the fiscal deficit, the FYPs emphasized the importance of reducing the
role of Government and making it more efficient through economic and public sector
management reforms. As transfer payments to the states accounted for a large share of the
overall fiscal budget, the 8th FYP encouraged states to become more fiscally responsible. Fiscal
requirements also provided impetus for infrastructure reforms, most notably in the power sector,
where inefficiencies and policy distortions had contributed substantially to state fiscal problems.
Faced with a growing need for roads, bridges, airports, and reliable power supply, the 9th FYP
significantly increased public investment in transport, and promoted public-private partnerships
and improvements in the enabling environment for private sector participation in infrastructure
investments and management, particularly in energy.
5.      The private sector took over from the public sector as the engine of growth. The removal
of price controls and reforms in the financial sector led to a more market-based allocation of
economic resources. Private savings and investment increased. Growth rates accelerated,
averaging over 6% per annum between 1992 and 2002 and well over 8% per annum during
2002­2006. Recently (from March 2006 to March 2007), the economy grew by 9.2%. Services4
increased to account for 48% of GDP and have been the main driver of growth, with rates
averaging 9% per annum over the 1990s and 11% per annum over the last 3 years. Recent high
growth in manufacturing (11.3% in 2005/2006) indicates that India's growth is deepening
beyond services. However, both the manufacturing and the formal service sectors are
comparatively capital intensive and have not created much­needed employment opportunities
for large parts of the population.

        3.       Growth with Equity

6.      Over the 9th FYP period, measures were initiated to develop long-term institutional
structures and increase funding for the provision of infrastructure to combat rural poverty. Social
services delivery was improved through more efficient use of available resources and better
targeting of subsidies for the poor. Together with strong economic growth, these measures led
to reductions in the overall level of income poverty to 26% of the population by 1999/2000 and
to improvements in social indicators (see Table A4.2).
7.      The 10th FYP (2002­2007) promotes human development as one of its four basic
themes (the others being high growth, equitable growth, and reforms) and emphasizes the
importance of reducing both "income poverty" and "human poverty" to help India meet the
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets by 2015. In expectation of greater private
investment, the 9th FYP had included a sharp reduction in plan allocation in proportion to the
total plan outlay for public investment in power. The not-so-encouraging response from private
investors led to a substantial increase in plan allocation for the sector in the 10th FYP. The mid­
term appraisal of the 10th FYP pointed to the need to upgrade infrastructure facilities and to

2
   The success of the market-based, export-oriented development models pursued by other Asian countries
   contributed to this policy change.
3
  The opening up of the economy has brought large increases in foreign trade in both goods and services, including
   financial services, and India has experienced substantial growth in private investment.
4
  Information technology, business process outsourcing, telecommunications, and financial services among others.
70         Appendix 2


refocus on agriculture and rural development to bring about broad-based growth and create
employment opportunities.

B.         Key Development Issues and Challenges

8.       Despite the benefits that India is reaping from the reforms made in the 1990s, the
economy is currently displaying signs of overheating as demand outstrips supply. These are
critical infrastructure deficits; fiscal deficits; skill shortages; and declining growth and stagnant
productivity in agriculture,5 which remains overregulated, with distorted production and
marketing incentives and the inability of the poor to capitalize on their assets, including land.
Questions remain as to whether the high growth economy is sustainable without ensuring
broad-based participation in growth, further reforms, and fiscal prudence to maintain or increase
the high investment needed, particularly in infrastructure.
9.      While a significant reduction in the overall level of poverty took place between
1983/1984 and 2004/2005 --from 45% of the population to 28%6--poverty has not declined to
the same extent recently. World Bank and ADB estimates using a $1-a-day poverty line show a
decline of only 8.5% in headcount ratio from 43.5% in 1990 to 35% in 2005, which would imply
an increase in the number of poor from 374 million to 397.6 million over the same period. The
evidence suggests that economic growth has not led to enough job creation to reduce poverty
either in urban or many of the rural areas, where the majority of India's poor live. There is
growing concern about the increasing disparities between rural and urban areas. Although
enrollment and retention in primary education and access to improved water sources have
increased, it is unclear whether India will reach all of its MDGs for 2015, particularly those
related to child and infant mortality and to gender equality in tertiary education (see Table A4.3).
10.     Although economic and political decentralization has brought opportunities, it has also
widened gaps across states (and within states). Less developed states such as Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, and Uttar Pradesh are increasingly lagging
behind states with more attractive investment climates. These less developed states (as well as
backward areas of fast-growing states) have rapidly growing, less educated populations more
suited to agriculture and unskilled labor-intensive manufacturing than to the advanced skill-
intensive, high-wage economies of the more developed states. Agriculture sector reforms and
improvements in infrastructure and business conditions will be needed to attract investments in
agriculture and in labor­intensive manufacturing and agroprocessing industries that can absorb
large pools of underemployed, low-cost labor.
11.     To maintain high growth, India needs considerable investment in infrastructure. The
country's infrastructure needs for the next 5 years (assuming annual GDP growth rates of 9%)
are estimated by the Planning Commission at $364 billion. A government-appointed panel
recently revised these estimated requirements upward to $475 billion (or 8% of GDP over to 11th
plan period). This compares with investment levels of 3.3% to 4.6% of GDP during the last
decade. Fiscal constraints dictate that at least 30% of the required investment will have to come
from the private sector. After some initial enthusiasm generated by early reforms, private sector
investment in infrastructure has stayed far below GOI expectations. The reasons for limited
private sector investment in infrastructure include the lack of a conducive regulatory and legal
environment that would help mitigate risk, land acquisition issues, and political uncertainties.


5
    Agriculture, which employs 57% of the total labor force, grew by an average of 2.9% annually between 1986 and
    2005 but declined to 2.3% growth from 2000 to 2005. Its share in GDP has fallen to under 20% from 36% in 1986.
6
    Preliminary estimates from the National Sample Survey large sample survey conducted in 2004/2005 using the
    national poverty definition.
                                                                                                  Appendix 3      71

          ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK COUNTRY STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS

A.       Evolution of ADB's Country Strategies

         1.       1986 and 1990 Strategies: Accelerating Industrialization and Removing
                   Infrastructure Bottlenecks

1.      The first two Asian Development Bank (ADB) country operational strategies (COSs),
approved in 1986 and 1990, supported the Government of India's (GOI) strategic thrust of
developing a modern, technologically progressive economy. The first COS sought to promote
industrialization by financing (i) private investments in industrial enterprises, either under loans
to development finance institutions or transactions under ADB's private sector window; and (ii)
infrastructure, particularly power, transport (state roads, highways, ports, and railways), and
telecommunications development. While the strategy recommended close monitoring of policy
measures taken after 1985 to accelerate industrial growth, no explicit link between ADB's
lending and policy or institutional reform was recommended. As ADB learned more about the
sectors and their issues, country operational programs in 1988, 1989, and 1990 suggested that
sector or project-related policy issues be subject to dialogue with the GOI. The second COS
(1990) further supported assistance to industry and associated infrastructure sectors. In the
transport sector, assistance was to be targeted at developing national highway systems,
improving the operational efficiency and modernization of port facilities, facilitating the
modernization of selected highly used freight railway routes, and modernizing and expanding
the telecommunications network. In the energy sector, ADB assistance was to help increase
power generation capacity and system efficiency, with assistance targeted at state and central
government entities showing commitment to reforms, especially tariff reform.
2.      The 1990 COS remarked on increasing macroeconomic instability and structural
problems, and recommended that ADB enter into a policy dialogue with the GOI, particularly
with regard to the need to abolish directed credit and administered interest rates. In response to
1991 structural reforms, ADB's country programs included support for the GOI's reform efforts.
3.     The 1990 COS noted the unavailability of Asian Development Fund (ADF) resources to
India, which effectively precluded ADB assistance to the agriculture and social sectors.1 It
recommended that the strategy be refined to include assistance for agriculture and social
development should ADF funds become available.

         2.       1996 Strategy: Emphasis on Policy-Based Lending

4.      The third COS (1996) supported the GOI's economic and structural reform agenda
through programs to alleviate infrastructure constraints by assisting in the development of
effective policy, regulatory, and institutional frameworks encouraging public and private sector
investment and domestic resource mobilization though financial sector reforms.
5.            ADB's operational focus shifted from assistance for national-level development
programs to support for the states in recognition of their important role in deepening the reform
process2 and the macroeconomic need for improving their fiscal position and reducing transfer
payments from the center.3 The shift to state level-operations was to (i) help ADB maximize its
development impact through more geographic focus and through demonstration effects of well-

1
  The GOI did not encourage the use of ordinary capital resources funds for nonrevenue­generating projects.
2
  States have considerable autonomy and have major legislative, administrative, and fiscal responsibilities in many of
   the economic and social sectors.
3
  The weak fiscal position of most states accounted for around one third of the consolidated fiscal deficit in 1996.
72      Appendix 3


conceived pilot projects; and (ii) provide impetus for state-level economic reforms, which had
been lagging behind national initiatives.
6.      The strategy promoted social development objectives through support for urban
infrastructure and housing finance.
       3.      2003 Strategy: Mainstreaming Poverty Reduction Objectives

7.      The 2003 Country Strategy and Program (CSP) drew on all three pillars of the 1999
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), although not every pillar was given equal weight. As
previous strategies had done, the CSP focused on support for infrastructure-led growth,
although it built in new priorities to facilitate more equitable growth by introducing assistance to
agriculture and rural development. Infrastructure development was to be assisted through
investments in publicly provided infrastructure such as upgrading/rehabilitating road systems,
water transport, railways, hydrocarbons, and power, where investment was to be directed
towards removing key bottlenecks where private investment was not forthcoming. At the same
time, the strategy sought to help create an environment for public-private partnerships in
infrastructure. The development effectiveness of physical investments was to be enhanced
through related support for policy reforms and capacity building.
8.     The 2003 CSP supported the second PRS pillar, inclusive social development, mainly
through urban social infrastructure projects that could help enhance public health by improving
potable water supply, sanitation, and sewerage.
9.     Improved governance, the third pillar, was to be met through support for (i) fiscal
consolidation at the central government level; (ii) sector-level policy reforms combined with
capacity building for better service delivery; (iii) state-level fiscal policy reforms combined with
interventions to strengthen state and local governments to ensure greater accountability,
transparency, and efficiency in service delivery, especially for pro-poor services; and (iv) core
governance interventions such as reform in the administration of justice.
10.     Another innovation in the 2003 CSP was the extension of ADB's state-level operations to
some of the poorer states, especially in the remote northeastern region, to help contain growing
interregional disparities.
B.     Evolution of Country Assistance Programs

       1.      Lending

11.     From the beginning of ADB assistance to India in 1986 to the end of 2006, 89 public
sector loans amounting to $16.2 billion were approved. Annual lending to India averaged around
$600 million through the 1990s, increasing to an average of around $1.2 billion between 2000
and 2006. Sharp reductions in lending occurred during 1993/94 due to the need to consolidate
operations in light of significant implementation delays; during 1998 as a result of nuclear testing
sanctions; and during 2005, when the GOI was reluctant to negotiate loans that it believed not
to be ready for implementation. Total lending amounted to $5,789 million (31 loans) over the
period 1986­1995, $6.2 billion (40 loans) in 1996­2002, and $4.3 billion (17 loans) in 2003­
2006 (see Table A5.1 for a list of loan projects in India). As a share of total ADB lending to its
developing member countries, the India program was stable at 15% during 1986­1995 and over
the next strategy period, but increased to 19% from 2003 to 2006. For the last 10 years, India
has been ADB's second largest borrower after the People's Republic of China.
                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 3     73

12.     Despite the different strategic objectives of the various country strategies, ADB's actual
lending operations have consistently been concentrated in the infrastructure sectors. Projects in
the transport and energy sectors accounted for over 60% of ADB's approved lending from 1986
to 2006. Nevertheless, lending programs to a large degree reflected the basic operational
thrusts of the country strategies, while responding to emerging country needs and ADB's
corporate concerns.
13.    Although the 1986 and 1990 COSs prioritized support for the industrialization of India's
economy, direct assistance for industry and trade sector projects represented only 1.7% of
ADB's total financial assistance to the country (see Figure A3.1). The majority of ADB loans
prior to 1996 financed investments in the energy sector and in the transport and
telecommunications sector, 48.2% and 32.4% respectively of the approved lending during the
period. In the aftermath of the 1991 economic crisis in India, the share of financial sector
assistance increased through policy-based lending to support banking and capital market
reforms (see Figures A3.2 and A3.3).

          in $ m illio n
                                                      Figure A3.1: Total Lending, 1986-2006                                                                                 in N o .

          1,600                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                       1,500.0
                                                                                                                                                     1,430.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     9
          1,400                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                                                                                           1,260.0
                                                                                                                                                             1,200.0                 8
                                                                                                                                               1,163.6
          1,200                                                                                                                  1,150.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                 982.0                                                                     7
          1,000
                                                         892.0                                                                                                                       6
                                                                         817.7                    6        6                                     6       6
            800                                                                                                          5                                                           5
                                                 699.0
                                                                                         630.0                           625.0                                 5
                                                                                                 600.0                                                                               4
            600                                                                                          563.0
                                   493.0 498.0    4       4       4        4              4                                                                            3     3
                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                           377.6                                                                                                                                   367.3
            400                     3     3
                   250.0    3                                                                                    250.0                                                               2
            200      2                                                           150.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                  1                                1
               0                                                                                                                                                                     0
                   1986    1987 1988 1989 1990           1991 1992 1993 1994             1995 1996       1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

                                                                                      Loan Value                  No. of Loans

          Source: Asian Development Bank database.


14.     While the overall share of infrastructure-related lending in total ADB lending to the
country remained at about 80%, the third COS period from 1996 to 2002 saw a shift within
ADB's infrastructure portfolio in India. Financial intermediation loans for private infrastructure
projects and urban infrastructure investments accounted for 30% of total ADB lending, whereas
the shares of lending for public sector transport and energy projects were reduced to 27% and
22%, respectively. ADB's strategic shift to state­level operations was reflected in the growing
number of state-level sector development programs, which were preceded by public sector
management programs for state governments promoting state level resource mobilization,
improved fiscal management, the restructuring of the state-level public enterprises, and the
creation of an enabling environment for private sector participation in infrastructure. Public
sector resource management programs accounted for 11% of ADB's lending during the third
COS period.
74   Appendix 3




                     Figure A3.2: Lending by Sectoral Allocation, 1986-2006 (% )
         100%                    1.8
                                1.7                        14.1                            11.8
          90%
                               15.9
                                                                                           8.2
          80%                                                                              1.1
                                                           16.1                            3.5
          70%
                                                           11.3                            23.5
          60%
                               48.2                         9.7
          50%


          40%                                                                              15.3
                                                            21.8

          30%


          20%
                                                                                           36.6
                               32.4
                                                           27.0
          10%


           0%
                           1986-1995                    1996-2002                       2003-2006
                   Transportation and Com munications        Energy
                   Finance                                    Industry and Trade
                   Public Resource Managem ent                Agriculture and Natural Resources
                   Multisector                                Urban Development

       Source: Asian Development Bank database


                       Figure A3.3: Lending by Sectoral Allocation, 1986-2006
          7,000
                                             ($ million)



          6,000
                               10 5. 0
                               -                          875.0
                              100.0

                               920.0
          5,000
                                                         1,000.0



          4,000                                           700.0                         501.2

                                                                                        380.0
                                                          600.0                         150.0
                              2,789.0
          3,000
                                                                                       1,000.0
                                                         1,350.0
          2,000
                                                                                        650.0


          1,000               1,875.3
                                                         1,669.6                       1,560.0



             0
                             1986-1995                  1996-2002                     2003-2006
                  Trans portation and Com m unication              Energy
                  Finance                                          Indus try and Trade
                  Public Res ource Managem ent                     Agriculture and Natural Res ources
                  Multis ector                                     Urban Developm ent

          Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                           Appendix 3        75

15.    During 1998 and 1999 and in the aftermath of the 1998 nuclear testing sanctions, the
ADB Board approved only projects in India with clear social development objectives. As a result,
low-income housing finance and urban infrastructure projects, which mostly combined water
and sanitation with social infrastructure and community empowerment project components,
accounted for 10% and 14%, respectively, of ADB's lending from 1996 to 2002.
16.      During 2003­2006, infrastructure lending declined slightly to 72% of total lending to
India. Transport sector projects, involving mainly national highway system improvements and
the construction of state and rural roads, accounted for the bulk (37%) of ADB's new lending
during the period. Energy sector lending was reduced compared with earlier program periods,
mainly due to anticipated increases in private sector involvement in the sector, particularly in
power generation. The program also included ADB's first investment in irrigation infrastructure in
India, although at only 1% of total lending this assistance was not substantial. ADB's strategic
shift, in line with the GOI's social equity and justice agenda, resulted in a sharp increase in
projects targeted at rural development (including the 2006 Rural Cooperative Credit
Restructuring and Development Program in the amount of $1 billion), which together accounted
for 38% of total lending over this period.
17.     There were some substantial differences between the 2003 COS and the actual lending
program. Programmed subregional assistance for inland waterways and clean fuel (gas)
projects was cancelled at the request of the Government due to the non-availability of ADF
funds4 and to access to private sector funds, respectively, as was planned support for energy
efficiency projects, capital market development, and small- and medium-sized enterprise (SME)
development, the latter due to disagreements about appropriate lending modalities. Multisector
emergency assistance for earthquake rehabilitation measures in Jammu and Kashmir, and the
tsunami-related reconstruction efforts were added to the program.

          2.       Technical Assistance

18.    A total of 239 technical assistance (TA) grants in the amount of $147.4 million were
approved for India between 1986 and 2006. TA volumes substantially increased over that period
(see Table A3.1).
                         Table A3.1: Technical Assistance to India 1986-2006
                       No.       Total Value      Average Annual TA         TA/Lending         Share in ADB-
      Period                      ($ million)           Amount               Ratio (%)         wide TA (% of
                                                      ($ million )                              total value)
    1986-1995           74            28.7               2.87                      0.5                3.1
    1996-2002          100            56.3               8.00                      0.9                4.9
    2003-2006           55            62.4               15.6                      1.5                7.7
ADB = Asian Development Bank, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.

19.     Sector allocations for TA have been comparatively close to lending allocations (see
Figure A3.4). Differences reflect mainly the (i) high share of loan projects in sectors like energy
and finance, which are usually prepared without project preparatory technical assistance
(PPTA); (ii) comparatively small amount of advisory technical assistance (ADTA) for the
transport sector; (iii) comparatively high demand for external advisory services in the fiscal and
public sector management reform area; and (iv) allocation of ADTA to the agriculture and
natural resources sector, particularly for environmental management (see Figures A3.5 to A3.8).


4
    As Bangladesh would have benefited from the inland waterways project, India expected the availability of ADF
    funds for this regional cooperation effort.
76   Appendix 3




                  Figure A3.4: Technical Assistance, by Sector Allocation, 1986-2006
                                              (in $'000)
           64,000

           60,000
           56,000                                       800.0                         13 ,5 6 0
                                                        4 ,3 0 0
           52,000
                                                        3 ,3 0 0
           48,000                                                                     3 ,8 9 5
                                                        4,570
           44,000
           40,000                                                                     8,700
                                                        10 ,8 4 5
           36,000
                                                          40
           32,000                                                                     10 ,4 7 0

           28,000             2 ,3 0 0
                                                        7,055
                              1,3 0 0                                                 1,300
           24,000             1,7 8 6
                              1,782                                                   7,150
           20,000             1,098                     11,190
           16,000             7,968
           12,000                                                                      6,880
                                                        14,163
            8,000            11,970                                                   10,488
            4,000
                           1986-1995                  1996-2002                     2003-2006

               Transportation and Communications          Energy
               Finance                                    Industry and Trade
               Law, Economic Management, and Policy       Agricultural and Natural Resources
               Multisector                                Urban Development
               Health and Nutrition

          Source: Asian Development Bank database.



                       Figure A3.5: PPTA, by Sector Allocation, 1986-2006
                                           (in $'000)
            37,000


            33,000
                                                                                        6,860

            29,000
                                                                                        1,895
            25,000
                                                                                        6,200
            21,000

                                                                                        3,050
            17,000
                                                                                        1,300
                                                                                        2,850
            13,000                                        3,200
                                                           -
                                                           505
                                                                                         3,680
             9,000                                         2,900

                                1,200
                                 --
                                1,097
             5,000               -                                                      9,188
                                1,704                     7,650
                                3,365
             1,000
                             1986-1995                 1996-2002                     2003-2006

              Trans portation and Com m unications             Energy
              Finance                                          Indus try and Trade
              Law, Econom ic Managem ent, and Policy           Agriculture and Natural Res ources
              Multis ector                                     Urban Developm ent

          PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
          Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                         Appendix 3   77


             Figure A3.6: ADTA, by Sector Allocation, 1986-2006
                                 (in $'000)
  42,500
                                               800.0
                                               1,10 0
  39,500
                                               3 ,3 0 0
  36,500
                                               4,570
  33,500

  30,500

  27,500                                      10 ,8 4 5

  24,500                                                                     6 ,7 0 0

  21,500                                         40
                     1,10 0
                    1,3 0 0                                                  2 ,0 0 0
  18,500             500                       6,550
                    1,7 8 6                                                  2 ,5 0 0
                     685
  15,500            1,098

  12,500                                                                     7 ,4 2 0
                   6,264                       8,290
   9,500                                                                      -
   6,500                                                                     4,300
                    8,605
   3,500                                       6,513
                                                                             3,200
       500                                                                   1,300
                  1986-1995                  1996-2002                     2003-2006
    Trans portation and Communications             Energy
    Finance                                        Industry and Trade
    Law, Economic Managem ent, and Policy          Agriculture and Natural Resources
    Multis ector                                   Urban Development
    Health and Nutrition

ADTA = advistory technical assistance
Source: Asian Development Bank database.



             Figure A3.7: PPTA Sector Allocation, 1986-2006
100%

                 16.3                                                             19.6
 90%                                          22.4

 80%
                 14.9                                                             5.4
                                               3.5
 70%
                                                                                  17.7
                                              20.3
 60%
                 23.1
                                                                                  8.7
 50%
                                                                                  3.7
 40%                                                                              8.1


 30%                                                                              10.5
                                              53.7
                 45.7
 20%
                                                                                  26.2
 10%

  0%
               1986-1995                    1996-2002                       2003-2006

   Trans portation and Com m unications              Energy
   Finance                                           Indus try and Trade
   Law, Econom ic Managem ent, and Policy            Agriculture and Natural Res ources
   Multis ector                                      Urban Developm ent

PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
78          Appendix 3



                             Figure A3.8: ADTA Sector Allocation, 1986-2006
                100%                                         2.6
                                  5.2
                                                             7.9
                                  2.3                                                        24.4
                                 -                           10.9
                                  8.4
                 80%
                                                             1. 9
                                  3.2
                                  5.1                                                         7.3

                                                             25.8                             9.1
                 60%                                                                         -
                                 29.4
                                                             0.1
                                                                                             27.1
                                                             15.6
                 40%



                                                             19.7                            15.7
                 20%             40.3

                                                                                             11.7
                                                             15.5
                                                                                              4.7
                  0%
                               1986-1995                  1996-2002                        2003-2006

                    Transportation and Comm unications              Energy
                    Finance                                         Indus try and Trade
                    Law, Econom ic Managem ent, and Policy          Health and Nutrition
                    Agriculture and Natural Res ources              Multis ector
                    Urban Developm ent

                 ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
                 Source: Asian Development Bank database.


20.     Accounting for a quarter of total TA provided to India, the share of PPTA was
comparatively low during the program periods 1986­1995 and 1996­2002. The PPTA share
increased to 56%5 during the recent program period, which compared with an ADB average of
36%. Initially, the GOI did not wish to use ADB's PPTA resources. During the first 10 years of
ADB operations in India, only 23% of loan projects were prepared through TA. This was partly
due to the fact that part of the TA amount had to be repaid if a loan ensued. The GOI was not
prepared to pay for TA. Also, during the 1980s and early 1990s, most of the ADB-financed
infrastructure projects were in subsectors (ports, railways, telecommunications, power
generation, power transmission, and gas sector development) in which central ministries and
agencies were deemed to have sufficient capacity for preparing feasibility studies, engineering
designs, and tender documents and for supervising project implementation. With ADB's
operational shift to state-level assistance, the share of projects prepared with PPTA increased
to 69% for projects approved during 1996­2002 and to 82% for projects approved during 2003­
2006 (see Table A3.2). The share of PPTA is particularly low for industry, finance, and
multisector projects due to the fact that most were financial intermediation-type loans or
emergency loans. For the energy sector, significantly more ADTA than PPTA was provided in
recent years, reflecting the increasingly policy-based nature of lending to the sector and the
need for assistance in implementing complex reform programs.




5
    This increase is mainly due to the United Kingdom's Department for International Development-funded 2006 TA
    Cluster for Project Processing and Capacity Development for $15 million, which is classified as PPTA and is being
    used mainly for preparing investment proposals, rather than directly for capacity development. As of March 2007,
    only 13% of TA proceeds were earmarked for capacity development activities.
                                                                                                    Appendix 3            79

                                Table A3.2: Share of Projects prepared with PPTA
                                                                                   a                    b
                                                1986-1995             1996-2002             2003-2006
                                                     Projects               Projects              Projects        Projects
                                             No. of    with         No. of    with        No. of    with         with PPTA
                  Sector                    Projects PPTA          Projects PPTA         Projects  PPTA             (%)
Transport                                      10       4             8       5            6        6                63
Energy                                         13       2             6       4            3        2                36
Finance                                         5       0             2       2            1        1                38
Industry and Trade                              1       0             0       0            0        0                  0
Law, Economic Management, and Policy            0       0             3       3            1        1               100
Agriculture and Natural Resources               0       0             0       0            1        1               100
Multisector                                     0       0             3       0            2        1                20
Urban Development                               1       1             4       4            3        2                88
           Total                               30       7            26      18           17       14                53
Share of Projects prepared
    with PPTA                                          23%                   69%                    82%
PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
a
  Including ADTA projects that helped prepare the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh Power SDPs, the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh
Public Sector Resource Management programs, and the Kerala Fiscal Reform Program.
b
  Including Uttaranchal Power Sector and Uttaranchal State Road Investment Project 1, approved 2 Jan 2007.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.


      21.    The share of lending-related TA (i.e., PPTA and capacity development associated with
      the implementation of loan projects) increased from 60% of total TA during 1986­1995 to 67%
      during 1996­2002, and to 79% during 2003­2006. This trend indicates a greater alignment of
      TA with lending operations.

               3.       Private Sector Operations

      22.     Private sector operations (PSO) started in India in 1987. Until 1995, a large number of
      small transactions were approved-- 9 loans totaling $136 million and 18 equity investments in
      the amount of $80 million for 24 projects (see Table A5.4). In line with ADB's overall support for
      industrial growth, its PSO during that period focused on the provision of direct financial
      assistance to three petrochemical companies and indirect assistance to private manufacturing
      companies through ADB financial support for financial institutions, finance companies, and
      private equity funds. Loans totaling $49.8 million were also provided to a power company. Three
      investments in capital markets intermediaries were approved, of which one was subsequently
      cancelled due to lack of demand. From 1996 to 2002, only three investments for an
      infrastructure finance institution, an infrastructure fund, and a mortgage guarantee company
      ($40.5 million) actually materialized. Another two PSO loans ($45 million) and equity
      investments ($15 million) for a power generation project and medical services network were
      subsequently cancelled due to financial difficulties of the sponsor and noncompetitiveness of
      ADB pricing, respectively. The low level of PSO was partially due to the fact that, during and
      following the period of the nuclear crisis (1998 and 1999), no private sector projects for India
      were considered by the ADB Board. Recently, ADB has intensified its efforts to finance private
      infrastructure projects (mainly conventional energy generation and distribution) through the
      provision of equity and debt, in some cases on a local currency basis. Investments and loans in
      financial institutions, and, more recently, private equity funds, have continued to be important
      areas of operations. PSO significantly increased during 2003­2006 with nine approved
      investments ($144 million) and nine approved loans ($505 million), accounting for 11% of ADB's
      financial assistance to the country during this period. However, loans to a power generation
      company, a housing finance institution, and an SME bank, plus an investment in an asset
80     Appendix 3


reconstruction company were subsequently cancelled due to either unfavorable pricing
conditions or the Reserve Bank of India's reluctance to approve external borrowings of non-
infrastructure-related financial institutions. Compared with the size of its public sector
operations, ADB's PSO in India have remained relatively small, with total approved investments
as of 31 December 2006 in the amount of $279 million and debt financing of $685 million, less
than 5% of total financial assistance to the country since 1986. Considering the impact of
cancellations, the PSO portfolio has shrunk by 20.5% to $766 million.
                                                                                                     INDIA: SOCIOECONOMIC DATA

                                                                                Table A4.1: Country Economic Indicators, 1986­2006
Item                                                     1986       1987      1988     1989      1990      1991      1992       1993      1994       1995       1996       1997       1998       1999       2000       2001       2002        2003        2004          2005          2006

Income and Growth
    GDP, per capita ($, current prices)                    320       347       340      330        352       304       299       289      324        362         373        399        396       416         420        428        443        512             581           670        739
    GDP Growth (%, constant prices)                         4.1       4.0     10.8       7.0        5.6       2.1      5.6        6.8      7.3        7.3         7.8        4.8        6.5       6.1         4.4        5.8        3.8        8.5             7.5           8.4       9.4
       - Agriculture                                      (1.7)     (1.3)     15.5       1.5        4.0      -1.5       5.8       4.1      5.0       -0.7         9.6       -2.4        6.2       0.3        -0.2        6.2       -7.2       10.0             0.0           6.0       2.7
       - Industry                                          7.3       6.6       9.2      10.3        7.1      -0.6       4.0       5.2     10.2       11.6         7.1        4.3        3.7       4.8         6.4        2.7        7.1        7.4             9.8           9.6      10.9
       - Services                                          7.6       7.2       7.9       9.7        5.2       7.0      6.4        9.8      7.1       10.1         7.2        9.8        8.4      10.1         5.7       7.1         7.4        8.5            9.6            9.8      11.0
    Sectoral Shares (% of GDP)
       - Agriculture                                      35.7      33.9      35.3      33.5      29.3      31.7      31.8      31.0      30.3       26.5       28.5       26.5       26.4       25.3       23.4       24.4       20.9        20.9            18.8      18.3          17.5
       - Industry                                         26.3      26.9      26.5      27.4      26.9      27.1      26.6      26.3      27.0       27.8       27.9       27.7       27.0       25.4       26.2       25.2       26.4        26.2            27.5      27.6          27.9
       - Services                                         38.0      39.2      38.2      39.1      43.8      41.3      41.6      42.8      42.7       45.7       43.7       45.8       46.6       49.2       50.4       50.5       52.7        52.9            53.7      54.1          54.6
Savings and Investment (market prices)
    Gross Domestic Investments (% of GDP)                 21.0      22.5      23.8      24.5      22.8      22.6      23.6      23.1      26.0       24.4       24.5       24.6       22.6       26.0       23.7       23.0       26.4        29.7            31.1      32.4        ...
    Gross National Savings (% of GDP)                     19.8      19.8      20.8      18.5      21.5      19.6      20.9      21.0      22.9       23.3       22.9       23.7       21.7       24.1       22.6       22.7       25.7        29.0            30.4      31.7        ...
Money and Inflation
    Consumer Price Index (annual % change)                 8.8       8.8       7.7       8.8       9.0      13.8      11.8       6.4      10.2       10.2        9.0        7.2       13.2        4.7        4.0        3.9        4.3         3.8             3.8       4.2        ...
    Money Supply (M2) (annual % change)                   18.6      16.0      17.8      19.4      15.1      19.3      14.8      18.4      22.4       13.6       16.2       18.0       19.4       14.6       16.8       14.1       14.7        16.7            12.3      21.2           20.8
Government Finance (% of GDP)
    Revenue                                               17.6      17.6      17.4      16.9      16.5      16.0      14.7      15.2      15.8       14.2       13.7       15.3       16.1       15.2       15.5       15.9       16.7        17.2        16.2          14.8          13.8
    Expenditure and Onlending                             20.2      19.3      18.8      19.1      18.5      17.1      16.4      16.5      15.9       15.0       14.7       15.2       16.0       15.2       15.5       15.9       16.8        17.0        15.9          14.4          14.1
    Overall Fiscal Balance (excluding grants)             (5.7)     (4.2)     (7.3)     (7.3)     (7.8)     (5.6)     (5.4)     (7.0)      (5.7)      (5.1)      (4.9)      (5.8)      (6.5)      (5.3)      (5.7)      (6.2)      (5.9)       (4.5)       (4.0)        (4.1)          -3.7
Balance of Trade/Payments
    Current Account Balance (% of GDP)                    (1.9)     (1.9)     (2.4)     (2.3)     (3.0)     (0.4)     (1.2)     (0.4)     (1.0)      (1.6)      (1.2)      (1.3)      (1.0)   (1.0)         (0.6)       0.7        1.3          2.4       (0.4)         (1.1)         (1.1)
    Merchandise Exports ($ million)                      9,874     9,607    14,537    17,046    18,601    19,366    20,715    22,874    26,399     32,798     33,533     35,828     33,872 37,060         45,296     44,297     52,487       62,977     79,855       101,056       118,235
    Merchandise Imports ($ million)                     15,935    15,504    20,288    21,773    24,677    21,040    24,452    23,973    28,729     37,832     39,206     42,458     43,223 49,991         51,371     51,965     61,141       77,090    105,546       140,777       170,622
    Trade Balance ($ million)                           -6,061    -5,897    -5,751    -4,727    -6,076    -1,675    -3,737    -1,098    -2,330     -5,034     -5,673     -6,630     -9,350 -12,931        -6,075     -7,668     -8,654      -14,113    -25,691       -39,721       -52,387

   Merchandise Exports ($) Growth (annual % change)       12.1       22.5     20.2      17.4        9.0       4.1      7.0      10.4      15.4       24.2        2.2        6.8       (5.5)       9.4       22.2       (2.2)      18.5        20.0        26.8         26.5           17.0

   Merchandise Imports ($) Growth (annual % change)         0.3       7.7     18.2        7.6     13.1     (14.7)    16.2       (2.0)    19.8       31.7         3.6        8.3        1.8      15.7         2.8        1.2      17.7        26.1        36.9            33.4          21.2
   Textile Exports ($ million)                              ...       ...    3,300     4,081     5,080     5,282     5,708     5,891     7,207      8,388      9,177      9,600      9,189      9,987     11,765     10,464     11,805      13,297      13,382        ...           ...
   Pearls, Semiprecious Stones ($ million)                  ...       ...    3,159     3,262     3,001     2,972     3,442     4,126     4,527      5,457      4,781      5,495      6,071      7,632      7,328      7,419      9,052      10,616      14,280        ...           ...
   Chemical Products ($ million)                         1,851     1,801       986     1,429     1,456     1,665     1,416     1,620     2,069      2,537      2,866      3,374      3,058      3,530      4,310      4,302      5,374       6,530       7,804        ...           ...
   Foreign Direct Investments ($ million)                   ...       ...       ...       ...       96       129       315       586     1,343      2,143      2,842      3,562      2,480      2,167      3,272      4,734      3,217       2,388       3,713        4,730         8,495
External Payments Indicators
   Gross Official Reserves ($ million)                   6,605     6,667    5,083     4,020     5,188     6,794     8,665     13,524    23,053     21,591     23,784     27,568     29,833     35,069     40,155     48,200     70,377     102,261     130,401       136,026       176,105
   External Debt Service (% of exports of goods and
                                                          32.5      31.0     29.7      29.8      31.9      29.6      27.3       26.9      28.7       29.7       23.6       21.9       21.2       15.7       14.5       11.7       17.3        19.1      ...           ...           ...
   services)
     Total External Debt (% of GDP)                           19.9     20.5   21.0     26.1      26.7      32.5      37.6       34.9      32.2       26.9       24.5       23.2       23.8       22.2       21.8       20.5       20.8        18.9        18.0         15.4         ...
Memorandum Items
     GDP (rupee billion, current prices)                    3,112     3,543  3,785     4,380    5,150      5,891     6,732     7,813     9,171     10,833     12,436     13,902     15,981     17,923     19,254     20,975     22,653      25,494      28,559        32,509        37,435




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 4
     GDP ($ million, current prices)                        2,468     2,734  2,720     2,700    2,942      2,590     2,597     2,562     2,928      3,341      3,510      3,828      3,873      4,163      4,284      4,445      4,660       5,473       6,302         7,372         8,264
     Exchange Rate (Rupee/$, average)                         12.6     13.0    13.9     16.2      17.5      22.7      25.9      30.5      31.3       32.4       35.4       36.3       41.3       43.1       44.9       47.2       48.6        46.6        45.3          44.1         45.3
     Population (million)                                     771       788     801      818      835        852       869       888       905        923        942        960        978      1,001      1,019      1,038      1,051       1,068       1,085         1,101         1,118
... = not available, GDP = gross domestic product, M2 = broad money supply.
Sources: ADB. 2007. Key Indicators 2007. Manila; ADB. 2007. Asian Development Outlook 2007. Manila.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              81
       82         Appendix 4


                                           Table A4.2: Country Social Indicators
Item                                                                                                    Period
                                                                          1980's                        1990's                  Latest Year

A. Population Indicators
   1. Total Population (million)                                   755           (1985)          852         (1991)         1,118          (2006)
   2  Annual Population Growth Rate (%)                            2.2           (1985)          2.2         (1991)          1.5           (2006)

B. Social Indicators
   1. Total Fertility Rate (births/woman)                           4.5          (1985)           3.6         (1991)         3.1         (2005)
   2  Infant Mortality Rate (below 1 yr/1,000 births)             115.0          (1981)          77.0         (1991)         62.0        (2004)
   3  Life Expectancy at Birth (years)                             57.0       (1985-1986)        59.0         (1990)         64.7        (2004)
      -Female                                                      56.0       (1985-1986)        59.0         (1990)         65.3        (2004)
      -Male                                                        57.0       (1985-1986)        59.0         (1990)         62.1        (2004)
   4  Adult Literacy (%)                                           44.1          (1985)          49.3         (1990)         61.0        (2004)
   5  Net Primary School Enrollment Ratio (%)                      67.5       (1985-1986)        71.0         (1993)         90.0        (2005)
   6  Child Malnutrition (% below age 5)                             -              -            63.0         (1990)         49.0        (2004)
   7  Population below Poverty Line (%)                            45.0          (1983)          36.0      (1993-1994)       28.6        (2004)
   8  Population with Access to Safe Water (%)                                                                               86.0        (2004)
      -Urban                                                       72.9          (1985)         83.8         (1990)          96.0        (2004)
      -Rural                                                       56.3          (1985)         73.9         (1990)          82.0        (2004)
   9  Population with Access to Sanitation (%)                     13.0          (1985)          24.0        (1991)          33.0        (2004)
      -Urban                                                       28.4          (1985)         45.9         (1991)           -
      -Rural                                                       0.7           (1985)          2.4         (1991)           -
   10 Public Education Expenditure (% of GDP)                      3.4           (1985)          3.7         (1990)          3.3         (2004)
   11 Human Development Index                                     0.438          (1980)         0.513        (1990)         0.611        (2004)
                                                                                                                                 th
      - Rank                                                                                                                126 of 177 countries
   12 Gender-Related Development Index                               -              -           0.410        (1996)         0.591        (2004)
                                                                                                                                th
      - Rank                                                         -              -             -             -            96 of 140 countries

C. Poverty Indicators
   1. Poverty Incidence (numbers, million)                        323.0          (1983)         320.0      (1993-1994)      303.9     (2004-2005)
   2. Poverty Gap                                                 12.9           (1983)         10.7       (1993-1994)       8.3      (2004-2005)
   3  Poverty Incidence, by State                                  44.5          (1983)         36.0       (1993-1994)       27.5     (2004-2005)
       a. Andhra Pradesh                                           28.9          (1983)         22.2       (1993-1994)       15.8     (2004-2005)
       b. Arunachal Pradesh                                       40.9           (1983)         39.4       (1993-1994)       17.6     (2004-2005)
       c. Assam                                                    40.5          (1983)         40.9       (1993-1994)       19.7     (2004-2005)
       d. Bihar                                                    62.2          (1983)         55.0       (1993-1994)       41.4     (2004-2005)
       e. Goa                                                     18.9           (1983)         14.9       (1993-1994)       13.8     (2004-2005)
       f. Gujarat                                                 32.8           (1983)         24.2       (1993-1994)       16.8     (2004-2005)
       g. Haryana                                                 21.4           (1983)         25.1       (1993-1994)       14.0     (2004-2005)
       h. Himachal Pradesh                                        16.4           (1983)         28.4       (1993-1994)       10.0     (2004-2005)
       i. Jammu and Kashmir                                       24.2           (1983)         25.2       (1993-1994)       5.4      (2004-2005)
       j. Karnataka                                                38.2          (1983)         33.2       (1993-1994)       25.0     (2004-2005)
       k. Kerala                                                   40.4          (1983)         25.4       (1993-1994)       15.0     (2004-2005)
       l. Madhya Pradesh                                           49.8          (1983)         42.5       (1993-1994)       38.3     (2004-2005)
      m. Maharashtra                                              43.4           (1983)         36.9       (1993-1994)       30.7     (2004-2005)
      n. Manipur                                                   37.0          (1983)         33.8       (1993-1994)       17.3     (2004-2005)
      o. Meghalaya                                                 38.8          (1983)         37.9       (1993-1994)       18.5     (2004-2005)
      p. Mizoram                                                  39.3           (1983)         37.9       (1993-1994)       12.6     (2004-2005)
      r. Orissa                                                    65.3          (1983)         48.6       (1993-1994)       46.4     (2004-2005)
      s. Punjab                                                    16.2          (1983)         11.8       (1993-1994)       8.4      (2004-2005)
      t. Rajasthan                                                34.5           (1983)         24.7       (1993-1994)       22.1     (2004-2005)
      u. Sikkim                                                   39.7           (1983)         41.4       (1993-1994)       20.1     (2004-2005)
      v. Tamil Nadu                                                51.7          (1983)         35.0       (1993-1994)       22.5     (2004-2005)
      w. Tripura                                                  40.0           (1983)         39.0       (1993-1994)       18.9     (2004-2005)
      x. Uttar Pradesh                                             47.1          (1983)         40.9       (1993-1994)       32.8     (2004-2005)
      y. West Bengal                                               54.9          (1983)         35.7       (1993-1994)       24.7     (2004-2005)
      z. Andaman and Nicobar Island                               52.1           (1983)         34.5       (1993-1994)      22.6      (2004-2005)
      aa. Chandigarh                                              23.8           (1983)         11.4       (1993-1994)       7.1      (2004-2005)
      bb. Delhi                                                   26.2           (1983)         14.7       (1993-1994)       14.7     (2004-2005)
      cc. Pondicherry                                              50.1          (1983)         37.4       (1993-1994)       22.4     (2004-2005)
   4  Human Poverty Index                                           -               -             -             -            31.3        (2004)
                                                                                                                                th
      - Rank                                                        -               -             -             -            55 of 103 countries
- = not available, GDP= gross domestic product
Sources: Country Assistance Plan (1997-1999 and 2000-2002); UNDP National Human Development Report on India (2001); 2006-2008 Country Strategy Program
Update, ADB Basic Statistics 2006, Human Development Report 2006; National Planning Commission, India.
                                              Table A4.3: India's Millennium Development Goalsa

                                                                                                                                   India's Targets for
      Goals                      Targets                                  Indicators                        India's Baselines
                                                                                                                                    2015 and Beyond

                                                         1.   Proportion of people living below the
                                                                                                          36.0% in 1993-1994             13.0%
                                                              national poverty line
Goal 1               Target 1                                                                             27.5% in 2004
Eradicate extreme    Halve, between 1990­2015, the       2.   Poverty gap ratio (incidence times
poverty and          proportion of people living in                                                       10.7% in1993-1994
                                                              depth of poverty)
hunger.              poverty.                                                                             8.3% in 2004
                                                         3.   Share of the poorest quintile in national
                                                                                                          8.2% in 2004
                                                              income or consumption
                                                         4.   Prevalence of underweight in children
                     Target 2                                                                             63.0% in 1990                   8.0%
                                                              under 5 years of age
                     Halve, between 1990­2015, the                                                        47.0% in 2001
                     proportion of people who suffer
                     from hunger.                        5.   Proportion of population having below
                                                                                                          25.0% in 1990-1992
                                                              the minimum level of dietary energy
                                                              consumption                                 21.0% in 2000-2002
                                                                                                          20.0% in 2004
                                                         6.   Net enrollment in primary school
Goal 2               Target 3                                                                             71.0% in 1993                  99.9%
Achieve universal    Ensure that, by 2015, children                                                       90.0% in 2005
primary education.   everywhere, boys and girls alike,
                     will be able to complete a full     7.   Proportion of pupils starting Grade 1
                                                                                                          79.0% in 2005. Primary
                                                              who reach Grade 5
                     course of primary schooling.                                                         completion rate was
                                                                                                          89.0% in 2005.
                                                         8.   Literacy rate in the age group of 15­24
                                                                                                          84.2% for males and       96.0% for males
                                                              year olds
                                                                                                          67.7% for females in
                                                                                                                                   94.0% for females
                                                                                                          2000; 76.0% in 2005
                                                         9.   Ratio of girls to boys in primary,




                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 4
                     Target 4                                                                             69.8% in 1990
                                                              secondary, and tertiary education
Goal 3               Eliminate gender disparity in                                                        87.7% in 2005
                     primary and secondary
Promote gender
                     education, preferably by 2005,




                                                                                                                                                         83
                                                                                                                                                  84
                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 4
                                                                                                                            India's Targets for
      Goals                     Targets                                 Indicators                      India's Baselines
                                                                                                                             2015 and Beyond

equality and       and in all levels of education no
empower women.     later than 2015.
                                                       10. Ratio of literate females to males, 15­
                                                                                                      83.0% in 2004              100.0%
                                                           24 years old
                                                       11. Share of women in wage employment in
                                                                                                      13.0% in 1990
                                                           the nona-griculture sector
                                                                                                      17.3% in 2005
                                                       12. Proportion of seats held by women in
                                                                                                      5.0% in 1990
                                                           the national parliament
                                                                                                      8.0% in 2005
                                                       13. Under-5 mortality rate (deaths/1,000
Goal 4             Target 5                                                                           123 in 1990
                                                           live births)
Reduce child       Reduce by two thirds, between                                                      74 in 2005
mortality.         1990­2015, the under-5 mortality
                   rate.                               14. Infant mortality rate (deaths/1,000 live
                                                                                                      80 in 1990                   22.5
                                                           births)
                                                                                                      56 in 2005

                                                       15. Proportion of 1-year-old children
                                                                                                      58.0% in 2005
                                                           immunized against measles


                                                       16. Maternal mortality ratio (deaths/100,000
Goal 5             Target 6                                                                           540 in 2001              100 in 2012
                                                           births)
Improve maternal   Reduce by three quarters,
health.            between 1990­2015, the
                   maternal mortality ratio.
                                                       17. Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of        47.0% in 2001
                                                          women ages 15-49)

                                                       18. Proportion of births attended by skilled
                                                                                                      43.0% in 2003
                                                           health personnel
                                                                                                                                 India's Targets for
       Goals                     Targets                                  Indicators                      India's Baselines
                                                                                                                                  2015 and Beyond

Goal 6               Target 7                            19. HIV prevalence among 15­24 year old        0.9% in 2005
                                                             women
Combat HIV/AIDS,     Halt by 2015, and begin to
malaria, and other   reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS.
diseases.                                                20. HIV prevalence, total population of ages   1% in 2001
                                                              15-24 years old
                                                                                                        1% in 2004

                     Target 8                            21. Death rate associated with malaria         7 in 2000
                     Halt by 2015, and begin to              (per 100,000)
                     reverse, the incidence of malaria
                     and other major diseases.           22. Prevalence rate of malaria                 166 in 2003
                                                              (per 100,000)

                                                         23. Death rate associated with tuberculosis    31.0 in 2003
                                                             (per 100,000)

                                                         24. Prevalence rate of tuberculosis            168 in 2005
                                                              (per 100,000)

                                                         25. Proportion of tuberculosis cases           Detected 0.3% in 1995
                                                             detected under the directly observed       and increased to 61.0%
                                                             treatment, short-course.                   in 2005
                                                         26. Life expectancy at birth
                                                                                                        59.0% in 1990
                                                                                                        64.7% in 2006 est.
                                                         27. Proportion of land under forest cover
Goal 7               Target 9                                                                           22.0% in 1990              33.0% in 2012
Ensure               Integrate the principles of                                                        23.0% in 2005




                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 4
environmental        sustainable development into
sustainability.      country policies and programs
                     and reverse the loss of             28. Energy use per $1,000 gross domestic       200 kilograms of oil       1026 metric tons
                                                             product                                    equivalent in 2002         of energy




                                                                                                                                                       85
                                                                                                                                                               86
                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 4
                                                                                                                                         India's Targets for
        Goals                        Targets                                  Indicators                        India's Baselines
                                                                                                                                          2015 and Beyond

                        environmental resources.
                                                            29. Carbon dioxide emissions                     1.2 in 2003
                                                                (metric tons/capita)

                                                            30. Consumption of ozone-depleting               1958 in 2005
                                                                chlorofluorocarbons (metric tons of
                                                                ozone-depleting potential)

                        Target 10                           31.   Proportion of population with              86.0% in 2005
                                                                  sustainable access to an improved
                        Halve, by 2015, the proportion of
                                                                  water source
                        people without sustainable
                        access to safe drinking water       32.   Proportion of urban population with        33.0% in 2005
                                                                  access to improved sanitation

AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
a
  Agreed upon at the Millennium Summit of 189 countries, September 2000, endorsed by ADB in April 2002 and now a priority in ADB's Medium-Term Strategy and
  Long-Term Strategic Framework.
Source: World Development Indicators, 2007; ADB Statistics 2006; India Vision 2020, Planning Commission; UNDP India Human Development Goals.
                                                                                                                          Appendix 5      87


                                                            ADB PROJECTS IN INDIA

                                                Table A5.1: ADB Public Sector Loans to India
                                                          as of December 31 2006

                                                                                                               Project
  Sector/Subsector                                  1991-2000     2001-2005                                                 Rating
                                                                                                             Completion                   Other OED
                                                                                                                                         Assessment
          Loan                                       Prim/Sec     Pov/Them          Amount       Date of
           No.                    Title             Objectives   Classification   ($ million)   Approval       Actual     PCR    PPAR
TRANSPORT and COMMUNICATION
  Roads & Highways
             918   Road Improvement                                                    198.0    10-Nov-88    31-Mar-98    GS         S

          1041     Second Road                                                         250.0     30-Oct-90   31-Dec-99    PS     NULL          S

          1274     National Highways                   EG                              245.0    29-Nov-93        na       NULL   NULL          S
                   Bombay-Vadodara Expressway                                                             The loan was
          1279                                         EG                                12.7   02-Dec-93                 NULL   NULL
                   Technical Assistance                                                                    cancelled.
          1747     Surat-Manor Tollway                 EG                              180.0     27-Jul-00       na       NULL   NULL          S

          1839     Western Transport Corridor                     PI/GG/PSD            240.0    20-Sep-01        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   West Bengal Corridor
          1870                                                      PI/ECO             210.0    11-Dec-01        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   Development
          1944     East-West Corridor                            ODI/ECO/PSD           320.0    26-Nov-02        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   Madhya Pradesh State Roads
          1958     Sector Development Program                     PI/ECO/GG              30.0   05-Dec-02        na       NULL   NULL
                   (Program Loan)
                                                                                                                                               S
                   Madhya Pradesh State Roads
          1959     Sector Development Program                     PI/ECO/GG            150.0    05-Dec-02        na       NULL   NULL
                   (Project Loan)

          2018     Rural Roads Sector I                             PI/ECO             400.0    20-Nov-03        na       NULL   NULL          S
                   National Highway Corridor
          2029                                                   ODI/ECO/PSD           400.0    04-Dec-03        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   (Sector) I
                   Chhattisgarh State Roads
          2050                                                      PI/ECO             180.0    15-Dec-03        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   Development Sector
          2154     National Highway Sector II                       GI/SEG             400.0    21-Dec-04        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   Rural Roads Sector II
          2248                                                     SEG/GOV             180.0     31-Jul-06
                   Investment Program
                   Subsector Total                                                   3,395.7

  Railways
             857   Railways                                                            190.0    10-Nov-87    30-Jun-98    GS     NULL          S
          1140     Second Railways                                                     225.0    05-Dec-91    08-Dec-99    PS     NULL          S
          1981     Railway Sector Improvement                    ODI/ECO/GG            313.6    19-Dec-02        na       NULL   NULL       PS
                   Subsector Total                                                     728.6
  Ports, Waterways, & Shipping
             842   Ports Development                                                     87.6   24-Sep-87    31-Dec-94    NR      PS
          1016     Second Ports                                                        129.0    29-Mar-90    30-Sep-97    GS         S
          1181     Coal Ports                                                          285.0     27-Oct-92   22-Jun-01    PS     NULL
                   Mumbai and Chennai Ports -
          1556     MBPT                              EG/ENV                              97.8   29-Sep-97        na       NULL   NULL
                   Mumbai and Chennai Ports -
          1557     CHPT                              EG/ENV                              15.2   29-Sep-97        na       NULL   NULL
                   Subsector Total                                                     614.6
  Telecommunications & Communications
             886   Telecommunications                                                  135.0     07-Apr-88    31-Jul-97   PS     US
             954   Second Telecommunications                                           118.0    09-Feb-89  31-Dec-97      PS     US
                                                                                                          The loan was
          1495     Rural Telecommunications            EG                              113.0    28-Nov-96  cancelled.     NULL   NULL
                   Subsector Total                                                     366.0
         88             Appendix 5


                                                                1991-2000        2001-2005                                     Proj
                                                                                                                            Completion     Rating         Other OED
         Loan                                                    Prim/Sec        Pov/Them         Amount        Date of                                  Assessment
          No. Title                                             Objectives      Classification   ($ million)   Approval       Actual     PCR   PPAR
MULTISECTOR
         1480 Private Sector Facility: Industrial                   EG                             150.0       07-Nov-96 13-Nov-01        S         S
              Credit & Investment Corp. of India
              Ltd.
           1481      Private Sector Infrastructure Facility:        EG                             100.0       07-Nov-96 16-May-02        S     PS
                     Industrial Finance Corporation of                                                                                                          PS
                     India Ltd.
           1482      Private Sector Infrastructure Facility:        EG                              50.0       07-Nov-96                 NULL NULL
                     SCICI Limited

           1826      Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation                           PI/ECO/HD         500.0       26-Mar-01        na       NULL NULL              S
                     and Reconstruction
           1871      Private Sector Infrastructure Facility                       ODI/ECO          100.0       11-Dec-01        na       NULL NULL
                     at State Level (Infrastructure Leasing
                     and Financial Services Ltd.
                                                                                                                                                                PS
           1872      Private Sector Infrastructure Facility                       ODI/ECO          100.0       11-Dec-01   The loan      NULL NULL
                     at State Level (Industrial                                                                              was
                     Development Bank of India                                                                           terminated.
           2151      Multisector Project for Infrastructure                        GI/SEG          250.0       21-Dec-04     na          NULL NULL
                     Rehabilitation in Jammu and Kashmir

           2166      Tsunami Emergency Assistance                                GI/SEG/ISD        100.0        14-Apr-05       na       NULL NULL
                     (Sector)

                     SECTOR Total                                                                 1,350.0




                                                                    1991-2000     2001-2005                                    Proj
                                                                                                                            Completion     Rating        Other OED
              Loan                                                  Prim/Sec   Pov/Them      Amount ($          Date of                                 Assessment
               No.     Title                                        Objective Classification  million)         Approval       Actual     PCR PPAR
  FINANCE
     Housing Finance
             1549 Housing Finance (National Housing Bank)                HD                           100.0    25-Sep-97     30-Jun-03    S    NULL

              1550     Housing Finance (Housing and Urban                HD                           100.0    25-Sep-97     06-Dec-99    S    NULL
                                                                                                                                                            S
                       Development Corporation)
              1551     Housing Finance (Housing Development              HD                           100.0    25-Sep-97     26-Jan-01    S    NULL
                       Finance Corporation)
              1758     Housing Finance II - Housing and Urban            HD                           100.0    21-Sep-00 The loan was    NULL NULL
                       Development Corporation                                                                            terminated.

              1759     Housing Finance II - National Housing Bank        HD                            40.0    21-Sep-00     30-Jun-07   NULL NULL
                                                                                                                                                           PS
              1760     Housing Finance II - Housing Development          HD                            80.0    21-Sep-00 The loan was    NULL NULL
                       Finance Corporation                                                                                terminated.

              1761     Housing Finance II - ICICI                        HD                            80.0    21-Sep-00     30-Jun-07   NULL NULL
                       Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring and
              2281                                                                SEG/GOV           1,000.0    08-Dec-06
                       Development Program
                   Subsector Total                                                                  1,600.0
     Banking Systems
             778 Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation                                         100.0     03-Apr-86    31-Jul-91   NR    GS
                   of India Limited
             975 Industrial Finance Corporation of India                                              150.0     24-Oct-89    21-May-94   GS    NULL

              1072  Second Industrial Credit and Investment                                           120.0    18-Dec-90     05-Jan-95   PS    NULL
                    Corporation of India Ltd.
                    Subsector Total                                                                   370.0
     Finance Sector Development
             1208 Financial Sector Program                                                            300.0    15-Dec-92     04-Nov-96   GS    GS
                    Subsector Total                                                                   300.0
     Capital Markets & Funds
              1408 Capital Market Development Program                    EG                           250.0    28-Nov-95     31-Mar-99   GS     S

                       Subsector Total                                                                250.0
                                                                                                                                        Appendix 5           89


                                                           1991-2000       2001-2005                                     Proj
                                                                                                                      Completion        Rating        Other OED
                                                                                                                                                     Assessment
     Sub- Loan                                              Prim/Sec      Pov/Them        Amount          Date of
    sector No. Title                                       Objectives    Classification ($ million)      Approval        Actual     PCR PPAR
LAW, ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT, and PUBLIC POLICY
   National Government Administration
                  Gujarat Public Sector Resource
            1506                                              EG                                250.0     18-Dec-96 31-Dec-00        S      NULL         S
                  Management Program
                  Madhya Pradesh Public Resource
            1717                                             EG/HD                              250.0     14-Dec-99 17-Mar-03        S      NULL        PS
                  Management Program
                  Modernizing Government and Fiscal
            1974                                                          ODI/GG/HD             200.0     16-Dec-02         na      PS      NULL        PS
                  Reform in Kerala (Subprogram I)
                  Subsector Total                                                               700.0
   Public Finance & Expenditure Management
                  Assam Governance and Public
                  Resource Management Sector
            2141                                                          GI/SEG/GOV            125.0     16-Dec-04         na     NULL NULL
                  Development Program (Program
                  Loan)
                                                                                                                                                         S
                  Assam Governance and Public
                  Resource Management Sector
            2142                                                          GI/SEG/GOV             25.0     16-Dec-04         na     NULL NULL
                  Development Program (Project
                  Loan)
                  Subsector Total                                                               150.0

                    SECTOR Total                                                                850.0




                                                          1991-2000      2001-2005                                      Proj
                                                                                                                     Completion         Rating        Other OED
                                                           Prim/Sec   Pov/Them       Amount              Date of                                     Assessment
          Loan No. Title                                                                                               Actual      PCR     PPAR
                                                          Objectives Classification ($ million)         Approval
INDUSTRY AND TRADE
   Small- & Medium-Scale Enterprises
           855    Small-and Medium-Scale Industries                                     100.0           03-Nov-87     24-Feb-93    NR      NULL
                    SECTOR Total                                                        100.0
AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
   Irrigation & Drainage
            2159    Chhattisgarh Irrigation Development                 TI/SEG/GOV/      46.1           29-Mar-05        na        NULL     NULL
                                                                             ISD
                     SECTOR Total                                                        46.1

URBAN DEVELOPMENT
         1415  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure               HD/PR                        85.0           14-Dec-95     30-Jun-04     S        S
               Development
         1416  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure               HD/PR                        20.0           14-Dec-95     26-Jan-01    HS        S
               Development
         1647  Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure              HD/ENV                       250.0           03-Dec-98        na        NULL     NULL         S
               Development
         1704  Karnataka Urban Development and             HD/ENV                       175.0            26-Oct-99       na        NULL     NULL         S
               Coastal Environmental Management
         1719  Urban and Environmental                     HD/ENV                        90.0           17-Dec-99      The loan    NULL     NULL
               Infrastructure Facility (HUDCO)                                                                           was
                                                                                                                      cancelled.
            1720     Urban and Environmental               HD/ENV                        80.0           17-Dec-99        na        NULL    NULL
                                                                                                                                                         U
                     Infrastructure Facility (ICICI)
            1721     Urban and Environmental               HD/ENV                        30.0           17-Dec-99      The loan    NULL     NULL
                     Infrastructure Facility (IDFC)                                                                      was
                                                                                                                      cancelled.
            1813     Calcutta Environmental                HD/ENV                       250.0           19-Dec-00        na        NULL     NULL         PS
                     Improvement
            2046     Urban Water Supply and                              PI/ECO/HD      200.0           12-Dec-03        na        NULL     NULL
                     Environmental Improvement in
                     Madhya Pradesh
            2226     Kerala Sustainable Urban                             GI/SEG        221.2           20-Dec-05        na        NULL     NULL
                     Development

            2293     Kolkata Environmental Improvement                  ISD/ENV/SEG      80.0           14-Dec-06
                     SECTOR Total                                                      1,481.2
         90          Appendix 5


                                                         1991-2000    2001-2005                                  Proj
                                                                                                              Completion     Rating      Other OED
            Loan                                          Prim/Sec   Pov/Them        Amount       Date of                               Assessment
             No.    Title                                Objectives Classification ($ million)   Approval       Actual     PCR PPAR
ENERGY
   Conventional Energy Generation (other than
   hydropower)
           798 North Madras Thermal Power                                                150.0   18-Nov-86    30-Jun-99    PS     S
              907   Unchahar Thermal Power Extension                                     160.0   29-Sep-88 31-Mar-00        S   NULL
              988   Rayalaseema Thermal Power                                            230.0   21-Nov-89 25-Feb-95       GS    GS
            1117    Gandhar Field Development                                            267.0   14-Nov-91    30-Jun-97    GS   NULL
            1148    Hydrocarbon Sector Program                                           250.0   17-Dec-91 18-Sep-97       PS    PS
            1222    Gas Flaring Reduction                   EG                           300.0   30-Mar-93 31-Dec-97       GS   NULL
            1285    Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion        EG                           260.0   07-Dec-93     31-Jul-98    S     S
            1591    LPG Pipeline                            EG                           150.0   16-Dec-97    31-Jan-01    HS   NULL
                    Subsector Total                                                    1,767.0
    Transmission & Distribution
            1161 Power Efficiency (Sector)                                               250.0   26-Mar-92    30-Jun-98    PS   NULL
            1405    Power Transmission (Sector)             EG                           275.0   16-Nov-95    31-Oct-03     S   NULL
            1764    Power Transmission Improvement          EG                           250.0    06-Oct-00       na       NULL NULL
                    (Sector)
                    Gujarat Power Sector Development -                                   150.0
            1803                                            EG                                    36873.00        na       NULL NULL
                    Program Loan
                                                                                                                                             HS
                    Gujarat Power Sector Development -                                   200.0
            1804                                            EG                                    36873.00        na       NULL NULL
                    Project Loan
            2152    Power Grid Transmission (Sector)                    GI/SEG           400.0   21-Dec-04        na       NULL NULL
                   Subsector Total                                                     1,525.0
    Energy Sector Development
            1029 Second North Madras Thermal                                             200.0   30-Aug-90 31-Aug-01        S   NULL
                   Power
            1081 Special Assistance                                                      150.0    04-Apr-91   23-Apr-91    NR   NULL
            1212    Energy Conservation and                                              147.0   17-Dec-92 The loan was    NULL NULL
                    Environment Improvement                                                                 terminated.
            1343    Industrial Energy Efficiency            EG                           150.0   13-Dec-94 27-Sep-00        S    PS
            1868    Madhya Pradesh Power Sector                       PI/ECO/GG          150.0   06-Dec-01        na       NULL NULL
                    Development Program (Program)
                                                                                                                                             S
            1869    Madhya Pradesh Power Sector                       PI/ECO/GG          200.0   06-Dec-01        na       NULL NULL
                    Development Program (Project)
            1968    State Power Sector Reform                         PI/ECO/GG          150.0   12-Dec-02        na       NULL NULL         PS
            2036    Assam Power Sector Development                    PI/ECO/GG          150.0   10-Dec-03        na       NULL NULL
                    Program (Program Loan)
                                                                                                                                             S
            2037    Assam Power Sector Development                    PI/ECO/GG          100.0   10-Dec-03        na       NULL NULL
                    Program (Project Loan)
                    Subsector Total                                                    1,397.0
    Renewable Energy Generation
           1465 Renewable Energy Development              EG/ENV                         100.0   26-Sep-96    25-Oct-02     S   NULL
                    Subsector Total                                                      100.0


                     SECTOR Total                                                      4,789.0
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DFI = development finance institution, ECO = economic growth EG = economic growth, ENV = environmental
protection, GG = good governance, GI = general intervention, GOV = governance, GS = generally successful, HD = human development, HS = highly
successful, ISD = inclusive social development, LPG = liquefied petroleum gas, na = not available, NR = no rating, NULL = no PCR/PPAR, ODI = others,
OED = Operations Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report, PI = poverty intervention, PPAR = project performance audit report, Prim =
primary, PS = partly successful, PSD = private sector development, Pov = poverty, PR = poverty reduction, S = successful, SDP = sector development
program, Sec = secondary, SEG = sustainable economic growth, Them = thematic, TI = targeted intervention, U = unsuccessful.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                                   Appendix 5          91


                                 Table A5.2: ADB Preparatory Technical Assistance to India
                                                          as of 31 December 2006
Sector/Subsector                                                                                                                  Rating
       TA                                                                                         Amount        Date of
           Title                                                                                                            TCR        TPER
       No.                                                                                          ($)        Approval
Transport & Communications                                                                        16,083,000
   Roads & Highways                                                                               13,733,000
        955 Road Improvement                                                                          75,000   24-Feb-88
       1164 Second Road                                                                              100,000    9-Jun-89
       1325 Vadodara-Bombay Expressway                                                               600,000   15-Jun-90
       1325 Vadodara-Bombay Expressway (Supplementary)                                               250,000   19-Mar-91
       1678 Third Road                                                                               250,000   26-Mar-92
       1942 Faridabad-Noida-Ghaziabad Expressway                                                     550,000   27-Aug-93    GS
       1951 Bombay-Vadodara Expressway TA Project Environmental Impact Assessment                     90,000   10-Sep-93
       2986 Western Transport Corridor-Facilitating Private Participation                          1,000,000    9-Feb-98
       3142 North-South Corridor Development in West Bengal                                        1,000,000   23-Dec-98
       3538 Preliminary Engineering for the West Bengal Corridor Development Project                 150,000   13-Nov-00
       3539 Resettlement and Environmental Assessment for the West Bengal Corridor Development       150,000   13-Nov-00
            Project
       3540 Economic and Poverty Analysis for the West Bengal Corridor Development Project           150,000   13-Nov-00
       3751 Madhya Pradesh State Road Sector Development                                             600,000   29-Oct-01
       3752 National Highway Corridor - Public-Private Partnership                                   700,000   29-Oct-01
       3845 Madhya Pradesh State Road Development                                                  1,000,000   14-Mar-02
       3914 Economic Studies for the Rural Roads Sector Development                                  150,000    3-Sep-02
       3915 Engineering Studies for the Rural Roads Sector Development                               150,000    3-Sep-02
       3916 Environmental Analysis for the Rural Roads Sector Development                            100,000    3-Sep-02
       3917 Institutional and Policy Development Studies for the Rural Roads Sector Development      150,000    3-Sep-02
       3918 Social Analysis for the Rural Roads Sector Development                                   150,000    3-Sep-02
       3995 Chhattisgarh State Roads Sector Development                                              800,000   21-Nov-02
       4036 National Highway Corridor (Sector)                                                       500,000   16-Dec-02
       4152 National Highway Sector II                                                               300,000    21-Jul-03
       4220 Rural Roads Sector II                                                                  1,000,000   20-Nov-03
       4355 High Priority National Highways                                                        1,000,000     8-Jul-04
       4378 North Eastern State Roads                                                                800,000   23-Aug-04
       4607 Uttaranchal State Roads                                                                  368,000     1-Jul-05
       3995 Chhattisgarh State Roads Sector Development (supplementary)                            1,600,000    1-Feb-06
   Ports, Waterways, & Shipping                                                                    2,250,000
       1853 Third Ports                                                                              600,000   11-Mar-93
       2519 Study on Development Strategies for Madras and Ennore Ports                              750,000   28-Dec-95    GS
       3974 Inland Waterway Sector Development Program                                               900,000    5-Nov-02
   Telecommunications & Communications                                                               100,000
       1955 Rural Telecommunications                                                                 100,000   21-Sep-93
Energy                                                                                             7,299,000
   Energy Sector Development                                                                       4,745,000
      1119 Power Sector Loan                                                                          50,000    6-Feb-89
           Environmental Improvement and Sustainable Development of the Agra-Mathura-
      2474                                                                                          600,000    15-Dec-95    U
           Ferozabad Trapezium in Uttar Pradesh
      3734 Kerala Power Sector Development Program                                                  800,000     4-Oct-01
      3885 Energy Efficiency Enhancement Project                                                    600,000    21-Jun-02    GS
      3953 Assam Power Sector Development Program                                                   800,000    29-Oct-02
      4182 Urban Clean Fuel                                                                         995,000    24-Sep-03
      4380 Uttaranchal Power Sector Development                                                     150,000    24-Aug-04
      4498 North East Power Development                                                             750,000    17-Dec-04
   Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)                                           800,000
      1837 Natural Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion                                                 100,000    31-Dec-92
      2560 LPG Pipeline Project Study                                                               100,000    24-Apr-96
      2752 Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal                                                           600,000    27-Jan-97    GS
   Transmission & Distribution                                                                      600,000
      2116 Power System Planning in Orissa                                                          600,000    28-Jun-94
   Hydropower Generation                                                                            800,000
      4336 Hydropower Development                                                                   800,000     6-May-04
   Renewable Energy Generation                                                                      354,000
      1953 Renewable Energy Development                                                             354,000    13-Sep-93
       92           Appendix 5


Sector/Subsector                                                                                                                          Rating
        TA                                                                                              Amount         Date of
            Title                                                                                                                   TCR        TPER
        No.                                                                                               ($)         Approval
   Economic Management                                                                                   1,000,000
        4106 Kerala Sustainable Urban Development                                                        1,000,000     9-May-03
   National Government Administration                                                                      800,000
        4150 Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Program                                       700,000     17-Jul-03
        4150 Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Program (Supplementary)                       100,000    18-Dec-03
   Law & Judiciary                                                                                         750,000
        4437 Administration of Justice                                                                     750,000    19-Nov-04
Finance                                                                                                  1,505,000
   Housing Finance                                                                                         505,000
        2700 Housing Finance Facility                                                                      100,000     5-Dec-96
        3288 Housing Finance II                                                                            405,000     8-Nov-99
   Microfinance                                                                                          1,000,000
        4247 Rural Finance Sector Restructuring and Development                                          1,000,000    12-Dec-03
Multisector
   Multisector                                                                                          15,500,000
        4515 Preparation of the Jammu and Kashmir Urban Infrastructure Development Project                 500,000    21-Dec-04
        4814 Project Processing and Capacity Development (TA Cluster)                                   15,000,000    30-Jun-06
Agriculture and Natural Resources                                                                        3,450,000
   Irrigation & Drainage                                                                                   700,000
        4815 Orissa Integrated Irrigated Agriculture and Water Management                                  700,000     18-Jul-06
   Agriculture Production, Agroprocessing, & Agrobusiness                                                1,000,000
        4407 Agribusiness Development Support                                                            1,000,000     11-Oct-04
   Agriculture Sector Development                                                                          900,000
        4216 Chhattisgarh Irrigation Development Sector                                                    900,000    13-Nov-03
   Water Resource Manangement                                                                              850,000
        4896 North Eastern Integrated Flood and Riverbank Erosion Management (Assam)                       850,000    14-Dec-06
Industry and Trade                                                                                       2,397,000
   Industry                                                                                              1,597,000
        1005 Indian Acrylics Ltd.                                                                           22,000       7-Jul-88
        1890 Industrial Energy Conservation and Environment Improvement                                    275,000    19-May-93
        2189 Hazardous Waste Management                                                                    500,000     24-Oct-94
        2266 Implementation of Clean Technology through Coal Beneficiation                                 300,000    27-Dec-94      GS
        4413 Northeastern States Trade and Investment Creation Initiative                                  500,000     12-Oct-04
   Small- & Medium-Scale Enterprises                                                                       800,000
        4448 Small and Medium Enterprise Finance Sector Development                                        800,000    25-Nov-04
Urban Development                                                                                        7,360,000
        1977 Urban Infrastructure Development                                                              600,000    12-Nov-93
        2373 Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development                                                    600,000    15-Aug-95
        2806 Karnataka Coastal Environmental Management and Urban Development                              800,000     6-Jun-97
        2936 Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Fund                                                   400,000    12-Dec-97
        3089 Calcutta Environmental Improvement                                                          1,000,000    16-Oct-98
        3759 Integrated Urban Development in Madhya Pradesh                                              1,000,000     2-Nov-01
        4348 North Eastern Region Urban Development                                                      1,000,000     8-Jun-04
        4530 Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development III                                                400,000    23-Dec-04
        4611 Uttaranchal Urban Development                                                                 600,000     14-Jul-05
        4678 North Eastern Region Urban Development (Phase II)                                             960,000    31-Oct-05

              Total                                                                                        56,644,000
ADB = Asian Development Bank, GS = generally successful, LPG = liquefied petroleum gas, PP = project preparatory, TA = technical assistance, TCR =
technical assistance completion report, TPER = technical assistance performance evaluation report, U = unsuccessful.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                                            Appendix 5            93

                                     Table A5.3: ADB Advisory Technical Assistance to India
                                                              as of 31 December 2006
 Sector/Subsector                                                                                                                        Rating
     TA                                                                                           Amount        Date of                            Other OED
         Title                                                                                                                TCR        TPER
     No.                                                                                            ($)        Approval                           Assessments
Transport & Communications                                                                        17,318,000
  Roads & Highways                                                                                 8,150,000
    1058 Pavement Management                                                                         490,000    3-Jan-89                               U
    1059 Expressway System Planning                                                                  260,000    3-Jan-89                               PS
    1402 Pavement Management for National Highways                                                   760,000   30-Oct-90                               U
    1403 Private Sector Participation in Expressway Financing, Construction and Operation            500,000   30-Oct-90                               HS
    1404 Road Construction Industry                                                                  340,000   30-Oct-90                                S
    2001 Road Safety                                                                                 210,000   29-Nov-93                 GS            PS
    2002 Environmental Management of Road Projects                                                   240,000   29-Nov-93                                S
    2003 Technical Standards of Highway Concrete Structures                                          350,000   29-Nov-93                               PS
          Capacity Building for Contract Supervision and Management in the National Highways
    3361                                                                                             600,000   22-Dec-99       GS                      HS
          Authority of India
    3724 Enhancing the Corporate Finance Capability of National Highways Authority of India          700,000   20-Sep-01                               S
    4013 Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Madhya Pradesh State Road Sector    1,500,000    5-Dec-02                               S
    4271 Development of High Density Corridors under the Public-Private Partnership                  700,000   18-Dec-03                               PS
    4013 Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Madhya Pradesh State Road Sector      600,000   29-Apr-05
          (Supplementary)
    4697 Development of Road Agencies in the Northeastern States                                     900,000   23-Nov-05                               S
  Ports, Waterways, & Shipping                                                                     4,458,000
    1004 Ports and Shipping Sector Study                                                             500,000     8-Jul-88
    1283 Operational and Financial Assistance for Bombay Ports                                       600,000   29-Mar-90
    1284 Development of Ship Repair Facilities                                                       400,000   29-Mar-90
    1770 Planning and Management Advisory Services for Paradip Port Trust                            600,000   27-Oct-92       GS
          Study on Development and Implementation of MOST's Strategies for Deregulation and
    1771                                                                                             670,000   27-Oct-92       GS
          Policy
    2768 Ports Policy and Financing Opportunities                                                    100,000   12-Mar-97
    2880 Enhancement of India Ports Policy Implementation                                          1,588,000   29-Sep-97       GS
  Railways                                                                                         3,235,000
    1620 Enhancement of Operational Efficiency on Indian Railways                                  1,050,000    5-Dec-91                               HS
    1621 Rationalization of Nonbulk General Cargo Traffic                                            560,000    5-Dec-91                               HS
    1622 Improvement of Traffic Costing and Financial Management Reporting of Indian Railways        325,000    5-Dec-91                               PS
    2721 Railway Sector Improvement                                                                  800,000   19-Dec-96                               PS
    4053 Management Consulting Services to Indian Railways                                           500,000   19-Dec-02                               PS
  Telecommunications & Communications                                                              1,325,000
    1123 Management Training for DOT                                                                 390,000    9-Feb-89
    1124 Study of DOT's Specifications for PIJF Cable                                                 90,000    9-Feb-89
    1125 Study of Industrial Engineering Standards and Costing Systems                               270,000    9-Feb-89
    2611 Institutional Support for Telecommunications Development                                    575,000    22-Jul-96      GS
  Multimodal Transport Sector Development                                                            150,000
    3445 Establishing a Public Private Joint Venture for the West Bengal North-South Economic        150,000   25-May-00                               S
          Corridor Development
Energy                                                                                            17,754,000
 Energy Sector Development                                                                        11,010,000
    1365 Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Operational Improvement                                        740,000   30-Aug-90       GS
    1366 Environment Monitoring and Pollution Control                                                490,000   30-Aug-90       GS
    1597 Safety and Environmental Management of ONGC's Activities                                    890,000    2-Jan-92
    2490 Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs in Andra Pradesh                         300,000   20-Dec-95
    2738 Preparation of a Power System Master Plan for the State of Gujarat                          600,000   17-Dec-96       GS        GS
    2739 Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs in Gujarat                               300,000   17-Dec-96       GS        GS
    2740 Review of Electricity Legislation and Regulations in Gujarat                                235,000   17-Dec-96       GS        GS
         Financial Management Support to Kheda & Rajkot Distribution Centers of the Gujarat
    2741                                                                                             580,000   17-Dec-96       GS        GS
         Electricity Board
    2742 Solicitation of Private Sector Implementation of the Chhara Combined Cycle Power            375,000   17-Dec-96
    2980 Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development                                                   1,000,000    7-Jan-98       PS                      S
    3305 Support to the Power Finance Corporation                                                  1,000,000   24-Nov-99       GS
    3573 Reorganization Plan for Gujarat Electricity Board                                           600,000   13-Dec-00       GS                       S
    3574 Consumer Awareness and Participation in Power Sector Reforms                                 50,000   13-Dec-00                                S
    3575 Support to Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission                                        450,000   13-Dec-00                               HS
    3882 Development of a Transfer Scheme for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform                     400,000   14-Jun-02       GS                       S
    3883 Legal Support for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform                                        150,000   14-Jun-02                                S
    3972 Strengthening Consumer and Stakeholder Communication for Madhya Pradesh Power               150,000    5-Nov-02
         Sector Reform                                                                                                                                 PS
    4083 Building the Capacity of Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission                            500,000   24-Jan-03                               HS
    4241 Reorganization of Assam State Electricity Board                                           1,000,000   10-Dec-03                                S
    4242 Institutional Development for Rural Electrification                                         400,000   10-Dec-03
    4243 Policy and Legal Support for Power Sector Reforms                                           100,000   10-Dec-03                               S
    4496 Capacity Building for Clean Development Mechanism                                           700,000   17-Dec-04
          94          Appendix 5


 Sector/Subsector                                                                                                                 Rating
     TA                                                                                           Amount        Date of                     Other OED
         Title                                                                                                              TCR   TPER
     No.                                                                                            ($)        Approval                    Assessments
 Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)                                            4,444,000
   1228 APSEB Operational Improvement Support                                                      1,000,000   21-Nov-89          GS
   1229 National Program for Environmental Management for Coal-Fired Power Generation                664,000   21-Nov-89          PS
   1416 Undertaking a Review of the Hydrocarbon Sector Operations                                    100,000    8-Nov-90
   1598 Evaluation of Petroleum Exploration and Development Risk Contracts                           180,000   14-Nov-91
   1645 Examination of Public Sector Oil Refining, Distribution and Marketing Activities             200,000    2-Jan-92
   1646 Promotion of Private Sector Investment in Downstream Activities                              400,000    2-Jan-92
   1701 Training Workshop on Environmental Issues Related to Electric Power Generation               100,000   25-May-92
   2008 Regulatory Framework for the Gas Industry                                                    600,000    7-Dec-93    GS
   2702 Preparation of Natural Gas Development Master Plan                                           600,000    9-Dec-96    GS
   2775 Hydrocarbon Exploration and Production Database and Archive System                           600,000     3-Apr-97   GS
 Transmission & Distribution                                                                       1,200,000
   1756 Study of Bulk Power and Transmission Tariffs and Transmission Regulations                    600,000   29-Sep-92    GS    GS
   3380 Private Sector Participation in Electricity Transmission                                     600,000   28-Dec-99    GS
 Hydropower Generation                                                                               500,000
   4630 Uttaranchal Power Sector Capacity Building                                                   500,000   11-Aug-05
 Renewable Energy Generation                                                                         600,000
   2648 Institutional Strengthening of Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency, Ltd.              600,000   26-Sep-96    GS
Law, Economic Management, & Public Policy                                                         19,880,500
 Public Finance & Expenditure Management                                                           7,029,500
   2362 Improvement of State Sales Tax Structure and Administration                                   99,500    14-Jul-95   GS    PS
   2432 Capacity Building of Income Tax Administration                                               550,000   26-Oct-95    GS    GS
   2668 Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances                                                          600,000   23-Oct-96    GS    PS
         Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance Reform and Institutional
   2943                                                                                              780,000   15-Dec-97    GS    GS
         Strengthening
   3576 Supporting Fiscal Reforms in Kerala                                                        1,000,000   13-Dec-00    GS                 S
   3856 Value-Added Tax Reform: Capacity Building at the Postimplementation Stage                    600,000   11-Apr-02
   4128 Budget Procedure Reform, Computerization, and Expenditure Management (ASSAM)               1,000,000   17-Jun-03
   4263 Capacity Building for Tax Administration                                                   1,000,000   16-Dec-03
   4297 Capacity Building for Fiscal Reforms in Sikkim                                               600,000   18-Dec-03                       HS
   4370 West Bengal Development Finance                                                              800,000    6-Aug-04                        S
 Economic Management                                                                               7,056,000
   1862 Project Monitoring and Procedure Streamlining                                                100,000   30-Mar-93
   2367 Program of Studies on Economic and Policy Reforms                                            476,000    28-Jul-95   GS
   2530 Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring Program                                     100,000    6-Feb-96
   2552 Restructuring Program for State-Owned Enterprises in Gujarat                                 600,000    2-Apr-96    GS     S
   3485 Participatory Poverty Assessment at the State Level                                          690,000   29-Aug-00    GS
   3880 Integrating Poverty Reduction in Programs and Projects                                       640,000   14-Jun-02
   3911 Participatory Poverty Assessment at the State Level, Part II                                 750,000   29-Aug-02
   4066 Policy Research Networking to Strengthen Policy Reforms                                      700,000   19-Dec-02
   4890 Mainstreaming Public-Private Partnership at State Level                                    3,000,000   11-Dec-06
 National Government Administration                                                                3,910,000
   1722 Assessment of National Renewal Fund                                                           99,000   29-Jun-92
   2136 Foreign Aid Management Information System                                                    361,000   18-Aug-94    PS
   2716 Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board                  850,000   18-Dec-96    GS    HS
   2793 Foreign Aid Management Information System                                                    100,000   19-May-97
    3338 Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net in Madhya Pradesh      600,000   14-Dec-99    PS    PS
   3379 Strengthening Disaster Mitigation and Management at the State Level                        1,000,000   28-Dec-99    GS
   3563 Institutional Strengthening of the Aid Accounts and Audit Division of the Ministry of        600,000   08-Dec-00
        Finance
   3869 Participative and Pro-Poor Fiscal and Administrative Reforms in Kerala                       150,000   24-May-02                       PS
   3870 Strengthening State Government Effectiveness and Accountability in Kerala                    150,000   24-May-02                       U
 Subnational Government Administration                                                             1,285,000
   2579 Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment Corp.                                  500,000   30-May-96    GS     U
   2944 Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh                                             700,000   15-Dec-97    GS
   3537 Support for India States' Reform Forum 2000                                                   85,000   13-Nov-00
 Law & Judiciary                                                                                     600,000
   2521 Training for Alternative Dispute Resolution                                                  100,000   27-Dec-95
   4153 Administration of Justice                                                                    500,000    25-Jul-03
                                                                                                                             Appendix 5          95

 Sector/Subsector                                                                                                                         Rating
     TA                                                                                              Amount        Date of                          Other OED
         Title                                                                                                                  TCR       TPER
     No.                                                                                               ($)        Approval                         Assessments
Finance                                                                                              11,448,355
  Pensions, Insurance, Social Security, & Contractual Savings                                         3,550,000
         Reform of the Private Pension and Provident Funds System Reform and the Employees'
    3367                                                                                              1,000,000   26-Dec-99     GS        PS
         Provident Fund Organization
         Policy and Operational Support and Capacity Building for the Insurance Regulatory and
    3460                                                                                                800,000   22-Jun-00     GS
         Development Authority
    4226 Pension Reforms for the Unorganised Sector                                                   1,000,000   25-Nov-03                            HS
    4548 State-Level Pension Reforms                                                                    750,000   23-Dec-04

  Capital Markets & Funds                                                                             2,149,855
      1563 Development of the Mutual Fund Industry                                                      350,000   12-Sep-91
      2357 Institutional Strengthening of the National Stock Exchange                                    99,855    04-Jul-95
      3473 Development of Secondary Debt Market                                                         600,000    28-Jul-00    GS                     HS
      4010 Reform of the Mutual Funds Industry                                                          800,000   04-Dec-02     GS                      S
      4202 Demutualization and Consolidation of Indian Stock Exchanges                                  150,000   21-Oct-03                            PS
      4203 Regulation and Supervision of Derivative Instruments                                         150,000   22-Oct-03                             S
  Housing Finance                                                                                     1,650,000
      2833 Strengthening Housing Finance Institutions                                                   600,000    24-Jul-97    GS
      3067 Restructuring State-Level Housing Institutions                                               500,000   11-Sep-98
      3586 Building HUDCO's Capacity for Lending to Community-Based Finance Institutions                150,000   15-Dec-00
      3732 Assessing the Role of Mortgaged-Backed Securities                                            150,000    2-Oct-01
      4569 A Study on the Development of an Agency to Facilitate Issuance of Residential Mortgage-      250,000   25-Feb-05
           Backed Securities                                                                                                                           HS
  Banking Systems                                                                                     1,400,000
      1806 Institutional Strengthening of ICICI and other Financial Institutions                        600,000   17-Dec-92     PS
           Developing the Enabling Environment for and Structuring Asset Reconstruction
      3943                                                                                              800,000   22-Oct-02     GS                     S
           Companies in India
  Finance Sector Development                                                                          2,698,500
      1007 Financial Sector Profile Study                                                                48,500     13-Jul-88
      3739 Impact on Poverty Reduction of Financial Sector Policies and Reforms                         150,000    11-Oct-01
      3866 Secured Transactions Reform                                                                  500,000   21-May-02                            S
      4887 Capacity Building for Rural Cooperative Credit Structure Reform                            2,000,000   08-Dec-06
Multisector
  Multisector                                                                                         5,000,000
      2066 Earthquake Emergency Rehabilitation Management                                               600,000    3-Mar-94
      2495 Human Development Study                                                                      400,000   21-Dec-95
           Strengthening Microfinance Institutions for Urban and Environmental Infrastructure
      3344                                                                                              500,000   17-Dec-99     GS
           Finance
      3791 Enhancing Private Sector Participation in Infrastructure Development at State Level        1,500,000   11-Dec-01
      4780 Knowledge Management and Capacity Building                                                 2,000,000   17-Apr-06
Agriculture and Natural Resources                                                                     7,570,000
  Environment & Biodiversity                                                                          4,570,000
      2296 Strengthening EIA Capacity and Environmental Legislation                                     500,000    3-Feb-95     GS
      3423 Environmental Management at the State Level                                                3,620,000   22-Mar-00
      3784 Conservation and Livelihood Improvement in the Indian Sundarbans                             450,000    4-Dec-01     GS
  Irrigation & Drainage                                                                               1,900,000
      4573 Water Users' Association Empowerment for Improved Irrigation Management in                 1,900,000   29-Mar-05
           Chhattisgarh
  Agriculture Production, Agroprocessing, & Agrobusiness                                                600,000
      4192 Agribusiness and Commercial Agricultural Assessment                                          600,000   09-Oct-03
  Water Resource Manangement                                                                            500,000
      3715 Madhya Pradesh Integrated Water Resources Management Strategy                                500,000   06-Sep-01     GS
Industry and Trade                                                                                      725,000
  Industry                                                                                              725,000
      2049 Technical Assistance to Facilitate Mergers and Acquisitions as a Route for Industrial        100,000   27-Dec-93
           Restructuring
      2403 Energy and Environmental Management of the Industrial Development Bank of India              585,000   26-Sep-95     GS
      2049 TA to Facilitate Mergers & Acquisitions as a Route for Industrial Restructuring               40,000   19-Feb-96
           (Supplementary)
Health, Nutrition, and Social Protection                                                                800,000
  Social Protection                                                                                     800,000
      3365 Capacity Building for Social Development                                                     800,000   23-Dec-99     GS
          96           Appendix 5




 Sector/Subsector                                                                                                                                   Rating
     TA                                                                                                   Amount          Date of                             Other OED
         Title                                                                                                                          TCR        TPER
     No.                                                                                                    ($)          Approval                            Assessments
Urban Development                                                                                         11,170,000
    2098 Urban Sector Profile                                                                                400,000      14-Jun-94      GS
         Capacity Building for Improved Infrastructure Development in Selected Municipalities in
    2202                                                                                                      600,000      9-Nov-94      GS
         Karnataka State
    2368 Institutional Strengthening of Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Finance Corporation                   100,000      28-Jul-95
    2471 Resource Mobilization Study for Local Governments in Karnataka                                      300,000     14-Dec-95
    3209 Strengthening Institutional Capacities for Urban Infrastructure Finance and Development             500,000     17-Jun-99

    3324 Community Participation in Urban Environmental Improvement                                           150,000     3-Dec-99
    3480 Reducing Poverty in Urban India                                                                      300,000    16-Aug-00       GS
    3644 Capacity Building for Earthquake Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Housing                      1,300,000    26-Mar-01       GS                       S
         Support for Improvements in the Accounting System of the Calcutta Municipal
    3770                                                                                                      150,000    14-Nov-01       GS                       S
         Corporation
    3902 North Eastern Region Urban Sector Profile                                                            150,000    19-Aug-02                                S
         Capacity Building for Project Management and Community Mobilization in Madhya
    4086                                                                                                      520,000      6-Mar-03                               S
         Pradesh
    4162 Urban Sector Review and Strategy                                                                     480,000    13-Aug-03
    4497 Capacity Building for Municipal Service Delivery in Kerala                                           800,000    17-Dec-04
    4518 Capacity Building for Kerala Sustainable Urban Development                                           500,000    20-Dec-04
    4775 Support for the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission                                    2,000,000    24-Mar-06
    4779 Project Implementation and Urban Management Improvement in the North Eastern                       1,520,000    11-Apr-06
         Region (Phase I)
    4836 Urban Transport Strategy                                                                           1,000,000    12-Sep-06
    4888 Strengthening Urban Project Management in Jammu and Kashmir                                          400,000     2-Dec-06

          Total                                                                                             91,665,855
AD = advisory, APSEB = Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board, ADB = Asian Development Bank, DOT = Department of Telecommunications, EIA = Environmental
Impact Assessment, HUDCO = Housing and Urban Development Coporation, ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India, GS = generally successful,
HS = highly successful, LPG = liquefied petroleum gas, MOST = Ministry of Surface Transport, OED = Operations Evaluation Department, ONGC = Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation Limited, PIJF = Polyethylene Insulated Jelly-Filled, PS = partly successful, S = successful, TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion
report, TPER = technical assistance performance evaluation report, U = unsuccessful.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                              Appendix 5          97

                      Table A5.4: Summary of Evaluated PSO Project Performance in India
                                               Development of         Investment
Name                                            Private Sector       Performance                          Comments/Issues
Polyesters Manufacturing Co.                  Partly Satisfactory     Satisfactory    Exited - FIRR was lower than projected but still a
                                                                                      respectable 14.4%.
Industrial Credit Co. (LOE)                        Excellent           Excellent      Exited - FIRR for the project was 23.2%.
Petrochemicals Manufacturing Co.              Partly Satisfactory    Unsatisfactory
                                                                                      Exited - Investment was sold at half the purchase cost.
Acrylics Manufacturing Co.                       Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory   Exited - only $425,000 was recovered from $1.6 million
                                                                                      investment.
Venture Fund A                                   Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory   Exited - FIRR for investment was negative.
Electric Supply Co.                              Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Loan had to be restructured due to operational and
                                                                                      financial problems of company but loan has since been
                                                                                      current.
Finance and Leasing Co. A                       Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory   Original purposes not met due to merger w/ a private
                                                                                      bank
Electric Supply Co. II                           Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Loan had to be restructured due to operational and
                                                                                      financial problems of company, but loan has since been
                                                                                      current.
Finance and Leasing Co. B                         Cancelled                --         --
Finance and Leasing Co. C                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Exited - Loan was fully repaid on time.
Finance and Leasing Co. D                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Exited - Loan was fully repaid on time.
Private Bank A                                Partly Satisfactory    Unsatisfactory   Exited - FIRR was a low 4.3%.
Private Bank B                                Partly Satisfactory      Excellent
                                                                                      Exited - FIRR was a high 39.4% but Private Bank B was
                                                                                      taken over after ADB exit due to governance issues.
Finance Co. A                                   Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory   Investment in Finance Co. A was a mere consequence
                                                                                      of merger of Finance & Leasing Co. A and Private Bank
                                                                                      A.
Venture Fund B                                   Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory   FIRR as of year-end 2006 is 2.6% only.
Private Equity Fund A                             Excellent           Satisfactory    Fund winding down - FIRR as of year-end 2006 is
                                                                                      11.5%.
Equity Management Co.                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Exit from Equity Mgt. Co. tied with exit from Private
                                                                                      Equity Fund A.
Capital Markets Co.                              Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory   Exit uncertain due to failure of sponsors to list shares.
Securities Co.                                    Cancelled                --         Cancelled due to lack of demand.
Gilts Co.                                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Exit still uncertain because sponsors were supposed to
                                                                                      list company's shares. FIRR was computed at 18.5% at
                                                                                      year-end 2006.
Power Generation Co. A                            Cancelled                --         Financial difficulties of main sponsor.
Infrastructure Finance Co. A                      Excellent            Excellent      Exited - Actual FIRR was 24% vs. projection of 19%.
Mortgage Credit Guarantee Co.                         --                   --         Documents under negotiation.
Infrastructure Fund A                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Disbursement in progress.
Medical Service                                   Cancelled                --         Cancelled due to noncompetitveness of ADB rates .
Transmission Co.                                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Fixed rate seriously at risk over project life
Housing Finance Co. A                             Cancelled                --         Cancelled due to noncompetitveness of ADB rates .
Housing Finance Co. B                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Loan fully disbursed; recovery not commenced.
Petrolum and Gas Co.                             Satisfactory          Excellent      Stocks traded 4.6x cost at year-end 2006.
Power Generation Co. B                            Cancelled                --         Cancelled due to noncompetitveness of ADB rates .
Private Equity Fund B                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Disbursement in progress.
Asset Reconstruction Co.                          Cancelled                --         Cancelled due to regulatory issue.
Infrastructure Finance Co. A                     Satisfactory              --         Agreement not yet signed.
Private Bank C                                    Cancelled                --         Cancelled due to regulatory issue.
Private Equity Fund C                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Disbursement in progress.
Gas Co.                                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Investment fully disbursed.
Infrastructure Fund B                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory    Disbursement in progress.
Private Equity Fund D                            Satisfactory              --         Agreement not yet signed.
Infrastructure Finance Co. B                     Satisfactory              --         Agreement not yet signed.
NTPC Capacity Expansion Financing Facility       Satisfactory              --         Disbursement in progress.
Petrolum and Gas Co. II                          Satisfactory              --         Agreement not yet signed.
FIRR = financial internal rate of return, LOE = line of equity, PSO = public sector operations.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.
98        Appendix 5



                        Table A5.5: India Economic and Sector Works
                                           Title                                    Date Published
     A. Discussion Papers
     Regional Trade Agreements in the Doha Round: Good for India?                    7 June 2007
     Policy Environment and Regulatory Reforms for Private and Foreign              26 April 2007
     Investment in Developing Countries: A Case of the Indian Power Sector
     The Macroeconomic Effects of Infrastructure Financing: A Tale of Two            29 Jan 2007
     Countries - Paper
     Free Trade Agreement between People's Republic of China and India:              26 Jan 2007
     Likely Impact and Its Implication to Asian Economic Community
     The Macroeconomic Effects of Infrastructure Financing: A Tale of Two            29 Jan 2007
     Countries - Presentation
     An Introduction to United Nations Industrial Development Organization &         4 Sept 2006
     Cluster Development in India - Presentation
     Policy Steps to Initiate Cluster Interventions in a Country/Region/Sector-        10 March
     Rural Roads Program in India                                                           2006
     Joining the Mainstream: Impact of Transport Investment on Poverty              8 March 2006
     Reduction
     Road Safety and it Socio-economic Impacts on the Poor                          7 March 2006
     Gender in Road Infrastructure                                                  7 March 2006
     Integrated Government Financial Management Information Systems                  13 Dec 2005
     Poverty Targeting and Village Level Governance: A Case Study from Uttar         24 Nov 2005
     Pradesh, India
     Open Education Systems in India                                                  1 Nov 2005
     ICT Innovation for Poverty Reduction: What Experience Say                       13 July 2005
     Conducive Environments for Sustainable e-Community Centers                      13 July 2005
     Challenges of Sustainability                                                   30 June 2005
     The Role of ICT and Public Sector Reforms in Sri Lanka and India                 5 Oct 2004
     Obstacles to Private Power Investments in India                                  9 Dec 2004
     Poverty Targeting in Asia: Experiences from Five Country Studies -              8 Sept 2004
     Presentation
     Poverty Targeting Poverty in India ­ Presentation                               8 Sept 2004
     Experiences with Poverty Targeting in Asia                                     16 April 2004
     Poverty Targeting in Asia: Experiences from India, Indonesia, the              16 April 2004
     Philippines, People's Republic of China and Thailand
     Poverty Targeting in Asia: Country Experience of India                           5 Feb 2004

     B. Research Policy Briefs/ Research Paper Series
     Policy and Regulatory Environment for Private Investment in the Power          20 Dec 2006
     Sector
     Poverty Targeting in Asia: Experiences in India, Indonesia, the Philippines,   1 March 2004
     People's Republic of China and Thailand
     Employees in Asian Enterprises: Their Potential Role in Corporate               1 April 2003
     Governance
     The Role of Foreign Banks in Post-Crisis Asia: The Importance of Method          1 Jan 2003
     of Entry
     Have India's Financial Market Reforms Changed Firms' Corporate                  1 June 2002
     Financing Patterns?
     Road from State to Market ­ Assessing the Gradual Approach to Banking          25 Feb 2002
     Sector Reforms in India
     The Basic Characteristics of Skills and Organizational Capabilities in the      1 Feb 2001
     Indian Software Industry

     C. EDRC Occasional Papers/ERD Working Paper Series
     Adjustment and Distribution: The Indian Experience (No. 017)                     June 1998
                                                                                     Appendix 5        99

                                       Title                                          Date Published
     Poverty Estimates in India: Some Key Issues (No. 51)                                May 2004

     D. Books, Periodicals, Studies and Reports
     Rehabilitation and Management of Tanks in India ­ A Study of Select States               2006
     From Disaster to Reconstruction: A Report on ADB's Response to the Asian             Dec 2005
     Tsunami
     Curbing Corruption in Tsunami Relief Operations                                          2005
     Investing in Ourselves: Giving and Fund Raising in India                           March 2004
     Anti-Corruption Policies in Asia and the Pacific                                         2004
     Pricing and Infrastructure Costing for Supply and Distribution of CNG and         15 May 2003
     ULSD to the Transport Sector in Mumbai, India
     Combating Trafficking of Women and Children in South Asia Regional                   April 2003
     Synthesis Paper for Bangladesh, India, and Nepal
     Role of Central Banks in Microfinance in Asia and the Pacific: Country                    2000
     Studies
     Rising to the Challenge in Asia: A Study of Financial Markets: Volume 05 ­                1999
     India
     Mortgage-Backed Securities Markets in Asia                                                1999
     India Urban Sector Strategy                                                               1998
     Rural Poverty in Developing Asia Volume 1: Bangladesh, India, and Sri                     1994
     Lanka
     Energy End Use: An Environmentally Sound Development Pathway                              1993
CNG = compressed natural gas, EDRC = Economic Development Resource Center, ERD = Economics and Research
Department, ICT = information and communication technology, ULSD =ultra-low surface diesel.
Source: Asian Development Bank Institute and Economics and Development Resource Center, ADB. Manila.
100     Appendix 6

                                  DATA ON ADB OPERATIONS

              Table A6.1: Poverty Incidence and ADB Lending (2003-2006)

         State Groups by                                      Distribution of
                                      No. of Poor by                            ADB Lending to
        Poverty Incidence                                      Poor across
                                      State Groups                               State Groups
         Rate in 2004/05                                      State Groups

      High                                106,537,637                 35%               35%
      Medium                              173,629,235                 57%               33%
      Low                                  23,750,314                  8%               32%
         Total                            303,917,186                100%              100%
      Note: States are grouped according to their poverty incidence rates: Low is less than 15%,
      medium is 15%-34%, and high is 35% and above.
      ADB = Asian Development Bank.
      Sources: Country assistance program evaluation team using data from the
                National Sample Survey for India and Asian Development Bank
                database.




                 Figure A6.1: Poverty Incidence and ADB Lending (1986-2006)

                                     ADB Lending by State Group
                                                             H=22%
                                  L=16%                    ($1.3 billion)
                               ($901 million)




                                            M=62%
                                          ($3.6 billion)


                 Note: L= poverty incidence of less than 15%, M= poverty incidence of
                 15%-34%, H= poverty incidence of 35% and above.
                 ADB = Asian Development Bank.
                 Sources: Country assistance program evaluation team using data from
                          the National Sample Survey for India and Asian Development
                          Bank database.
                                                                                                          Appendix 6     101

                    Table A6.2: Absolute Poverty Levels and ADB Lending (2003-2006)
   State Groups by                                                     Distribution of
                                              No. of Poor by State                            ADB Lending by State
Absolute Poverty Levels                                                 Poor Across
                                                     Groups                                         Groups
       (2004/05)                                                       State Groups
High                                             130,220,103                    43%                             ­
Medium                                           129,721,799                    43%                           19%
Low                                               43,975,284                    14%                           81%
                    Total                        303,917,186                   100%                          100%
Note: States are grouped based on number of people experiencing poverty: High= greater than 30 million people, medium=
11-30 million people, low= 10 million people and below.
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Sources: Country assistance program evaluation team using data from the National Sample Survey for India
          and Asian Development Bank database.


                      Figure A6.2: Absolute Poverty Levels and ADB Lending (1986-2006)

                                                    ADB Lending by State Group
                                                                        H=6%
                                                                     ($371 million)



                                L=48%
                             ($2.8 billion)


                                                                                           M=45%
                                                                                         ($2.6 billion)




                            Note: States are grouped based on number of people experiencing
                                  poverty: High= greater than 30 million people, medium= 11-30
                                  million people, low= 10 million people and below.
                            ADB = Asian Development Bank.
                            Sources: Country assistance program evaluation team using data from the
                                       National Sample Survey for India and Asian Development Bank
                                       database.



                              Figure A6.3: Time Lag from PPTA Approval to Loan
                                                   Approval
               45
               40
               35
               30
      Months




               25
               20
               15
               10
                5
                0
                 88

                 89

                 90

                 91

                 92

                 93

                 94

                 95

                 96

                 97

                 98

                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03

                 04

                 05

                 06
               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               19

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20




                                  Average No. of Months from PPTA Approval to Loan Approval
               PPTA = projcet preparatory technical assistance.
               Source: Asian Development Bank databse.
102   Appendix 6



                                 Figure A6.4: Annual Commitment Charges Collected and
                                                       Capitalized
                      16.0
                                                                                                                                                  14.6
                                                                                                                                                   14.2
                      14.0
                                                                                    13.2
                      12.0                                                   12.5                                                          12.0
                                                                                           11.9
                      10.0                                            10.4                                                          10.4
        $ million


                                                                8.4                               8.7
                       8.0
                                                                                                        7.0                   7.2
                       6.0                                6.1                                                 6.3
                                                                                                                    5.6 5.1
                                                    4.9
                       4.0
                                          3.0 3.2
                       2.0
                                    0.8
                       -
                             87

                             88

                             89

                             90

                             91

                             92

                             93

                             94

                             95

                             96

                             97

                             98

                             99

                             00

                             01

                             02

                             03

                             04

                             05

                             06
                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           19

                           20

                           20

                           20

                           20

                           20

                           20

                           20
                       Source: ADB Controller's Department, Loan Accounting Division.




                                            Figure A6.5: PSOD Country Exposure
                       350                                                                                                             25%

                       300




                                                                                                                                                  % of Total ADB PSO Exposure
                                                                                                                                       20%
                       250

                                                                                                                                       15%
                       200
          $ million




                       150
                                                                                                                                       10%

                       100
                                                                                                                                       5%
                           50

                       -                                                                                                               0%
                                 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
                                           Total Exposure India                      % Country Exposure of India

                      ADB = Asian Development Bank, PSO = private sector operations, PSOD = Private
                      Sector Operations Department.
                      Source: Asian Development Bank.


                                Figure A6.6: Disbursement Ratio Trends of Project Loans
                                                      (1987-2006)
          40.0

          30.0

          20.0

          10.0

             -
                            1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

                                                                 Ind Projects               ADB Projects

       Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                                         Appendix 6   103

                               Figure A6.7: Disbursement Ratio of OCR Funded
 40.0
                                             Projects (1987-2006)
 35.0

 30.0
 25.0

 20.0
   15.0

  10.0
    5.0

   -
                   1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

                                                                 OCR-India               OCR-A DB
    OCR = ordinary capital resources.
    Source: Asian Development Bank database.


                                        Figure A6.8: Undisbursed Loan Balances
                    4,000
                    3,500
                    3,000
                    2,500
$ Million




                    2,000
                    1,500
                    1,000
                      500
                       -
                                1998       1999      2000         2001           2002         2003      2004     2005     2006

                     Project    1,559      867       1,456        1,762          2,311        2,461     2,505    3,181    3,468
                     Program     150       250        249         249            335           178       258      53       35
                     Total      1,709      1,117      1,705       2,010          2,646        2,639     2,763    3,234    3,503


                                                              Project             Program               Total

  Source: ADB Loan Financial Information Services.



                             Figure A6.9: Three-Year Moving Averages of Contract
                                             Awards by Loan Type

                   1,200
                   1,000
       $ Million




                     800
                     600
                     400
                     200
                     -
                               1997      1998      1999       2000        2001         2002      2003     2004    2005    2006


                                                   Project           Program                   Total

    Source: ADB Controller's Department, Disbursement Operations Division.
104         Appendix 6

                                   Figure A6.10: Contract Awards Ratio for Project Loans


                    60%

                    50%

               Ratio (%)
                      40%

                    30%

                    20%

                    10%

                      0%
                            1997     1998     1999     2000    2001     2002    2003     2004    2005     2006

                                             India (Project Loans)         ADB-Wide (Project Loans)

                ADB = Asian Development Bank.
                Source: Central Operations Service Office.




       Table A6.3: Thematic and Poverty Classification of Projects, by Strategy Years
                            as of 31 December 2006 (in $ millions)

                                                              Strategy Years
             Classification                          1986-            1996-            2003-          Total      % Share
                                                     1995             2002             2006
      Thematic Classification
              Old Theme Lista
      Economic Growth                                  1,493            4,280            1,430          7,202       41.0%
      Human Development                                  105            2,225              400          2,730       15.5%
      Poverty Reduction                                  105                                              105        0.6%
      Environmental Protection                                            975                             975        5.5%
      Private Sector Development                                          560                             560        3.2%
      Good Governance                                                     844              250          1,094        6.2%
             New Theme Listb
      Inclusive Social Development                                                         226            226        1.3%
      Sustainable Economic Growth                                                        2,827          2,827       16.1%
      Governance                                                                         1,376          1,376        7.8%
      Environmental Sustainability                                                          80             80        0.5%
      Private Sector Development                                                           400            400        2.3%
      Capacity Development                                                                                           0.0%
      Gender                                                                                                         0.0%
      Regional Cooperation                                                                                           0.0%
                   TOTAL                                                                              17,575       100.0%
      Poverty Classification
      Poverty Intervention                                              1,300            1,360          2,660       47.4%
      Others                                                            1,434                           1,434       25.5%
      General Interventionb                                                              1,521          1,521       27.1%
                   TOTAL                                                                                5,615      100.0%
  Notes: Most of the projects have 2 or 3 classifications.
  Classification of projects started in 1991; there are 23 loans or $4,192 million with no classification.
  There are two time periods for the classification: a prior to July 2004; and b after July 2004.
  Private Sector Development is the same classification for both old and new themes
  Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                              Appendix 6            105

  Table A6.4: Thematic and Poverty Classification of Projects, by Strategy Years
                            as of 31 December 2006
                              (by number of loans)

                                                         Strategy Years                                     %
            Classification                                                                    Total        Share
                                            1986-1995        1996-2002        2003-2006
Thematic Classification
        Old Theme Lista
Economic Growth                                         7              21                 6       34        37.4%
Human Development                                       5              11                 2       18        19.8%
Poverty Reduction                                       2                                          2         2.2%
Environmental Protection                                                 7                         7         7.7%
Private Sector Development                                               2                         2         2.2%
Good Governance                                                          5                2        7         7.7%
       New Theme Listb                                                                                       0.0%
Inclusive Social Development                                                              3        3         3.3%
Sustainable Economic Growth                                                              11       11        12.1%
Governance                                                                                5        5         5.5%
Environmental Sustainability                                                              1        1         1.1%
Private Sector Development                                                                1        1         1.1%
Capacity Development                                                                                         0.0%
Gender                                                                                                       0.0%
Regional Cooperation                                                                                         0.0%
              TOTAL                                                                               91       100.0%
Poverty Classification
Poverty Intervention                                                     5                8       13        48.1%
Others                                                                   6                         6        22.2%
General Interventionb                                                                     8        8        29.6%
             TOTAL                                                                                27       100.0%
Notes: Most of the projects have 2 or 3 classifications.
Classification of projects started in 1991; there are 23 loans or $4,192 million with no classification.
There are two time periods for the classification: a prior to July 2004; and b after July 2004.
Private Sector Development is the same classification for both old and new themes
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
    106          Appendix 6

                        Table A6.5: Economic Reforms and Corruption Perceptions

                                                                Power Sector
                                            Investment                                Fiscal Deficit      Corruption
                 Item                                           Performance
                                             Climate a                                 2000-2003 c       Perception d
                                                                  Rating b
More Reform Minded States
Andhra Pradesh                                   2.3                  55.8                  -4.6               421
Gujarat                                          2.4                  54.5                  -5.8               417
Haryana                                          2.5                  23.8                  -3.7               516
Karnataka                                        2.7                  46.9                  -4.4               576
Kerala                                           2.8                  31.6                  -5.2               240
Maharasthra                                      2.3                  35.4                  -4.1               433
Tamil Nadu                                       3.1                  29.7                  -3.8               509
          Group Average                          2.6                  39.7                  -4.5              444.6

Less Reform-Minded States
Bihar                                            0.4                  -3.1                  -4.5               695
Madhya Pradesh                                   1.8                  22.0                  -3.9               584
Orrisa                                           1.7                  21.3                  -7.8               475
Punjab                                           2.9                  27.7                  -6.1               459
Rajasthan                                        1.6                  27.8                  -6.0               543
Uttar Pradesh                                    1.4                  24.4                  -5.1               491
West Bengal                                      1.2                  46.2                  -7.3               461
          Group Average                          1.6                  23.7                  -5.8              529.7
Notes: States were grouped depending whether they are at the top or bottom, respectively, of the sum of the relative
ranking on investment climate, power sector restructuring, and fiscal reforms.
a
  Reflects the climate of the state in terms of its overall investment attractiveness.
Source: Indicus Analytics for the Confederation of Indian Industry. How are the States Doing. 2002.
b
  Ministry of Power GOI. Fourth Report on State Power Sector-Performance Ratings. June 2006.
c
  Singh Nirvikar and T N. Srinivasan. Federalism and Economic Development in India: An Assessment. 2006. Department
of Economics, University of California, St. Cruz. Paper 625.
d
  Transparency International India. India Corruption Study 2005. New Delhi. October 2005.
                                                                                           Appendix 6      107

                     Table A6.6: Weighted Average of Loan Closure Delays
          Item                Years             OCR          IND         INO         PAK          PHI        PRC
Closed OCR Loans              '86-'95           279            7          90          22          51           9
                              '96-'02           209           30          54          13          24          41
                              '03-'06           119           12          34           9          18          27
                              '86-'06           607           49         178          44          93          77

Closed Late                   '86-'95           232            4          84          20          44           5
                              '96-'02           162           21          47          11          23          32
                              '03-'06            99            8          32           5          15          24
                              '86-'06           493           33         163          36          82          61

% Late                        '86-'95           83%          57%         93%         91%         86%         56%
                              '96-'02           78%          70%         87%         85%         96%         78%
                              '03-'06           83%          67%         94%         56%         83%         89%
                              '86-'06           81%          67%         92%         82%         88%         79%

Weighted Average Delay         '86-'95           2.18        1.67       2.23         2.14          2.93      1.43
in Years                       '96-'02           2.11        2.77       1.91         2.56          2.70      1.32
                               '03-'06           1.92        1.57       2.67         1.99          1.73      1.28
                               '86-'06           2.08        2.40       2.17         2.33          2.65      1.31
IND = India, INO = Indonesia, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's
Republic of China.
Notes:
1. Only OCR loans were included in the data set.
2. Actual loan amounts (instead of approved loan amounts) were used to compute for the weighted averages.
Source: ADB Loan Financial Information Services.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    108
                                                                        Table A6.7: Project Monitoring Information System - India




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 6
           INDICATORS                   UNIT      1998             1999             2000             2001              2002              2003              2004             2005             2006              Region              ADB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2006             -2006
I. Public Sector Loans
 A. Loan Portfolio
1. Active Loan Portfolio               No./$mn   26      3,943.3   26     3,825.9   32     4,505.1   32     5,231.3   29      5,189.6   27      5,199.0   32      6,290.9   33     6,013.4   32     6,811.1   155   11,834.7    529   37,349.6
(a) Project Loans                      No./$mn   15      2,573.3   12     2,255.9   15     2,685.1   17     3,601.3   16      3,609.6   19      4,388.6   23      5,355.5   25     5,378.8   26     5,473.8   134   10,051.6    441   29,336.6
(b) Program Loans                      No./$mn    2        500.0    2       500.0    3       650.0    3       550.0    5        780.0    3        380.0    4        505.0    3       355.0    2     1,125.0    12    1,462.2     60    6,969.8
(c) DFI/Credit Loans                   No./$mn    9        870.0   12     1,070.0   14     1,170.0   12     1,080.0    8        800.0    5        430.4    5        430.4    5       279.6    4       212.2     6      282.2     13      532.8
(d) Combined Projects and DFI          No./$mn    0           -     0           -    0           -    0           -    0            -    0            -    0            -    0           -    0           -     3       38.7     15      510.4
2. Average Age of the Active Loan       Years                4.2              3.8              3.2              3.2               2.5               2.2               2.7              3.3              3.7              3.9               3.8
Portfolio
3. Inactive Loan Portfolio             No./$mn                     1        50.0    0            -   0            -   0             -   0             -    0            -   0            -   0            -     0           -     0             -
B. Start-Up Compliance
1. Loans Approved During the Year      No./$mn   1        250.0    5       625.0    7      1,150.0   7      1,500.0   6       1,163.6   6       1,430.0   5       1,200.0   3       367.3    3      1,260.0   15     1,698.7    71        6,821.3
2. Loans Not Yet Signed                  No.                2.0              5.0               5.0              5.0               3.0               5.0               4.0             2.0               2.0              8.0                 44.0
3. Loans Awaiting Effectiveness          No.                3.0              1.0               1.0              4.0               1.0               1.0               3.0             2.0               1.0              4.0                 16.0
4. Average Time from Approval to       Months               5.6              6.3               5.6              6.1               5.6               5.6               6.2             6.8               7.6              3.8                  3.9
Signing
5. Average Time from Signing to        Months                2.1              2.4              2.3              2.2               1.9               2.0               2.1              2.1              2.2               4.8                 4.5
Effectivity
6. Loans that Became Effective more    No./%     4         20.0    6        28.6    9        34.6    6        26.1    4         16.0    4         19.0    6         24.0     6       20.7    6        20.7    89         62.2   287         61.2
than 90 Days after Signing
C. Financial Performance
1. Contract/Commitment                  $mn               543.3            538.5            455.7            124.3             794.4             748.6             550.5           1,037.4          1,714.7          2,339.4              6,372.8
2. Contract/CommitmentRatioa             %                 23.2             36.3             18.0              4.5              22.4              18.5              12.7              26.1             41.7                                  29.3
3. Disbursement Achievement             $mn               620.4            605.1            487.0            269.8             576.5             658.2             381.3             641.0            701.4          1,321.1              5,400.0
4. Disbursement Ratiob                   %                 32.9             35.2             22.2             11.9              17.9              20.0              12.1              16.5             16.7                                  23.4
5. Imprest Fund Turnover Ratiob          %                  1.5              1.4              1.3              0.4               0.6               1.5               1.9               2.3              1.6                                   1.6
6. Submission of APA and AFS (PC
& NC)c
(a) =< 6 months overdue                No./%                       0           -    3         20.0   2         12.5   3          17.6   7          38.9   4          22.2   5        25.0    10       38.5    35         31.0    77          22.4
(b) > 6 =<12 months overdue            No./%                       1         7.1    0            -   0            -   1           5.9   1           5.6   1           5.6   0           -     1        3.8     6          5.3    17           4.9
(c) > 12 months overdue                No./%                       0           -    0            -   1          6.3   0             -   1           5.6   2          11.1   1         5.0     1        3.8     2          1.8     6           1.7
7. Loan Service Payments                $mn               319.3            373.3             594.4            472.6             695.9           1,848.9           1,427.7                            378.7              705.6             3,432.1
8. Net Resource Transfer                $mn               301.1            231.8           (107.4)          (202.8)           (119.4)           1,190.7           1,046.4                            322.7              615.5             1,967.7
D. Portfolio Performance
1. Project Ratings (no. of Loans)
(a) Highly Satisfactory                No./%      2         7.7    2        18.2     0          -     1        3.1     0           -     0           -     0           -     0          -     0          -      1         0.6     3          0.6
(b) Satisfactory                       No./%     19        73.1    8        72.7    27       84.4    25       78.1    21        72.4    23        85.2    24        75.0    27       81.8    30       93.7    135        87.1   479         90.5
(c) Partly Satisfactory                No./%      4        15.4    5        18.5     3        9.4     2        6.3     7        24.1     1         3.7     2         6.3     2        6.1     0          -     14         9.0    31          5.9
(d) Unsatisfactory                     No./%      0          -     3        11.1     2        6.3     4       12.5     1         3.4     3        11.1     6        18.8     4       12.1     2        6.3      5         3.2    16          3.0
2. Projects at Risk (no. of Loans)     No./%                                                          7       21.9     8        27.6     4        14.8     8        25.0     8       24.2     2        6.3     19        12.3    53         10.0
(a) Problem Projects (IP or IO is      No./%     4         15.4    8        29.6    5        15.6     6       18.8     8        27.6     4        14.8     8        25.0     6       18.2     2        6.3     19        12.3    47          8.9
rated PS or U)
(b) Potential Problem Projects (4 or   No./%                                                         1          3.1   0             -   0             -   0             -    2         6.1    0           -     0           -     6           1.1
(c) Problem Projects
(i) Implementation Progress (PS &       No./%     5        19.2    8        29.6     4       12.5     6       18.8     3        10.3     3        11.1    7         21.9    6        18.2    2          6.3    15         9.7    40           7.6
(ii) Impact and Outcome (PS & U)        No./%     2         7.7    4        14.8     2        6.3     1        3.1     5        17.2     2         7.4    2          6.3    2         6.1    0            -     6         3.9    16           3.0
             INDICATORS                    UNIT              1998                   1999                      2000              2001                  2002                  2003                   2004                   2005                  2006                  Region                   ADB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2006                  -2006
3. Risk Ratiosd
(a) Project Implementation Delays          No./%                                                                                7        35.0          6       28.6          2         9.1         3        11.1          8        28.6        10        35.7        55          36.9       132         25.6
(b) Loan Utilization Delays                No./%                                                                                2        16.7          3       37.5          1       20.0          3        60.0          2        40.0          1       25.0         45       500.0          2          7.1
(c) Established, Staffed, and/or           No./%                                                                                1         3.4          2        8.3          1         4.2         0            -         0           -          1        3.3          1          0.7        18          3.8
Operation of PMU/PIU
(d) Fielding of Consultants                No./%                                                                                1         5.0          0           -         0           -         0            -         0           -          1        3.6        21          14.1        29          5.6
(e) Environmental or Social Problems       No./%                                                                                2        11.8          0           -         1         5.3         2          8.7         1         4.0          0           -         1          0.7        14          3.1
(f) Poor Compliance with APA and AFS       No./%                                                                                2         6.9          1        4.2          1         4.2         4        14.3          2         6.7          2        6.7          4          2.8        27          5.8

(g) Poor Compliance with Other             No./%                                                                               16        50.0          5       17.2          1         3.7         5        15.6          6        18.2          6       18.8          2          1.3        52          9.8
Covenants
(h) Shortage of                            No./%                                                                                0            -         0           -         0           -         0            -         0           -          0           -         6          4.0        19          3.7
CounterpartFunds/Cofinancing
(i) Unsettled Cost Overrun                 No./%                                                                                0            -         0           -         0           -         0            -         0           -          0           -         8          5.8         7          1.5
(j) Significant DisbursementDelays         No./%                                                                               11        34.4        12        41.4         11       40.7         11        34.4          9        27.3        14        43.7         10          6.5       163         30.8
(k) In Risk Sector or Country with         No./%                                                                               24        75.0        13        44.8          8       29.6         20        62.5         25        75.8          3        9.4          1          0.6        69         13.0
HIstory of Past        Problems
(l) Project Fielded Missions               No./%                                                                                8        25.0        10        34.5         11       40.7         11        34.4          8        24.2          3        9.4        50          32.3       149         28.2
4. Overall Risk Ratio of the Portfolioe      %                                                                                           25.3                  19.5                  14.0                   18.7                   18.4                  12.5                    12.5                   12.3

E. Portfolio Supervision
1. Proactivity Indexf                      No./%                                                                                4        80.0          7      100.0          7       87.5          3        75.0          6        75.0          7       87.5        14          60.9        27         61.4
2. Average Supervision Intensity(staff-     days                      10.9                   11.5                     8.3                14.9                  26.0                  30.0                   37.6                   21.6                  31.8                   27.4                    25.6
days/project)
3. Loans with Settled CostOverruns          No.                                                                                              -                     -                     -                      -                     -                      -                    1.0                    5.0
4. Loans with Changes in                    No.                         -                      1.0                      -                 2.0                   1.0                    6.0                    7.0                   5.0                   5.0                   19.0                    60.0
ProjectScope
5. Loans with Changes in                    No.                         -                      1.0                      -                    -                  5.0                    3.0                    7.0                   6.0                   4.0                   23.0                    81.0
Implementation Arrangements
6. Loans with Extensions                    No.                        6.0                     7.0                    6.0                 5.0                   3.0                    1.0                    6.0                  10.0                   8.0                   40.0                   154.0
7. Loan Cancellations                       $mn                       94.4                   74.8                    80.0               153.7                 328.8                 128.5                   92.5                 415.0                   55.3                  230.2                   423.0
II. Technical Assistance
1. Active TA Portfolio                    No./$mn                                   50       33.1         50         33.4      51        34.9        72        46.5         73       48.1         78        52.7         63        46.9        50        63.4
2. Average Time from Approval to          Months                                               5.3                    3.3                 3.2                   3.2                    2.9                    2.7                   3.4                   3.4
Signing of TA Letter/Agreement
3. TAs Completed but not Financially      Months                                                                                                                3.2                    2.9                    2.7                   3.4                   3.4
Closed (potential savings)
No.|$ million                                                                       21         4.5        20          4.0      19         1.4        22         1.8         16         1.6        14          1.7         8         0.9          4        1.0

" " = not applicable, APA = audited project sccounts, APS = audited financial statements, DFI = develompent financial institutions, IO = implementation objective, IP = implementation progress, PIU = project implementation unit, PMO = project monitoring unit, PS = partially satisfactory, US = unsa
technical assistance.
a For 2002 to 2001, figures are based on the contract awards and exchange rates as of 31 December 2001.
b Disbursement ratio is the ratio of total disbursement in a given year/period over the net loan amount available at the beginning of the year/period plus the loan amounts of newly approved loans that have become effective during the year/period. Where (i) "Total disbursement in a given year/pe
confirmed disbursement for a particular year/period covered; (ii) "Net loan amoint available at the beginning of the year/period" refers to all the loans that were effective at the beginning of the year; (iii) "Loan amounts of newly approved loans that have become effective during the year/period" ref
approved before and after the beginning of the year that have become effective after the beginning of the year.
c The annualized turnover rate is computed as the ratio of total liquidation over the time-weighted average fund balance for 12 months.
d % of problem-flagged projects (loans) to the total no. of loans in the various loan portfolio categories.
e The weighted average of the 12 risk ratios.
f % of problem projects changed through upgrading, restructuring, closure, or cancellation during the last 12 months.
" " = not applicable




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 109
110         Appendix 7


                   ASSESSMENT OF ADB FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSISTANCE

A.     Background
1.       Prior to 1991, financial markets in India were characterized by government ownership of
the banking system, administrated interest rates, mandatory credit allocations to priority sectors
and other statutory preemptions, a captive market for government securities, reliance on central
bank financing, and capital account restrictions. Capital markets lacked a proper regulatory and
institutional framework. In 1991, the Government of India (GOI) embarked on a gradual process
of phased and coordinated deregulation and liberalization of financial markets, which has so far
led, among other things, to the commercialization and partial privatization of government
financial institutions, the introduction of market-determined interest and exchange rates, phased
capital account liberalization, the introduction of an auction-based system for the government
securities markets, the establishment of a regulatory framework for capital markets institutions
and insurance companies, and the development of an adequate infrastructure for capital market
operations.
2.     Since the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) financial sector operations in India began in
1986, ADB has approved 3 program loans for $1.55 billion and 16 advisory technical assistance
(ADTA) grants for $7.7 million supporting the reform process, as well as 11 financial
intermediation loans under 6 public sector projects involving a total value of $1.07 billion, which
were accompanied by 3 ADTA grants for $1.7 million. In addition, three projects in the amount
of $700 million involving eight multisector financial intermediation loans (FILs) for infrastructure
were approved. An additional $400.3 million in loans and investments for 17 financial institutions
and 7 funds was provided under ADB's private sector window.
B.     ADB Assistance for Financial Sector Development and Reforms
       1.        Banking Sector Development
3.       The Financial Sector Program Loan (FSPL), which was approved during the country's
balance-of-payments crisis in 1991, supported the GOI's wide-ranging sector reform efforts.
While ADB had earlier undertaken two financial sector studies that identified key impediments to
the functioning of financial markets, the agenda for the FSPL was set largely by the
recommendations of a high-level government committee chaired by Shri M. Narasimham. Key
banking sector-related measures included (i) reductions of cash reserve and statutory liquidity
ratios for banks, which reduced the amount of bank funds that had to be held in government
securities, thereby increasing the availability of funds for lending to the private sector; (ii) a
gradual deregulation of interest rates, which, among other things, allowed banks to determine
lending rates for corporate customers; (iii) licensing of new private sector banks, which
enhanced competition and forced government banks to improve customer services and diversify
their operations; (iv) removal of privileged funding, operational opportunities, and tax treatment
for development finance institutions (DFIs), which encouraged their commercialization and
facilitated their entry into the banking market; (v) greater autonomy and operational flexibility for
banks and DFIs, which allowed banks more freedom in opening branches; (vi) the phased
introduction of capital adequacy requirements for banks based on standards of the Basle
Committee, which, applied together with new asset classification and provisioning requirements,
instilled more discipline in banking sector operations, paved the way for a restructuring of the
banking sector along commercial considerations, and enhanced the financial soundness of the
remaining banks and DFIs; (vii) the introduction of international accounting standards for banks
consistent with IAS 30, which enhanced transparency; and (viii) establishment of a financial
supervision board within the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for bank and nonbank financial
institutions. Measures that were not fully complied with included rationalization of priority sector
                                                                                Appendix 7      111

credit limits and a phase-out of the export financing facility and interest rate subsidies on export
credit, which indicates the GOI's reluctance to leave credit allocation to market forces.
4.      Envisaged outcomes related to more competition among and improvements in the
financial soundness of financial institutions were achieved within a few years of the program,
while others such as a reduction of intermediation costs and increase in private access to
financial savings have taken a longer to accomplish. Program measures that showed little
effectiveness included liberalization measures for commercial paper and certificates of deposit,
and efforts to enhance competition and diversity in the banking sector (see Table A8.1)
5.      Other recent ADB assistance in the banking area included support for the development
of a secured transactions regime and the establishment of asset reconstruction companies
(ARCs). Most of the legal components of the secured transactions technical assistance (TA)
had to be cancelled, as the 2002 Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, which, among other things, covered (out of court)
enforcement of movable and nonmovable collateral by secured creditors, was approved around
the same time as the TA itself. However, TA assistance for the establishment of a central
agency for movable property, which is to be set up by March 2009, is considered to be highly
useful by the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Levels of nonperforming assets have declined in recent
years, partly due to the Act, but are still estimated by MOF to be $14 billion­$16.5 billion. The
gross nonperforming loan (NPL) ratio (gross NPL/loans) of scheduled commercial banks in India
improved substantially from 10.4% in FY2002 to 3.3% in FY2006. The net NPL ratio also
decreased from 5.5% in FY2002 to 1.2% in FY2006.
6.      ADB TA helped create an enabling framework for a market-based approach to the
resolution of NPLs. Several banks have established ARCs, and some financial institutions have
started buying assets from banks. However, the level of assets under management is
comparatively small. An increase in the allowable share of foreign investment in ARCs, as
previously suggested by ADB consultants, beyond the current cap of 49% is being considered,
which should help attract the required asset management skills to the market.
7.        In response to GOI requests for assistance in rural finance, ADB processed the Rural
Cooperative Credit Restructuring and Development Program, which seeks to help policy and
institutional reforms (including financial and operational restructuring) of the cooperative credit
structure (CCS) in five states (from among Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, and Rajasthan) that have concurred with the reform agenda. Cooperative
credit structure reform is seen as critical to rural transformation, because it has an all-India
membership base of 135 million and has links to the broader cooperative movement comprising
processing, marketing, input distribution, dairy, and weaving. Implementation of the loan, which
was approved in 2006, appears to be on track, with several states approving the required
changes in cooperative legislation to improve governance. Management of the implementing
agency, the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, acknowledges the
challenges involved in restructuring tens of thousands of small financial institutions and
transforming them into general service providers simultaneously within a short period of time.
About 30% of rural credit cooperatives are expected to close in the process. Others are to
transform themselves into viable providers of financial and other services to the rural poor, who
are not reached by other financial institutions. This will require substantial capacity development
efforts and political commitment to deal with incentive problems inherent to recapitalization
efforts.
            112               Appendix 7
                             Table A7.1: Key Performance Indicators and Achievement of Objectives
                                                                                                                                       Achievement
      Objective/Performance Indicators                                                 Period Averages/Year-end Values
                                                                                                                                       of Objectives
      1. Private access to financial savings                                 1987-1992           1993-1996            1997-2006        Modest
         - Commercial banks' (CBs) claims on private sector/GDP (%)             25.8                23.7                 32.0
         - CBs' reserves/GDP (%)                                                 5.4                 5.4                  3.6
         - CBs' reserves and claims on Government/GDP (%)                       14.6                16.6                 21.3
                                                                          FY1990/91-1991/92   FY1992/93-1996/97    FY1997/98-2005/06
         - CBs' total assets/GDP (%)                                            47.2                43.6                 56.8
         - CB credit to priority sectors/total credit (%)                       37.4                35.5                 34.7
      2. Intermediations costs                                            FY1988/89-1991/92   FY1992/93-1996/97    FY1997/98-2005/06   Substantial
         - Reserve money/quasi money (%) a                                      50.3                48.1                 33.3
         - CBs' noninterest expenses/CBs' average assets (%)                     3.3                 4.5                  2.6
         - CBs' noninterest expenses/CBs' interest income (%)                   36.4                47.6                 29.2
         - Net interest income/working funds (spread) (%)                        2.6                 2.9                  3.1
      3. Competition and diversity                                          End-Dec 1992        End-Dec 1996         End-Dec 2006      Modest
         - Private sector banks (no.)                                           46                  70                   55
         - Private banks assets/CBs total assets (%)                            10.0                12.4                 27.7
                                                                          FY1987/88-1991/92   FY1992/93-1996/97   FY1997/98-2005/06
         - CBs noninterest income/CBs total income                              10.0                12.9                 16.1
      4. Banks/DFIs financial soundness and autonomy                      FY1988/89-1991/92   FY1992/93-1996/97      End-Mar 2006      Substantial
         - Tier 1 risk-weighted capital ratio of nationalized SCBs (%)           3.3                 9.5                  9.1
         - Tier 1 risk-weighted capital ratios of DFIs (%)                  End-Mar 1991        End-Mar 1998         End-Mar 2006
             IDBI                                                               11.2                13.7                 11.7
             IFCI                                                               10.8                12.7                -27.9
             ICICI                                                              10.6                13.0                  9.2
         - Share of nongovernment equity holding (%)                        End-Mar 1991        End-Mar 1998         End-Mar 2006
             SBI                                                                 0.0                40.2                 40.2
             State Bank of Bikaner and Japur                                     0.0                25.0                 25.0
             State Bank of Travancore                                            0.0                24.0                 22.0
             Oriental Bank of Commerce                                           0.0                33.5                 48.9
             Dena Bank                                                           0.0                29.0                 48.8
             Bank of Baroda                                                      0.0                33.1                 46.2
             Bank of India                                                       0.0                23.0                 30.5
             Corporation Bank                                                    0.0                31.6                 42.8
             IDBI                                                                0.0                25.4                 47.3
             IFCI                                                                0.0                50.0                 93.5
      5. NPL resolution                                                   FY1998/99-2001/02   FY2002/03-2005/06      End-Mar 2006      Substantial
         - SCBs' gross NPL/SCBs' total loans (%)                                12.3                 6.1                  3.3
         - SCBs' net NPL/SCBs' total loans (%)                                   6.5                 2.6                  1.2
      6. Bond and money markets development                                                   FY1995/96-1999/00    FY2000/01-2005/06   Modest
         - Primary issuance of Gov't securities/GDP (%)                                              4.2                  5.5
         - Primary issuance of corporate bonds/GDP (%)                                               0.8                  0.4
         - Secondary trading (outright) of Gov't securities/GDP (%)                                  9.8                 38.7
         - Secondary trading (repo) of Gov't securities/GDP (%                                       3.3                 26.0
         - Secondary trading of corporate bonds/GDP (%)                                              0.0                  0.2
         - Commercial paper outstanding/GDP (%)                                                      0.1                  0.3
         - Bank certificates of deposit outstanding/GDP (%)                                          0.6                  0.2
      7. Capital market development                                       FY1992/93-1994/95   FY1995/96-1998/99    FY1999/00-2005/06   Substantial
         - Market capitalization (BSE)/GDP (%)                                  31.5                32.1                 39.1
         - Market capitalization (All-India)/GDP (%)                            35.2                34.1                 43.9
         - Equities turnover (BSE & NSE)/GDP (%)                                23.5                34.7                 56.8
         - Equities turnover (All India)/GDP (%)                                23.5                40.8                 64.7
         - Derivatives turnover (BSE & NSE)/GDP (%)                              0.0                 0.0                 46.3
      8. Mutual funds development                                           End-Mar 1991        End-Mar 1994         End-Mar 2006      Substantial
         - Mutual funds (no.)                                                    8                  12                   38
         - Private sector fund management companies (no.)                        0                   5                   26
                                                                                              FY1993/94-2001/02    FY2002/03-2005/06
         - Gross funds mobilized (public & private sector funds)/GDP(%)                              2.6                 20.1
         - Gross funds mobilized (private sector funds only)/GDP (%)                                 1.4                 17.5
      9. Insurance industry development                                     End-Mar 1999        End-Mar 2001         End-Mar 2006      Modest
         - Life insurance companies (no.)                                        1                    7                   15
         - General insurance companies (no.)                                     4                    8                   15
                                                                                                 FY1999/00         FY2000/01-2005/06
        - Life insurance companies premiums/GDP (%)                                                  1.2                  2.1
        - General insurance companies premiums/GDP (%)                                               0.5                  0.5
        - Life insurance companies investments/GDP (%)                                               6.6                 10.5
        - General insurance companies investments/GDP (%)                                            na                   1.1


 BSE = Bombay Stock Exchange, CB = commercial banks, DFI = development financial institution, FY = fiscal year (April to March), GDP = gross
 domestic product, ICICI = Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India, IDBI = Industrial Development Bank of India, IFCI = International
 Finance Corporation of India Ltd., na = not available, NPL = nonperforming loans, NSE = National Stock Exchange, SBI = State Bank of India, SCB =
 state commercial bank.
 a
    Reserve money is defined as currency in circulation plus the required and excess reserves of banks, while quasi money is composed of
    time deposits. The variable, therefore, is a measure of the (i) efficiency in bank's term-deposit mobilization; (ii) excess reserves, as proxy for
    efficiency of banks in the use of funds; and (iii) required reserves, which represent a degree of financial repression. Accordingly, a lower
    ratio of reserve money to quasi money broadly indicates a more efficient function of financial intermediation.
 b
    Working funds include debt, deposits, reserves, and capital.
Sources: ADB Key Indicators 2007; International Monetary Fund; International Statistics; Reserve Bank of India; Securities Exchange Board of
         India; Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority; Bombay Stock Exchange; National Stock Exchange.
                                                                                                 Appendix 7     113

8.       ADB's private sector operations also sought to support banking sector reforms through
investment in two private sector banks. Domestic private sector banks accounted for only 7.4%
of total bank assets in India in FY1996, but their share rose to 20.5% in FY2006. However, one
of the ADB-invested banks sustained losses and was subsequently merged with another bank,
and the other one experienced governance problems after ADB's exit, which resulted in a run
on the bank and its subsequent merger with a public sector bank.
           2.       Capital Market Development
9.     The FSPL included a number of important capital markets-related measures, such as
the establishment of an independent securities regulator, the removal of government controls
over the pricing of new equity issues, the introduction of capital adequacy standards for brokers,
and the introduction of corporate membership and inclusion of independent members on the
boards of stock exchanges. While these measures did not have an immediate impact on market
volumes, they laid the foundations for a regulated market and improved the corporate
governance of market participants. The program also helped strengthen price-finding
mechanisms for government securities markets.
10.     In 1995, ADB approved the Capital Market Development Program Loan (CMDPL), which
focused on implementation of the GOI's broad capital market reform agenda. The lack of clarity
on policy actions to strengthen the regulatory powers and authority of the capital markets
regulator--the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)--was the only concern about the
program. The program was instrumental in (i) establishing an integrated national market system,
(ii) modernizing market trading infrastructure to support growth and expansion, (iii) eliminating
legal and regulatory impediments to broader market participation, (iv) improving pricing and
efficiency through enhanced competition in the market, and (v) developing a stronger and more
independent securities market regulator. These reforms had a dramatic impact on the efficiency,
transparency, and professionalism of the Indian capital markets. The establishment of the
automated National Stock Exchange (NSE) created an efficient and transparent market, whose
existence forced the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) to also improve its trading systems and
practices. The new market also led to a consolidation among exchanges, as other regional
exchanges lost most of their business to NSE and BSE. The establishment of National
Securities Depository Limited (and later Central Depository Services Limited for BSE), the
dematerialization of securities, introduction of automated securities settlement, reintroduction of
a regulated market for repurchase agreements (repos), and establishment of a revised
regulatory framework for derivatives have increased investor confidence and market liquidity.
The badla1 system was discontinued, and majority foreign ownership of brokers was permitted.
The introduction of regulations for licensing market-making primary dealers in government
securities helped spur market development.
11.     Subsequently, ADB also provided TA for secondary debt market development, reforms
of the mutual fund industry, demutualization of stock exchanges, regulation and supervision of
derivatives markets, and pension reform. These were generally perceived to be useful by MOF,
the executing agency, for furthering the Government's understanding of relevant policy issues
and options. TA helped develop rules and guidelines for regulating and licensing private sector
firms in the mutual fund management business, which were approved in 1993. In the same
year, SEBI began licensing private sector firms to engage in the mutual fund management
business. There are now 27 private sector fund management companies in India, including 16
foreign/joint venture firms. ADB also provided TA to the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority (IRDA). IRDA has implemented some of the recommendations made by the TA related

1
    The badla system, which allowed transactions to be carried forward from one trading settlement cycle to the next,
     was banned by SEBI in March 1994.
114       Appendix 7


to strengthening of the policyholder protection scheme and organizational changes. However,
new legislation (consolidating the Insurance Act of 1938 and the IRDA Act) as suggested by the
TA has not been acted upon yet. ADB has had a number of TA operations in the pensions area,
initially working on pension issues related to the unorganized sector. The GOI's current pension
reform agenda is to replace existing defined benefit schemes for government employees and
bring into place a new pension scheme for the 402 million informal sector workers under a
unified pension arrangement (New Pension Scheme) that is mandatory for the former and
voluntary for the latter. ADB TA provided recommendations for the design of the New Pension
Scheme. ADB is also assisting state governments in estimating their pension liabilities and
identifying reform options.
12.      A number of relevant consultant recommendations under ADB capital markets-related
TA have not been implemented. For example, the level of government ownership in financial
institutions, its role in determining interest rates, large fiscal deficits, lack of transparency about
macroeconomic/monetary targets of RBI, and the underdeveloped institutional investor base
continue to impede the development of bond markets. Mutual fund development is constrained
through the lack of tax incentives and shortcomings in the regulatory framework, including the
lack of an effective self-regulatory structure.
13.     ADB likewise promoted the formation of capital market institutions under its private
sector window. Its first investment in such an institution was under a line of equity granted to the
Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India through which ADB invested $387,000 in
Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited. (CRISIL) in 1987. CRISIL was the first
domestic credit rating agency established in India. It was created at a time when interest rates
were determined by the Government, the secondary market for debt instruments was at an
embryonic stage, and credit ratings of debt issues were not mandatory. Presently, CRISIL is
India's leading rating and research company, with a share of over 60% of the Indian ratings
market (there are four other credit rating agencies in India). CRISIL has rated over 6,600 debt
instruments worth Rs9.79 trillion ($217 billion) issued by over 3,400 debt issuers. CRISIL has
also provided TA for the establishment of rating agencies in Malaysia and Israel. In 2005,
Standard and Poor's acquired a majority stake in the company. CRISIL had a market cap of
Rs12 billion ($275 million) and a net worth of Rs1.6 billion ($37 million) as of year-end 2006.
14.     To help develop the securities market, ADB in 1995 made equity investments in three
subsidiaries of the State Bank of India (SBI), India's largest commercial bank: (i) $21.2 million
equivalent in SBI Capital Markets (SBICAP) to support the expansion of its investment banking
operations and privatization program; (ii) $4.3 million equivalent in SBICAP Securities Limited,
securities company operating in the secondary debt market; and (iii) $4.5 million equivalent in
SBI Gilts Limited (SBIGL), a securities company operating in the primary dealership of
government securities. The proposed investment in SBICAP Securities Limited was eventually
cancelled due to lack of demand.
15.     The actual investment of ADB in SBICAP was $19.98 million or 13.84% of the
company's outstanding capital. SBICAP is one of the dominant players in the Indian capital
markets. According to the SBI's Annual Report for FY2006­2007, SBICAP was ranked as the
number 1 lead arranger in the Asia and Pacific Region (including Japan) for the second
consecutive year by both Project Finance International and Bloomberg. It was also ranked 9th
and 3rd globally by Project Finance International in the project finance arranger and project
finance advisory categories, respectively, in 2006. SBICAP's current focus is on infrastructure
project advisory and syndication mandates, particularly in urban infrastructure and power.
16.   ADB invested $4.192 million in SBIGL to support the development of India's debt market.
The company subsequently merged with the Discount Finance House of India Limited (DFHI) in
                                                                                Appendix 7    115

2004 to form SBI DFHI. The company contributed to establishing and maintaining the primary
dealer system, which in turn served the development of the government securities market as
originally envisaged. Without the presence of SBIGL and SBI DFHI, the absorption of primary
dealers in the primary market, especially at the initial stage and during the FY2005 market
downturn, would have been insufficient. The government securities market of India
demonstrated steady growth and development from 1996 to 2006. The outstanding stock of
government securities (Central Government-issued only) grew at a compounded annual growth
rate of 19.8% from Rs1.7 trillion as of FY1996 to Rs10.3 trillion as of FY 2006. Outstanding
stock of government securities as a percentage of gross domestic product also increased from
14.3% in FY1996 to 28.9% in FY2006. Finally, the average maturity of dated government
securities (with maturities of over 1 year) increased from 5.7 years in 1996 to 16.9 years in
2006.
       3.      Housing Finance
17.     ADB has been supporting housing finance development though a number of credit lines,
an investment in a mortgage guaranty company, as well as through TA for capacity
development of housing finance institutions and the development of mortgage-backed
securities.
18.      Loan proceeds under the first housing finance project, approved in 1997, which were
channeled though the National Housing Bank (NHB), the Housing and Urban Development
Corporation (HUDCO), and the Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) were fully
utilized and provided finance to more than 219,449 households and an additional 191,700 low-
income households, although the project achieved limited success in developing sustainable
channels for microfinance for housing. By comparison, loans to HUDCO and HDFC under the
second housing finance project, approved in 2000, which sought to provide financing for low-
income housing, were cancelled due to the comparatively high costs (London Interbank Offered
Rate plus 60 basis points fee plus an increased government guarantee fee of 120 basis points)
of the ADB line, which were above the costs of funds available from other sources domestically
or internationally at the time. NHB and ICICI Bank are the other two intermediaries. ICICI Bank
managed to utilize its line including $70 million for direct lending for low-income housing and $8
million for microhousing loans that are provided though community financial
institutions/nongovernment organizations. ICICI Bank wants to expand its micro- and low-
income housing lending, and credits the ADB project for its interest in these market segments,
although it finds that subsidized government programs make it difficult for commercial lenders to
compete. NHB utilized only $7 million of the original allocation of $40 million, citing cumbersome
ADB reporting requirements for its primary lenders, in particular the need to calculate the
household income of borrowers for determining eligibility.
19.     The availability of housing finance has increased substantially over the last few years,
from Rs190 billion in 2000/2001 to Rs768 billion in 2004/2005, with 66% of this amount coming
from commercial banks after housing finance was included in priority sector lending
requirements. While commercial institutions appreciated ADB credit lines as a way of widening
their funding base and facilitating access to long-term funds, they see ADB's future role for
housing finance development in the promotion of mortgage-backed securitization through TA
and investments in and the provision of credit enhancements to issuers of such securities.
Securitization is important for the creation of additional headroom for new mortgage financing by
banks. A well-received TA, which was processed by the Private Sector Operations Department,
is seeking to develop an institutional mechanism for the issuance of "true sale" residential
mortgage-backed securities, and to identify necessary related policy and legal changes.
116         Appendix 7


20.     ADB approved two equity investments in the housing finance subsector. Under a line of
equity through ICICI, ADB invested $645,000 in the first bank-sponsored housing finance
company (HFC) in India in 1987. At that time, there were only six HFCs in India, and housing
finance was not a priority business of banks. The ADB-invested company therefore helped fill
the demand for housing loans in the late 1980s and 1990s. The company continues to be
profitable, but the housing finance business has become very competitive in recent years. There
are now 46 HFCs operating in India, and banks have become major players. In fact, banks have
recorded higher annual housing loan disbursements than HFCs since 2003. The dominant
HFCs are two institutions that ADB had provided assistance to via public sector loans-- HDFC
and HUDCO.
21.     The other housing finance subsector investment, approved by ADB in 2002, was an
equity investment of up to $10 million in the India Mortgage Credit Guarantee Co. to help protect
primary mortgage lenders such as banks and HFCs in case of borrower default. However, the
investment has been on hold. It can be set up as soon as regulations for securitization are in
place and the shareholding structure has been agreed upon.
       4.        Infrastructure Finance
22.     ADB approved three public sector financial intermediation projects for infrastructure
financing. Under the 1996 Private Sector Infrastructure Facility, only one of the three selected
intermediaries, ICICI, fully utilized the line, while the Industrial Financial Corporation of India
(IFCI) used only 62.5%, and the line to the Shipping Credit and Investment Company of India
Limited (SCICI) was cancelled. In total, the project helped finance nine subprojects in the power,
transport, and telecommunications sectors, of which five power sector projects and one port
project were assessed to be efficient. The project performance evaluation report for the project
assessed the loan to ICICI to be successful and the loan to the Industrial Finance Corporation of
India to be partly successful due to foreseeable financial problems of the institution, which
precluded it from making new loans. The second objective of the project--to help support
corporate debt markets development through the purchase of nonconvertible debentures issued
by project companies--was not met, as there was no liquidity in such corporate debt
instruments.
23.      Eighty-six percent of the total loan proceeds under the Urban and Environmental
Infrastructure Facility, which was approved in 1999, were cancelled, with only ICICI Bank
utilizing 34% of its credit line. The other intermediaries, Infrastructure Development Finance
Company (IDFC) and HUDCO, cited pricing and ADB procurement requirements, respectively,
as reasons for the lack of demand by project sponsors for the lines. However, ICICI Bank and
IDFC also stated that it was difficult to find suitable private urban infrastructure projects outside
transport and real estate/land development. For example, in the water sector, issues related to
water rights, land acquisition, resettlement, regulatory problems, and lack of available data on
water leakages deterred private sector investment in the sector. ICICI Bank managed to
disburse only part of its line after ADB allowed the use of loan proceeds for energy
efficiency/environment and infrastructure projects by industrial enterprises, although ADB
resettlement policies reduced effective demand even in this market segment. Municipal projects,
on the other hand, were slow to close, and fewer than 20 municipalities in India are deemed
creditworthy by market participants and have an acceptable credit rating. Escrow accounts and
other security are considered essential to mitigate risk, and loan maturities usually do not
exceed 2­3 years.
24.   Of the $200 million Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at the State Level, which was
approved in 2001, $141.3 million has been cancelled, as the intermediaries, Industrial
Development Bank of India and Infrastructure Finance and Leasing Services Limited. (ILFS),
                                                                                              Appendix 7     117

were unable to find suitable subprojects in the designated sectors and the four states.2 With
ADB approval to expand to other states and to finance subprojects it also sponsors, ILFS is
confident that it will be able to withdraw about $50 million of its original allocation of $100
million. ILFS noted that state governments generally lack the capacity to manage the bidding
process for infrastructure projects, and that private sponsors were reluctant to develop smaller
project proposals that would then be put out to competitive bid. While there were no problems in
developing and financing telecommunications, power generation, industrial infrastructure, and
possibly even some of the transport infrastructure and waste management projects of the
largest Indian cities in the private sector, the development of most other infrastructure projects
required some form of public-private partnership (PPP) like the viability gap financing
mechanism of the National Highways Authority of India for national highways development.
25.      Overall, infrastructure financing in India has been constrained by lack of opportunities in
terms of a pipeline of bankable projects. This is primarily because of the slow pace of project
development due to the lack of accountability of public agencies, lack of institutional capabilities
in structuring projects with appropriate risk-return profiles, and lack of risk allocation and
mitigation issues among government officials responsible for project structuring. Model
concession frameworks with generally accepted risk allocation and mitigation provisions have
not evolved in many sectors, thereby increasing project development, structuring, and due
diligence times. In other sectors, policy on private sector investment is still evolving. Private
investment in power still faces issues of power purchase agreements, payment security, fuel
linkages, distribution reforms, control of electricity theft, stability of regulatory principles,
evolution of policy on merchant power plants, etc. Similarly, water supply and sewerage also
face substantial policy barriers to the entry of the private sector, especially related to lack of
political will to increase user charges in lieu of higher levels of service. Coalition politics has
restricted the role of private investment in airports to a few metropolitan airports. The urban
infrastructure sector, which offers immense scope for private investment, is still largely untapped
because of issues related to reform of urban local bodies. Nontransparent bidding processes
have also adversely affected private participation in infrastructure projects. Moreover, poor
contract adherence and inadequate dispute resolution procedures and practices discourage
international developers from undertaking projects in India and raise the cost of funds for
infrastructure projects. State governments play a crucial role in many infrastructure sectors.
Though some states like Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Punjab have taken a proactive role in
promoting private investment, most states do not have a coherent plan for inviting private
investment in infrastructure. Besides political will, lack of capacity in structuring projects for
private investment is a major constraint in such states.
26.      With regard to constraints on the financing side, infrastructure as an asset class is still
evolving in India, and appraisal skills for analysis of complex and project-specific risk allocation
and mitigation are generally low, especially since infrastructure projects operate under complex
contracts and complex legal structures such as special purpose vehicles and escrow accounts.
As large-scale private investment in India is only a recent focus, understanding of these issues
among market participants is not deep. The GOI's approach of evolving standard concession
frameworks in various infrastructure sectors may help increase the general understanding of
risk allocation issues among investors and could lead to scaling up of bank and capital market
interest in infrastructure financing. However, the task of coming up with generally agreed upon
model concession agreements has not been easy, and to date there is only one such authorized
framework in place ­ that for a PPP in national highways.


2
    IDBI utilized only $8.257 million and cancelled the remaining amount of $97.43 million in November 2003, while
    ILFS has cancelled $49.6 million.
118         Appendix 7


27.      Apart from the constraints related to bank lending and contractual savings, provision of
infrastructure financing also suffers from a very weak corporate debt market. Moreover, there
are restrictions on domestic entities' ability to issue bonds in international markets and on the
entry of foreign investors into the domestic bond market. The restrictions on purchases by
foreigners in the corporate and government bond markets are stringent. Although foreign
institutional investors have been allowed to buy bonds since 1996, there has been a cap of $1
billion on the total corporate bonds that all foreign institutional investors can hold. This cap was
lowered to $0.5 billion in 2004. Although the approach to equity inflows has been much more
liberal, portfolio equity inflows have dominated over direct investment. As infrastructure projects
in India are generally not financed through the capital markets, portfolio equity investments do
not provide relief from a general scarcity of sponsor equity. Use of mezzanine financing by
foreign investors is constrained, as the interest rate caps on external commercial borrowings do
not provide adequate scope for differential pricing for debt and quasi equity.
28.     Infrastructure financiers see a role for ADB in the provision of foreign currency funding,
take-out finance, and credit enhancement, particularly during the project start-up period. For
example, ADB's nonsovereign $50 million financing facility for IDFC is addressing the lack of US
dollar-based loan financing for Indian companies and financial institutions that finance
infrastructure with foreign exchange revenues (e.g., ports and airports), and is expected to help
IDFC tap the offshore dollar market without ADB support in the future.
29.     ADB also supported infrastructure financiers under its private sector operations. In 1998,
ADB invested $15.463 million in the equity capital of IDFC, which was envisaged to play a major
role in mobilizing financial resources to meet the growing need for infrastructure facilities in
India. At the end of its 10th year of operation in March 2007, IDFC's total assets amounted to
Rs180 million, and it is now one of the largest infrastructure lending companies in India. As of
end-March 2007, it had provided financial assistance to over 160 projects totaling Rs220 billion.
In 1995, ADB approved an equity investment of up to $15 million in the first equity fund targeted
primarily at the infrastructure sector in India. The fund is well managed and has divested from all
but one of its investments. Notable investments of the fund included a toll road, a toll bridge,
and a gas company.
C. Performance Assessment

       1.        Sector Positioning
30.       ADB's assistance in the financial sector has been well positioned. It has consistently
addressed critical reform areas in banking and capital market development. It also identified the
need to develop domestic debt markets and an institutional investor base, and actively
promoted assistance for mutual fund, pension, and insurance reforms. Although there have
been some attempts to strategize its assistance on the ADB side, most reform-related
assistance was not included in country strategies, but was in response to specific government
requests on an ad hoc basis, whenever opportunities and commitment for further reforms
emerged. In the absence of a comprehensive longer term government roadmap for financial
sector reform, this approach is appropriate, although it makes assistance difficult to plan. The
initial division of labor in the sector between the World Bank and ADB has become more blurred
over recent years, which reflects the GOI's preference for obtaining advice on important,
complex, and controversial topics such as pension reform from a range of sources.
         2.       Relevance
31.     Overall, ADB's financial sector assistance is rated relevant. The policy-based loans were
fully consistent with the GOI's reform programs. While ADB's technical and financial assistance
for financial sector reforms has been highly relevant for addressing pertinent sector problems,
                                                                                Appendix 7    119

the use of stand-alone, supply-driven FILs for housing, infrastructure, industrial, and small- and
medium-sized enterprise finance was generally less relevant, as the provision of funds per se
did little to address underlying structural problems in these sectors that affected effective
demand for financing, or was not needed in the first place considering liquid market conditions.
32.      ADB's traditional support for housing finance development in India has been through the
provision of FILs to housing finance institutions. Although there might be some merit in
capacity-building measures to help build up specific lending capabilities, there has been little
need for ADB funds lately. Recent ADB assistance to promote mortgage-backed securitization
through TA and investments, and the provision of credit enhancements for issuers of such
securities, are more relevant, as they help create additional headroom for new mortgage
financing by banks. ADB's investment in a mortgage guaranty company is in line with this new
focus.
33.    Despite the comparatively large outreach of the banking system, ADB's policy support
for the restructuring of rural credit cooperatives would appear to be relevant, although it is
unclear how tens of thousands of small organizations can be operationally restructured over a
short period of time, given limited financial and personnel resources.
34.    ADB's private sector operations have complemented reform efforts on the public sector
side by supporting private financial institutions during a critical stage of their development.
       3.      Effectiveness
35.      ADB's financial sector assistance overall has been less effective, as only 60% of the
approved amounts under the FILs was actually disbursed (see Table A7.2). The rating is on the
higher end, though, as the FSPL and the CMDPL, additional ADB TA, and ADB's investment in
capital market institutions and private banks helped (i) enhance competition and diversity in the
banking and nonbanking sectors, (ii) enhance the autonomy and financial soundness of banks,
(iii) develop the equity market, and (iv) lay the groundwork for the development of an
institutional investor base and debt markets through the identification of pertinent policy issues
and options. Partial progress has been made in (i) enhancing private access to financial
savings; (ii) developing corporate bond markets; (iii) reducing government ownership in the
banking system; and (iv) eliminating remaining allocative distortions, including priority credit
requirements. A number of relevant TA and policy recommendations have not been
implemented yet.
       4.      Sustainability
36.     Overall, ADB's financial sector assistance is rated likely sustainable. The basic thrust
and direction of ADB-supported financial sector reform programs have been maintained and
expanded on. There has been no reversal of policy direction or content. The sustainability of
individual FILs is mixed. In some cases, ADB programs prompted financial intermediaries to
build up capacity in a particular business segment that they did not service before. In other
cases, assistance had no long-term institutional impact, and no sustainable lending
mechanisms were created.
       5.      Sector Impact
37.    The sector impact of ADB's assistance is rated substantial. Although the GOI would
have proceeded with most reforms without ADB support, the three program loans nevertheless,
helped (i) define and shape the scope of the reform programs, and (ii) facilitate continuing
dialogue with the Government in difficult reform areas. Particularly with regard to capital market
development, institutional investment/pension reform, and NPL resolution, ADB-funded TA
provided significant inputs for policy discussion and reform implementation.
         120       Appendix 7


                                    Table A7.2: Financial Intermediation Loans to India
                                                 Amount       DATE        Cancelled
Loan #               Project Name                                                     % OF Total                      Reasons for Cancellation
                                                 ($'000)    APPROVED       Amount

   778 Industrial Credit and Investment           100,000      3-Apr-86       1,212        1.2%    Cancelled amount negligible.
       Corporation of India Limited (ICICI)
   855 Small-and Medium-Scale Industries          100,000      3-Nov-87      11,791       11.8%    Loan allocations to small-scale industries (SSI) were fully
                                                                                                   utilized within 2 years of loan effectiveness but loans to
                                                                                                   medium scale industries (MSI) were underutilized. Although
                                                                                                   ADB agreed to reallocate loans to SSIs, the higher minimum
                                                                                                   interest rates (14% vs. the original 12.5%-13.5%) discouraged
                                                                                                   full utilization of the loan. Repeated devaluation of the rupee
                                                                                                   also contributed to the shortfall in loan utilization. Part of the
                                                                                                   loan was eventually cancelled.
   975 Industrial Finance Corporation of India    150,000     24-Oct-89      45,499       30.3%    The loan was underutilized because of changes in market
       (IFCI)                                                                                      conditions, specifically the depreciation of the rupee against
                                                                                                   the US dollar. The Government also liberalized its import
                                                                                                   policy by allowing rupees to be used to pay for imports of
                                                                                                   capital goods, thereby limiting the demand for foreign currency
                                                                                                   loans. The Government and IFCI requested cancellation of the
                                                                                                   undisbursed balance of the loan amounting to $45.5 million.

  1072 Second Industrial Credit and Investment    120,000     18-Dec-90      59,467       49.6%    Initially, the loan experienced rapid subloan commitment
       Corporation of India Ltd. (SICICI)                                                          ($106.5 million in commitments were recorded in the 12
                                                                                                   months following loan effectiveness). However, loan utilization
                                                                                                   was severely affected by the substantial devaluation of the
                                                                                                   rupee and the GOI's decision in 1992 not to continue the
                                                                                                   Exchange Risk Administration Scheme (ERAS). The abolition
                                                                                                   of ERAS limited the appeal of foreign currency borrowing to
                                                                                                   only those subborrowers with export income and thereby able
                                                                                                   to hedge their foreign currency exposure.

  1416 Karnataka Urban Infrastructure              20,000     14-Dec-95           -        0.0%    Loan fully utilized.
       Development
  1480 Private Sector Infrastructure Facility:    150,000      7-Nov-96           -        0.0%    Loan fully utilized.
       Industrial Credit & Investment Corp. of
       India Ltd.
  1481 Private Sector Infrastructure Facility     100,000      7-Nov-96      37,502       37.5%    Due to financial problems, IFCI decided to restrict its exposure
       (PSIF): Industrial Finance Corporation                                                      to high-risk infrastructure projects. ADB therefore decided to
       of India Ltd.(IFCI)                                                                         cancel the undisbursed component of $37.5 million at IFCI's
                                                                                                   request.
  1482 Private Sector Infrastructure Facility:     50,000      7-Nov-96      50,000      100.0%    After Board approval of Loan Nos. 1480, 1481 and 1482 under
       SCICI Limited                                                                               the PSIF for ICICI, IFCI and SCICI, respectively, ICICI and
                                                                                                   SCICI decided to merge. The approved loan amount for SCICI
                                                                                                   could have been assumed by ICICI as the surviving entity but
                                                                                                   ICICI decided not to pursue the matter when ADB introduced a
                                                                                                   front-end fee and increased its lending spread.

  1549 Housing Finance (National Housing          100,000     25-Sep-97           -        0.0%    Loan fully utilized.
       Bank)
  1550 Housing Finance (Housing and Urban         100,000     25-Sep-97           -        0.0%    Loan fully utilized.
       Development Corporation)
  1551 Housing Finance (Housing                   100,000     25-Sep-97           -        0.0%    Loan fully utilized.
       Development Finance Corporation)
  1719 Urban and Environmental Infrastructure      90,000     17-Dec-99      90,000      100.0%    Loan cancelled at the request of HUDCO citing pricing and
       Facility (HUDCO)                                                                            ADB procurement requirements, respectively, as reasons for
                                                                                                   lack of demand by project sponsors for the lines.
  1720 Urban and Environmental Infrastructure      80,000     17-Dec-99      52,648       65.8%    65.8% of the approved loan amount was cancelled due to
       Facility (ICICI)                                                                            paucity of projects to be funded. The few creditworthy projects
                                                                                                   had access to cheaper sources of finance vis-à-vis the UEIF
                                                                                                   from sources such as grants/soft loans from state government
                                                                                                   and capital markets. ICICI was only able to disburse part of its
                                                                                                   line after ADB allowed the use of loan proceeds for energy
                                                                                                   efficiency/environment and infrastructure projects by industrial
                                                                                                   enterprises, although ADB resettlement policies reduced
                                                                                                   effective demand even in this market segment.

  1721 Urban and Environmental Infrastructure      30,000     17-Dec-99      30,000      100.0%    Loan cancelled at the request of IDFC citing pricing and ADB
       Facility (IDFC)                                                                             procurement requirements, respectively, as reasons for lack of
                                                                                                   demand by project sponsors for the lines. IDFC also stated
                                                                                                   that it was difficult to find suitable private urban infrastructure
                                                                                                   projects outside transport and real estate/land development.
                                                                                                                                     Appendix 7            121

                                                    Amount         Date           Cancelled
 Loan #               Project Name                                                             % of Total                      Reasons for Cancellation
                                                    ($'000)      Approved          Amount

   1758 Housing Finance II - Housing and             100,000        21-Sep-00       100,000      100.0%     Loan cancelled at the request of HUDCO due to high cost
        Urban Development Corporation                                                                       (LIBOR plus 60 basis points fees plus an increased
                                                                                                            Government guarantee fee of 120 basis points) of ADB funds
                                                                                                            (compared to the cost of funds available in the Indian capital
                                                                                                            market at that time).

   1759 Housing Finance II - National Housing         40,000        21-Sep-00        32,600        81.5%    The plan of NHB to expand its refinancing operations so that
        Bank (NHB)                                                                                          smaller housing finance companies (HFCs) can increase their
                                                                                                            lending to low-income households, community financial
                                                                                                            institutions, and NGOs did not take off as expected. The main
                                                                                                            reason for this was that HFCs were hesitant to lend to low-
                                                                                                            income households. NHB also cited cumbersome ADB
                                                                                                            reporting requirements for its primary lenders, particularly the
                                                                                                            need to calculate the household income of borrowers for
                                                                                                            determining eligibility.

   1760 Housing Finance II - Housing                  80,000        21-Sep-00        80,000      100.0%     Loan cancelled at the request of HDFC due to high cost
        Development Finance Corporation                                                                     (LIBOR plus 60 basis points fees plus an increased
                                                                                                            government guarantee fee of 120 basis points) of ADB funds
                                                                                                            (compared with the cost of funds available in the Indian capital
                                                                                                            market at that time).

   1761 Housing Finance II - ICICI                    80,000        21-Sep-00             -         0.0%    Loan ongoing and no cancellations thus far (96.25% of loan
                                                                                                            amount had already been disbursed as of 31 Jan. 2007).

   1871 Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at    100,000        11-Dec-01        25,162        25.2%    25.2% of the approved loan amount has so far been cancelled
        State Level (Infrastructure Leasing and                                                             due to the lack of bankable projects in the four states selected.
        Financial Services Ltd. (IL&FS)                                                                     With ADB approval to expand to other states and to finance
                                                                                                            subprojects it also sponsors, ILFS is confident that it will be
                                                                                                            able to withdraw at least $50 million of its original allocation of
                                                                                                            $100 million.

   1872 Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at    100,000        11-Dec-01        91,743        91.7%    IDBI requested cancellation of the undisbursed loan amount of
        State Level (Industrial Development                                                                 about $91.7 million in 2003 due to its inability to find eligible
        Bank of India (IDBI)                                                                                subprojects within the selected states.



      Total                                         1,790,000                       707,624         40%
SUMMARY:                                                                           Cancelled
                                                                                    Amount        Number
          Cancelled before loan effectiveness                                       230,000           3
          Cancelled 50% or more of approved loan amount after loan effectivenes     356,458           6
          Cancelled more than 5% but less than 50% of approved loan amount          119,954           4
          Closed projects with negligible (5% or less) or no cancellations            1,212           6
          Ongoing projects (no cancellations as of year-end 2006)                       -             1
                                                                                    707,624          20
ADB = Asian Develoopment Bank, GOI = Government of India, HDFC = Housing Development Finance Corporation, LIBOR
= London Inter-Bank Offered Rate, NGO = nongovernment organizations, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PSIF = Private
Sector Infrastructure Finance.
Source: ADB Project Completion Reports (PCR); ADB Project Performance Reports (PPR).
122    Appendix 7


       6.      Contributions to Development Results
38.     Overall, financial sector reforms helped improve resource mobilization and allocation in
the economy. This can reasonably be expected to have facilitated other economic reforms and
contributed to economic growth. The FSPL was also effective and timely in achieving
macroeconomic stability and helped the Government with the most costly aspect of financial
sector reform-- the recapitalization of public sector banks. In particular, the CMDPL helped
create strong market institutions, and the successful implementation of program measures
related to innovation and market openness has instilled decision makers with confidence for
further reforms.
       7.      ADB Performance
39.     ADB's performance has usually been satisfactory, with some exceptions. The need and
market conditions for the second housing and the urban infrastructure FILs were misjudged by
ADB staff in the social sector division that was processing the loans. TA requirements were not
properly assessed for TA 3866. For several TA operations, consulting firms were hired that
could not do the job, which was partly due to difficulties associated with hiring top-notch
expertise in the sector at rates offered by ADB.
40.      A common problem for a number of ADB capital markets TA operations that somewhat
affected TA outcomes appears to have been the lack of involvement of relevant regulatory
institutions (i.e., RBI and SEBI) in TA design and implementation. While MOF has important
policy-setting functions in the financial sector, assistance would have been more effective if the
regulatory bodies had participated in the design and implementation of TA related to regulatory
areas. In general, more effort could be made by ADB to discuss pertinent financial sector
issues with regulators and RBI on a regular basis.
41.     With the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank focusing on banking sector
issues in India, ADB initially took the lead among multilateral institutions in providing assistance
in the capital market subsector. While its contributions are still appreciated, decision makers do
not anymore perceive ADB as having any comparative advantage in this area. A number of
recent activities in other subsectors (e.g., in rural finance and pension reform) have been jointly
carried out by the World Bank and ADB. The feedback of MOF on ADB's performance in the
financial sector has been positive, which was confirmed by most financial institutions that the
Operations Evaluation Department talked to.
        8.     Sector Rating
42.    Sector assistance is rated partly successful, mainly due to the poor performance of a
large number of FILs, which accounted for more than half of ADB's operations in the sector.
However, the rating is on the high side, considering the relevance, effectiveness, and sector
impact of ADB's assistance for financial sector reforms.
        9.     Recommendations for Future Operations
43.     Taking into consideration the favorable macroeconomic environment and the need to
prepare the financial system for India's envisaged capital account liberalization and to mobilize
substantial long-term resources for infrastructure development, the GOI is likely to embark on a
next round of reforms, which could include measures to increase competition in various financial
market segments; strengthen the enforcement capacity for financial regulators; develop
corporate bond markets; develop the institutional investment base; enhance corporate
governance, accounting, and audit standards and practices; and remove impediments to rural
credit. ADB should continue its financial and technical support for financial sector reforms, as
required.
                                                                                  Appendix 7     123

44.     With regard to infrastructure financing, ADB needs to identify and financially support
innovative financing mechanisms and credit enhancements for infrastructure projects under
both its public and private sector operations. The objective should be to catalyze funds from
other sources through products and mechanisms that primarily provide risk mitigation. There
might also be need for assistance that helps develop local capacity for infrastructure financing
including the use of PPPs. It is important to recognize that infrastructure financing in India is not
constrained by a lack of funds per se, but by the failure of the financial system to translate
savings into long-term funds for investment, and most importantly by structural problems that
constrain the development of viable private infrastructure projects.
45.      ADB should consider the discontinuation of FILs if there is no effective demand or value
addition by ADB. This would not necessarily rule out the provision of debt financing to financial
institutions in cases where ADB assistance can indeed help leverage additional funds, improve
the lending practices of the institution, or provide funding that would otherwise not be available
domestically. Given ADB's checkered history of financial intermediation lending in India,
improved efforts are needed to assess actual demand for ADB funding. Overall, support for the
development of a corporate debt market will likely be more effective in mobilizing long-term
resources than any direct financial assistance by ADB can be.
124         Appendix 8


                               CLIENT PERCEPTION SURVEYS

A.     Operations Evaluation Department: EA/IA Survey

       1.        Project Identification and Design/ Ownership

1.      Though 80% of executing agency/implementing agency (EA/IA) survey respondents
stated that they found assistance in the preparation and design of projects as one of the main
benefits of dealing with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), this rating was on the moderate
side. The majority of respondents indicated the Government of India (GOI) (46%) or the EA
(31%) as the principal players in identifying the need for specific projects, which implies strong
client ownership. More than half of the respondents opined that stakeholders perceived the EA's
agenda as the main driver of a project.
2.      About 54% of respondents affirmed that counterpart staff also played substantial roles in
the design of loan projects. About 80% of respondents agreed that they had had enough input
into the project's design.
3.     From a substantial number of respondents (62%), it was gathered that project teams
made realistic assessments of the capacity and other critical constraints facing EAs in delivering
a sustainable project. The majority of EAs for urban development projects felt that ADB took the
community's perspective sufficiently into account; however, ADB did not often provide a clear
communication strategy in such projects, which are generally prone to substantial (adverse)
community reactions. Nevertheless, in general, project designs came out better than EAs
expected (58%).
       2.        Support for Project Implementation

4.      Around 90% of survey respondents opined that ADB had helped with project
implementation. Although the degree is assessed as moderate from the EAs' point of view, the
majority of surveyed EAs and IAs (80%) found that ADB-assisted projects were implemented
more efficiently than other projects of the same EA. Most surveyed EAs found that ADB
provided timely service, worked closely with project managers, and helped ensure that
procurement and disbursements were not delayed.
5.      The overwhelming majority of EAs (11 of 13) reported several problems during project
implementation. Some of these related to ADB's business processes such as stringency of
reporting and environmental requirements, selection criterion for subprojects, disbursement
procedures, consultant recruitment, procurement, and adequacy of project preparation. There
were also problems unrelated to ADB, such as shortage of experienced personnel in the EAs,
shortage of suitable civil works contractors in the country/region, and unexpected price
increases for inputs. The EAs felt that over 50% of such problems could have been anticipated
during project preparation and processing.
6.     Most of the EAs did not have any major contentious issues or differences with ADB.
However, one EA highlighted the rigid policy guidelines of ADB, which did not allow their project
to succeed. Another EA raised skepticism about ADB's part in introducing e-tendering in
procurement transactions.
       3.        Capacity Development

7.    The majority of EA respondents who had received capacity development-related support
from ADB rated the usefulness of ADB's assistance in the medium range. Higher ratings were
                                                                               Appendix 8      125

correlated with the degree of skills training received. It was felt that the effectiveness of ADB's
institutional support could be enhanced through the inclusion of more training components.
       4.      Safeguard Requirements

8.     The need for the guidelines was fully explained by ADB during project preparation as
confirmed by 90% of the respondents. Most EAs agreed that ADB safeguard policies increased
the transparency and good governance of ADB-financed projects, thereby improving public
support. More than 81% of respondents stated that ADB's safeguard policies and other
requirements enhanced the sustainability and development outcomes of funded projects,
notwithstanding the delays and difficulties they cause from time to time. A substantial number of
respondents (60%) also perceived their respective projects to be better safeguarded against
environmental and social risks than other similar government-funded projects.
9.      Around 64% of the respondents opined that the resettlement guidelines were
customized to meet the specific needs of the communities. The majority of EA and IA survey
respondents (73%) stated that ADB's resettlement policies had helped in providing fair and
satisfactory treatment for project-affected areas and communities, enhancing the project's
development contributions. More than half of the respondents affirmed that the conflict between
existing national laws and practices vis-à-vis ADB policies was resolved with mutual
understanding.
10.      During Country Assistance Program Evaluation (CAPE) Mission meetings with EAs and
IAs, there were frequent references to complaints about ADB's time-consuming and arguably
inflexible approach in its safeguard requirements, particularly concerning land acquisition and
resettlement. Responses to the CAPE survey did not seem to accord prime importance to these
issues.
       5.      Procurement

11.     A substantial number of the EAs (66%) agreed that ADB's procurement guidelines
improved the quality of procurement through competition, while only 33% thought that the
guidelines reduced cost. In relation to this, a respondent opined that the guidelines do not suit
low-cost projects. On the other hand, 64% of the respondents indicated that the consultant
selection process actually promoted the recruitment of people with high expertise. It is also
encouraging to note that, while compliance with the guidelines sometimes added to
implementation delays, 91% of the respondents still thought this to be acceptable in view of the
economy and efficiency achieved. However, in view of improvement in the guidelines, it was
suggested to put effort into introducing a mechanism to reduce the time period for selection and
recruitment. There was also a suggestion to review the adaptability of the guidelines under
certain conditions, since at times these do not suit the varying situations in the developing
member countries (DMCs).
       6.      Financial Management Requirements

12.     Less than half of the EAs thought that ADB's financial management and reporting
requirements and domestic laws and practices were reconciled with mutual understanding.
Despite this, more than 60% still thought that ADB requirements increased the transparency of
projects and programs.
       7.      Economic and Sector Work

13.     Most of the EAs/IAs surveyed were not familiar with ADB's economic and sector work in
India; only two responded that they had such familiarity.
126         Appendix 8


       8.        ADB Value Addition

14.    The following benefits were perceived to have accrued to the organization from ADB
assistance, ranked from the most substantial to the least substantial contribution of ADB:
       (i)       good and transparent procurement processes,
       (ii)      availability of financing,
       (iii)     support in project implementation,
       (iv)      longer loan maturities,
       (v)       support in project design and preparation,
       (vi)      access to cofinancing (ADB can leverage additional financial resources),
       (vii)     access to sector experience of ADB,
       (viii)    external quality control / monitoring by ADB project officers,
       (ix)      expertise of ADB consultants,
       (x)       lower financing costs,
       (xi)      assistance for capacity development,
       (xii)     ADB can persuade government decision makers,
       (xiii)    support for organizational changes, and
       (xiv)     support for politically difficult decisions.
15.     In addition, a sizable number of EAs reported that ADB-supported studies and analysis
contributed significantly to the success of the reform process by strengthening legal and
regulatory frameworks, pricing and tariff policies, and private sector participation. Some EAs
also acknowledged significant contributions to policy and institutional reform. Against the
general perception of ADB's limited effectiveness in making a contribution in policy areas, such
instances, even when in the minority, need to be specifically noted as successes to build upon
in future operations.
       9.         Role of the India Resident Mission (INRM)

16.    The following areas were seen as roles for INRM, in declining order of importance:
       (i)       project implementation,
       (ii)      helping implement ADB safeguard policies,
       (iii)     project preparation,
       (iv)      project identification,
       (v)       capacity development activities,
       (vi)      policy dialogue, and
       (vii)     ADB's private sector operations.
17.    The contributions of INRM, ranked from the most evident to the least, were:
       (i)       increased the speed of program/project implementation,
       (ii)      improved my understanding of how ADB operates,
       (iii)     strengthened partnerships within the country,
       (iv)      strengthened ADB's understanding of country realities,
       (v)       improved ADB's overall effectiveness in providing services to the country,
       (vi)      increased the speed of decision making,
       (vii)     heightened ADB's overall visibility, and
       (viii)    improved aid coordination through increased joint programming and portfolio
                 review exercises and sectorwide approach activities.
                                                                             Appendix 8      127

       10.     Interaction with Headquarters and INRM Staff

18.      Most of the EA respondents had had more interaction with INRM staff than with
headquarters (HQ) staff. Based on the responses, HQ and INRM staff shared the following
traits, as perceived by EAs (ranked from highest):
       (i)     have good personal interaction skills,
       (ii)    have good communication skills,
       (iii)   deliver commitments and carry out promises, and
       (iv)    have good management skills.
19.     However, compared with INRM staff, HQ staff are perceived to have stronger technical
expertise. A number of EAs opined that INRM staff do not have enough delegated authority to
operate effectively. On the other hand, as could be expected, INRM staff are perceived to better
take into account various experiences in the country and to be more sensitive to country-specific
circumstances.
       11.     Feedback on Overall Satisfaction with ADB Operations in India

20.    Most of the respondents provided satisfactory feedback on ADB operations in India, with
only one EA in disagreement.
       12.     Comparison with Other Agencies

21.   While a few EA respondents felt that ADB performed worse than other agencies and a
number of EAs gave no opinion, half of the EAs found ADB's assistance to be better in terms of
       (i)     responsiveness to country needs,
       (ii)    quality of project design,
       (iii)   effectiveness of project implementation/assistance,
       (iv)    overall effectiveness,
       (v)     efficiency of service delivery, and
       (vi)    aid cooperation.


B.     Regional Perception Survey of ADB (Responses from India)

22.    In 2006, Princeton Survey Research Associates International conducted a survey of
opinion leaders, clients, and partners of ADB to assess their views on the role of ADB within the
development context of Asia and the Pacific, ADB's effectiveness and helpfulness, and the way
ADB communicates its mission and activities to external audiences. The survey explored a
number of issues with a random sample of respondents, including development issues facing
DMCs and general impressions of ADB, its priorities, performance, and its outreach. The total of
490 respondents from DMCs included 49 from India (4 from academia, 7 from civil society
organizations, 8 from development partners, 14 from government, 5 from the media, and 11
from the private sector) and 206 from donor countries.
       1.      Perceptions about Constraints to Development

23.    About 96% of respondents from India ranked poor infrastructure as the biggest
constraint to economic and social development. This was also true for most of ADB's other
regions, except for East Asia and Southeast Asia, where respondents ranked environmental
degradation (94%) and corruption (96%), respectively, as the greatest threat to development.
(Table A8.1)
 128           Appendix 8


                   Table A8.1: Threats to Economic and Social Development (%)
                   Threat                    IND         EA        CW         South Asia      SEA       Pacific
 Poor Infrastructure                         96          72         94            94          89          94
 Income Inequality                           85          82         70            84          86          90
 Limited Educational Opportunities
                                             84          77         87            80          91          88
 and Inadequate Health Services
 Corruption                                  82          80         94            82          96          91
 Poor Governance                             77          66         94            80          90          94
 Environmental Degradation                   68          94         76            73          89          78
 Low Rate of Investment                      64          34         73            79          86          97
 Lack of Active Private Sector               48          48         80            62          76          87
 Lack of Natural Resources                   39          57         26            47          56          72
 CW = Central and West Asia, EA = East Asia, IND = India, SEA = Southeast Asia.
 Source: Princeton Survey Research Associates International. ADB perceptions Survey of Opinion Leaders.
          November 2006.

          2.        Perceptions about ADB

                    a.       Meeting DMC Development Goals

 24.    Most of the India respondents (80%), including 85% of government respondents,
 perceived ADB as being helpful in achieving the country's development goals and objectives.
 Table A8.2 shows how ADB scored in different areas, if "very helpful" responses are
 considered.
 Table A8.2: ADB's Helpfulness in Meeting Developing Member Country Development Goals
                       and Objectives (% of satisfied respondents)
                      Item                         IND        EA      CW         South Asia     SEA         Pacific
Emphatic and Understanding                         43         15         24            32          27          48
Loan and Resources Capacity                        35         25         44            40          34          26
Knowledgeable Staff                                31         10         10            27          33          52
Ability to Bring Different Partners Together       28         20         15            26          25          30
Effective Consultations with Stakeholders          28          5         22            25          31          30
Technical Skilled Staff                            20         20         29            20          27          48
Efficiency and Timely Handling of Projects         20         5          17            17          30          22
Work Effectively with Development Partners         20         20         27            27          29          39
Procedures and Processes                           16         5           2            15          23          30
Range and Quality of Services                      16          5         12            16          21          35
Overall Assistance                                 17         13         27            26          23          36
CW = Central and West Asia, EA = East Asia, IND = India, SEA = Southeast Asia.
Source: Princeton Survey Research Associates International. ADB Perceptions Survey of Opinion Leaders. November
        2006.


 25.     India respondents marked ADB high with regard to the availability of knowledgeable
 staff--which seems to conflict somewhat with the feedback obtained from a number of
 concerned entities during the interviews.
 26.    In terms of overall assistance, only 17% of India respondents found ADB to very helpful.
 This was second lowest to East Asia. The fact that the overall satisfaction level with ADB's
 assistance is lower than the component ratings might imply that there are other issues affecting
 perceptions, which are not listed here.
                                                                                               Appendix 8         129

                     b.      Priorities for ADB Operations

   27.     India respondents' perceptions of ADB's operational priorities were in line with those
   indicated by respondents in other countries (Table A8.3). ADB was seen primarily as an
   infrastructure bank, although nearly half of the respondents were aware that ADB also promotes
   poverty reduction.
                    Table A8.3: Current Priorities of ADB Operations (% High Priority)
                   Priority                       IND         EA        CW        South Asia     SEA     Pacific      Donor
Improving Infrastructure                           66         33        60           63           51       73          61
Promoting Poverty Reduction                        44         29        51           39           48       27          57
Improving Social Services                          25          4        34           34           34       21          23
Promoting Environmental Sustainability             25         35        21           22           25       21          22
Promoting Gender Equality                          23         12        14           19           19       27          18
Supporting Regional Cooperation                    22         22        32           22           38       36          43
Improving Governance                               19          9        32           22           28       42          20
Establishing Effective Disaster Management         19          4        10           12           10        3           8
Supporting local capital markets                   12          8        17            9           23       27          26
Mobilizing resources to Enhance Growth of
                                                    8         15        14           10          20         27          25
the private sector
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CW = Central and West Asia, EA = East Asia, IND = India, SEA = Southeast Asia.
Source: Princeton Survey Research Associates International. ADB Perceptions Survey of Opinion Leaders. November 2006.


   28.      A similar ranking emerged when stakeholders were asked how ADB should be
   prioritizing its operations in India (Table A8.4). Improving infrastructure and promoting poverty
   reduction registered the highest number of positive responses, followed by improving social
   services, promoting gender equality, and promoting environmental sustainability. By
   comparison, East Asian respondents ranked improving infrastructure as the lowest, and
   promoting environmental sustainability as the highest priority for ADB.

                 Table A8.4: Should Be Priorities of ADB Operations (% according high priority)
                      Priority                          IND        EA        CW      SouthAsia     SEA      Pacific      Donor
Improving Infrastructure                                 88        31        63         88          76        82          56
Promoting Poverty Reduction                              81        56        64         81          86        85          85
Improving Social Services                                72        55        62         69          77        70          57
Promoting Gender Equality                                65        35        32         54          40        55          48
Promoting Environmental Sustainability                   63        71        44         53          59        61          63
Establishing Effective Disaster Management               54        37        33         50          44        36          35
Supporting Regional Cooperation                          51        39        59         52          54        67          52
Improving Governance                                     51        52        52         59          66        82          56
Mobilizing Resources to Enhance Growth of the
                                                        49         33        50           50        54           70          44
Private Sector
Supporting Local Capital Markets                        39         31        38           44        50           45          40
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CW = Central and West Asia, EA = East Asia, IND = India, SEA = Southeast Asia.
Source: Princeton Survey Research Associates International. ADB Perceptions Survey of Opinion Leaders. November 2006.


   29.    By type of respondents, improving infrastructure was rated highly by those from
   academia (100%), government (93%), and development partners (88%). Poverty reduction
   received the highest score from the media (100%), the private sector (91%), and civil society
   organizations (86%). ADB's role in promoting environmental sustainability was particularly
   supported by government (70%) and private sector (80%) respondents. Promoting gender
130       Appendix 8


equality and the establishment of effective disaster management were deemed to be of higher
priority in India than in other countries. The latter could be attributed to the various natural
disasters that affected parts of the country in recent years.
30.    On a related note, respondents in India identified the following as the areas that could
best contribute towards reducing poverty in the country:
       (i)     improving infrastructure,
       (ii)    improving social services,
       (iii)   improving governance,
       (iv)    promoting gender equality, and
       (v)     supporting agriculture.

               c.       Strengths and Weaknesses of ADB

31.     Respondents in India perceived ADB's strengths and weaknesses as shown in Table
A8.5, ranked from the highest to lowest number of responses:
                        Table A8.5: Strengths and Weaknesses of ADB
                        Strengths                                Weaknesses
           Providing loans and grants                  Slow and bureaucratic
           Providing financial assistance              Does not take local conditions into
                                                       account
           Providing knowledge and expertise           Spread too thin; has to please too
                                                       many constituencies
           Policies and beliefs                        Too much focus on government-
                                                       based aid
         ADB = Asian Development Bank.
         Source: Princeton Survey Research Associates International. ADB Perceptions Survey of Opinion
                 Leaders. November 2006.

32.   At the regional level, a similar trend was evident in South Asia and the other regions.
South Asia actually showed the lowest percentage of respondents who regarded the slow and
bureaucratic processes of ADB as a weakness. Conversely, the provision of financial assistance
was deemed to be ADB's greatest strength.
               d.       Role in Poverty Reduction

33.     Among India respondents, 81% opined that ADB does a good job in this area, with the
highest number of positive responses coming from civil society organizations and government.
Of those who gave ADB a good rating, all attributed its success in poverty reduction to the
following: giving top priority; allocating enough financial resources; and having the knowledge,
expertise, and foresight for this thrust.
               e.       Transparency and Corruption

34.      Almost 81% of India respondents opined that ADB operates in a transparent and open
manner in the country. The highest approval ratings came from development partners, media,
and government. However, only 64% responded to the question on whether ADB ensures that
its staff do not operate in a corrupt manner. Compared with respondents in other regions, India
posted the highest percentage of respondents who did not venture an opinion on this matter,
which can be interpreted either to mean that respondents really do not have an answer, or there
might be a credibility issue that needs to be addressed.
                                                                              Appendix 8      131

               f.     Safeguard Requirements

35.   While 30% of respondents in India found ADB's safeguard requirements to be too
burdensome, 67% nevertheless opined that these requirements ensure benefits for society.
               g.     Partnership with Government

36.    Around 86% of all respondents in India and 93% of government respondents thought
that ADB had a collaborative and responsive partnership with the government.
               h.     Partnership with the Private Sector

37.    Among private sector respondents in India who gave their opinion on the level of
cooperation that ADB should have with the private sector, most thought that this partnership
should be expanded to
       (i)     include more investments and development,
       (ii)    help the private sector develop best practices in the area of management, and
       (iii)   free up public sector resources to use in other areas.

               i.     Use of ADB Financial Resources

38.     Loans to governments were seen as the best way to utilize ADB's resources by 49% of
respondents in India. This was followed by grants to governments (15%), equity investments for
private firms (14%), guarantees for private firms and credit lines to financial institutions (8%),
and grants to civil society organizations (6%).
               j.     Comparison with Other Funding Agencies

39.    Compared with other funding agencies, ADB ranked the highest in terms of its impact in
India, with 90% of respondents in India giving it a good or somewhat good rating. By
comparison, the World Bank had an 84% approval rating, followed by the United Nations
Development Programme at 74% and the International Monetary Fund at only 54%.
               k.     Aid Coordination and Consultation with Other Stakeholders

40.    Eighty Nine percent of respondents in India (including 88% of government respondents)
opined that ADB is helpful in bringing development partners together, while 77% thought that
ADB is effective in working with other agencies. However, there were also quite a number of
respondents who gave no opinion regarding ADB's aid coordination work (including 50% of
ADB's development partners in India).
               l.      Range and Quality of Services by INRM

41.     With the exception of the People's Republic of China Resident Mission and the Sri
Lanka Resident Mission, INRM scored below most of ADB's resident missions in the DMCs
surveyed with regard to its helpfulness in meeting development goals and objectives. ADB's
resident missions in Bangladesh, Cambodia, Indonesia, and Kyrgyz Republic received ratings in
excess of 90% for the range and quality of services offered and for meeting development goals
and objectives. By comparison, only 68% of India respondents (mostly from the government and
civil society organizations) felt that the range and quality of services offered by INRM were
helpful, while a substantial percentage (21%) had no opinion on the matter.
132          Appendix 8


                  m.      ADB as Source of Research and Analytical Work

42.    Only 28% of India respondents strongly agreed that ADB is an excellent source of
research, analysis, and knowledge, including data and statistics, on a range of important
development issues, with the highest approval ratings coming from the private sector and
media. At the regional level, only respondents in East Asia (20%) were less impressed than
respondents in India with the usefulness and quality of ADB's knowledge products.
C.     Headquarters Staff Perceptions about INRM

43.     In conjunction with its special study on the effectiveness of ADB's Resident Mission
Policy, the Operations Evaluation Department also conducted a survey of HQ staff who had a
considerable degree of interaction with INRM.
44.    In general, all respondents agreed that there was no difficulty in meeting INRM staff for
discussion, and there was strong agreement about INRM staff
       (i)        knowing the country very well,
       (ii)       having extensive and inside knowledge of relevant sectors in the country,
       (iii)      making good use of available local expertise (i.e., being able to find good
                  consultants), and
       (iv)       delivering on commitments and carrying out promises.
45.      Some areas elicited mixed responses, particularly those related to the management
skills of INRM.
46.   In terms of project design and implementation, INRM was gauged to be strong by most
respondents with regard to
       (i)        providing strong support to HQ missions,
       (ii)       adequately considering country realities and sector context,
       (iii)      helping counterparts assume responsibility, and
       (iv)       helping ensure that procurement and disbursements are not delayed.
47.    In relation to INRM support to HQ, the following areas received the highest ratings:
       (i)        depth of knowledge and understanding of the country's economic, political, and
                  social situations; and of its development needs and priorities;
       (ii)       facilitation of project processing through liaison and logistical support;
       (iii)      quality and timeliness of information provided; and
       (iv)       following up outstanding issues with government.
48.   The following suggestions were made on how INRM's performance can be further
improved:
       (i)        delegation of more authority for decision making, and
       (ii)       greater interaction between HQ and INRM staff.
                                                                                                  Appendix 9     133

                         ASSESSMENT OF ADB ASSISTANCE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT

A.         Context
           1.       Methodology
1.     This sector assessment was undertaken as an input to the India Country Assistance
Program Evaluation. It was based on a review of relevant project and strategy documents;
discussions with central and state government officials and other stakeholders; an opinion
survey of project directors and project management consultants; site visits to four projects,1
three of which were still at various stages of implementation; as well as project performance
evaluation report (PPER) findings for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
(KUIDP).
           2.       Sector Development Trends and Challenges
2.      India is undergoing unprecedented growth in the absolute size of its urban population,
and the structure and form of towns and cities have also witnessed drastic changes over the
past decades. The national urban population grew from 63 million in 1951 to nearly 285 million
in 2001. The higher growth rate of the urban population in comparison with the national
population growth rate,2 resulting in the increased share of the urban population, has caused
the growth of megacities. While the number of towns more than doubled since the 1970s to
5,161 during 2001, the number of cities with more than 1 million inhabitants quadrupled during
the same period. Since much of the urban growth has been built on existing, worn-out
infrastructure, almost all major cities in India are experiencing serious infrastructure strains, and
in some cases, investors have begun to move their investments to less congested cities and
suburban areas.3 Poor quantity and quality of infrastructure and basic services are cited as the
major impediments to sustainable urban growth. The Census of India (2001) reported that
approximately 50% of urban households did not have access to tap water at their premises, and
43% lacked toilet facilities. Land and housing markets have come under severe pressure. Even
with a marginal decline in urban poverty, nearly 24% of the urban population lives under
conditions of absolute poverty in slums and unauthorized settlements. Most cities are suffering
from air and water pollution, problems posed by inadequate solid and liquid waste management,
large-scale use of low-grade domestic fuels, and the occupation of environmentally sensitive
lands by squatters.
3.      Against the exponential growth of the urban population and the growing investment
requirements of the infrastructure sectors, the share of urban sector budgetary allocation has
remained stagnant and even decreased in recent plan periods. Compared with urban
infrastructure investment needs of Rs80 billion per year estimated by the India Infrastructure
Report, the combined plan outlays for the Ministry of Urban Development (MUD) and Ministry of
Employment and Poverty Alleviation for urban development projects4 amounted to only Rs17
billion per year during 2001­2006. The share of plan outlay for the urban development and
housing sectors has been on the decline since the 6th Five Year Plan (FYP). This means that

1
    Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project, Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project, Karnataka
    Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management Project, and Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation
    Project.
2
    While the national population grew at an annual rate of 1.7% during 2000-2004, the urban population grew at a rate
    of 2.5% during that period. Asian Development Bank. 2005. Key Development Indicators. Manila
3
    Some of the medium-sized towns such as Gurgeon, Mysore, Noida, and Pune have seen significant growth in
    recent years as a result of these spatial shifts in urban growth nearby megacities.
4
    Major urban sector projects covered in the 10th Five Year Plan (2002­2007) are the Mega City Project, Integrated
    Development of Small and Medium Towns, Accelerated Urban Water Supply Program, Local Sanitation Program,
    solid waste management projects, urban transportation projects, and poverty reduction programs.
134       Appendix 9


financing for nearly 90% of the estimated urban infrastructure investment requirements will have
to come from sources other than the central budget, including from state budgetary transfers,
tax revenues of local governments, user charges, external assistance, the private sector, and
institutional financing.
4.      The finances of municipal governments, the key institutions responsible for urban
development and growth and for the development of cities and towns, are in a bad state.5 Due
to their narrow and inelastic tax base and its indifferent application, municipalities in India have
not been able to generate sufficient resources to meet even the operation and maintenance
(O&M) costs of the services they provide. Only a few municipal administrations have applied
such principles as "user-pays" for recovering the costs of services. This has translated into
large-scale subsidization of basic services, which has increased the dependence of city
administrations on the higher tiers of government. A recent study estimated that financial
transfers from higher tiers account for 35­50% of the total resources of city governments. Also,
state boards and authorities retain key roles in the planning, financing, and management of
infrastructure services, leading to situations wherein urban local bodies bear the financial
responsibility without being able to influence investment decisions, which has resulted in
nonrepayment and lack of maintenance.

         3.       Government Strategies
5.      Urban sector reform initiatives in India can be broadly divided into two phases: The first
generation of reforms started with the promulgation of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act of
1992 and Central Government guidelines for "Urban Development Plans Formulation and
Implementation" of 1996. While the Act provided the institutional framework for administrative
decentralization and fiscal and financial devolution to urban local bodies (ULBs),6 the guidelines
were aimed primarily at improving the fiscal health of ULBs through rationalization of urban
service subsidies and a more commercial approach to decisions on urban development projects
and infrastructure. During the first phase of urban reforms, the main focus was on institutional
reforms supporting the devolution of fiscal and services, responsibilities to urban local bodies.
6.      The second generation of urban reforms focused on strengthening urban management
and resource mobilization through market financing and private sector participation. As a first
step, the Central Government recommended that states amend their municipal acts to enable
private sector participation in urban sector investments and service management. The model
municipal act suggested by the Central Government includes modification and simplification of
municipal bylaws, provision for enhanced market borrowing, and the introduction of market-
based tariffs and cost recovery. Central authorities also promoted the commercial use of
municipal lands to help finance infrastructure investments by repealing the Urban Ceiling Act
and revising the Rent Control Act. In addition, the Government of India (GOI) initiated
accounting and financial management reforms. For example, MUD, in cooperation with the
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, prepared a National Municipal

5
  Analysis by ADB. 2007. Om Prakash Mathur in India: Case Study in Urbanization and Sustainability in Asia: Case
   Studies of Good Practice. Manila.
6
  The powers to constitute local governments, both rural local bodies and municipalities (urban local bodies), rest with
   the state governments. They derive their powers from the state rural local bodies and municipal acts. Out of the
   state list of subjects, state municipal acts assign functions such as public health and sanitation, and functions
   relating to water, land, prevention of diseases, and many others, to municipalities. Similarly, they also assign the
   tax powers enjoyed by them, such as taxes on land and buildings, the entry of goods into a local area for
   consumption, and use or sale therein to municipal governments. The discretion and autonomy of states in
   determining the powers and functions of municipal bodies explain the existence of very large differences in the role
   that transfers play in different states.
                                                                                                  Appendix 9     135

Accounting Manual in January 2005 that supports accounting reforms at both the state and local
urban levels.
7.      Some of the financial reforms seeking to tap domestic resources for financing urban
infrastructure relate to the introduction of tax-free bonds and pooled financing7 for municipal
infrastructure. As of 2006, tax-free municipal bonds had been floated by 11 cities in the country
amounting to Rs7260 million (the equivalent of $179 million). In comparison with municipal
bonds, pooled financing is relatively new for Indian cities. With the successful application of this
instrument by state parastatals in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka,8 pooled financing became a
potentially viable market-based financing option for small and medium towns. Another important
reform initiated by the GOI relates to foreign direct investment (FDI) in the provision of urban
infrastructure and services. Hitherto the Foreign Investment Promotion Board allowed direct
investment in urban assets only on a case-to-case basis. This scenario changed with the
decision of the Central Government to place FDI in urban infrastructure under sector-specific
guidelines, enabling flows to the integrated townships and to urban infrastructure and service
management.
8.      The urban sector in India has witnessed different forms of public- private partnerships
(PPPs) such as management contracts (Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Board
with the Angalian Water Supply Co. UK); service contracts (solid waste management contracts
by the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad); and private sector participation in water and
sewerage (Tirupur Water Supply Project and Alandur Sewerage Project) in the form of build,
own, operate; build, operate, transfer; build, own, operate, transfer; build, operate, lease,
transfer and other PPP initiatives. However, lack of adequate institutional structures and
appropriate regulatory frameworks for pricing urban utilities and for authorizing the
concessionaries to penalize users for nonpayment of tariffs, etc. have constrained successful
replication of these early initiatives. Currently, MUD, on behalf of the Central Government, is in
the process of developing guidelines for the participation of the private sector in infrastructure.
9.       The ongoing Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), which links
central budget assistance to urban sector reform, is the main urban sector strategic framework
within which the GOI intends to direct future investments and institutional, fiscal, and
management reforms in urban areas. Despite the Report of the National Commission on
Urbanization of 1988 and the two successive national housing policies within a span of 10
years, a national urban policy has yet to evolve, even though many state governments have
prepared state urbanization strategy reports taking into account their resources and potentials
and the pattern of urban growth. Subsequent to the constitution of a National Task Force on
Urban Perspectives and Policy by the Planning Commission in 1995, the GOI constituted three
technical groups to formulate a national urban policy to guide urbanization and the structure and
growth of environmentally sustainable cities in the country. It is envisaged that
institutionalization of the various fiscal and financial management and governance reform
initiatives taken by the Government will be important aspects of the proposed policy.




7
  To facilitate access to capital markets by smaller and medium-based urban local bodies, the GOI has proposed the
   state-level pooled financing facility, which is similar to the state bond bank model in the United States. The
   objective is to reduce the cost of borrowing by creating a special purpose vehicle that enables capital investments
   to be pooled under one state-level borrowing umbrella/agency. In December 2002, the Tamil Nadu Water and
   Sanitation Pooled Fund successfully accessed Rs304 million in market borrowing using this mechanism to fund
   infrastructure in 14 towns.
8
  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Financing Corporation and Tamil Nadu Urban Development Fund, respectively.
136      Appendix 9



4.     ADB'S Urban Sector Development Strategies and Programs in India
10.     In the 1970s and 1980s, externally funded urban development projects in India focused
on increasing the public supply of land; shelter; services; and financing packages consisting of
sites and services, slum upgrading, water supply and sanitation, and transportation. While the
World Bank was the main agency supporting urban development during that time, its
intervention in the sector declined following its growing concerns about project quality and
sustainability. When the GOI initiated started reforms to decentralize urban management
responsibilities to local governments and to address the weak financial resource base of local
governments and land acquisition issues, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) entered the
sector during the 1990s. The first ADB project in the sector, the KUIDP was approved in 1995.
11.      The 1990 Country Operational Strategy (COS), while leaving open the possibility for
ADB's engagement in the sector, nevertheless warned that ADB should proceed cautiously and
on the basis of detailed studies. Project preparatory technical assistance (TA) and urban sector-
related work were initiated from 1993 onwards. With its overall operational shift to support
devolution and reforms in 1996, leading to a number of integrated urban development projects,
ADB also initiated policy dialogue on the (i) creation of an enabling legal, planning, financing,
and regulatory framework for the sustainable augmentation of housing, infrastructure, and civic
services; (ii) commercialization of urban infrastructure and alternative forms of service provision;
(iii) assistance to the urban poor to organize into sustainable groups and networks for improving
their income and the quality of their physical environment; (iv) protection of the environment;
and (v) support for improved urban governance.
12.     In 2003, ADB approved TA to help review its urban sector assistance approach in India
by identifying its strengths and weaknesses in the sector, causes of implementation delays, and
suitable modalities and areas for its future interventions in the sector. The study confirmed
ADB's integrated urban development approach to be one of its strengths, but recommended
that resulting implementation complexities and problems would need to be addressed by
concentrating assistance on fewer towns within focus states with adequate support, in
coordination with other development partners, for policy reforms, project management, and
capacity development of ULBs. To deal with the lack of commitment to reform experienced in a
number of cities assisted by ADB, the TA findings suggested selecting participating towns in
accordance with performance criteria, and increasing stakeholder participation at the project
design stage. ADB's current urban sector strategy for India, as reflected in the 2003 COS, calls
for continued support for integrated urban development projects in an effort to improve the
urban environment and living conditions, especially of the urban poor, and to strengthen the
capacity of ULBs to implement projects and deliver services. Furthermore, urban projects in
India are to be demand driven, with key criteria being ULBs' willingness to initiate policy reform
measures as part of ADB-financed projects. The overall design of integrated urban development
projects is to take ULBs' absorptive capacity into account. Integrated urban development
projects funded by ADB are also to be used to introduce and implement various cost-recovery
mechanisms and privatization measures, especially for water supply subprojects, to ensure
financial sustainability. ADB's sector strategy emphasizes the incorporation of appropriately
designed community awareness and participation programs within urban development projects,
recognizing that innovative approaches to participation by communities and beneficiaries,
particularly low-income households, are essential for overall project sustainability and
replicability. ADB has adopted a holistic approach to urban poverty that goes beyond the
delivery of basic services, seeking to empower the poor to improve their living conditions.
13.   Since ADB's urban sector operations in India began in 1995, nine public sector loans for
seven projects with a total value of $1.28 billion were approved. Four of these projects have
                                                                                                Appendix 9     137

been completed or are nearing completion. In addition, two other projects (Multisector Project
for Infrastructure Rehabilitation in Jammu and Kashmir, Tsunami Emergency Assistance) with a
total loan amount of $350 supported mainly urban infrastructure development or reconstruction.
Fourteen sector TA grants for $5.95 million were also provided. ADB has had no private sector
operations in the sector.
14.     All of the loan projects supported by ADB in the past pursued a multisector integrated
urban development approach, which mirrors the urban development strategy followed by the
central and state governments. Most municipal governments implement need-based capital
investment plans, and many of the investments are made towards the provision of basic
infrastructure (particularly solid waste management, water supply and sewerage systems,
sanitation, and roads), slum improvements, low-income housing, and construction of revenue-
generating assets such as commercial centers and convention halls. Most investments are
determined by the nature of plan and nonplan budgetary support provided by the Central
Government under the FYP allocations, and by the extent of fiscal, financial, and administrative
devolution and municipal management reforms promoted by the state governments. The
multisector integrated nature of ADB-supported urban development projects has also reflected
the political aspirations of elected bodies, which have viewed the externally aided project as a
one-time opportunity to help finance a wide range of investment needs in many sectors and
have sought a bundling of urban services in return for implementing urban/municipal fiscal
reforms. ADB has attempted to somewhat rationalize the investment scope9 in more recent
projects to further enhance effectiveness and efficiency in achieving project outcomes, albeit
with limited success.
15.     ADB will selectively expand its operations to include stand-alone, large infrastructure
projects in megacities, which will utilize more innovative financing and be PPP-based.
16.     Apart from adopting a multisector approach for its urban development operations in
India, ADB has also used a multitown strategy. With the exception of the Kolkata Environmental
Improvement Project, most other ADB projects have supported infrastructure investments in
second-tier towns with the objective of relieving pressures on the larger cities. ADB is
increasingly concentrating its urban development projects in its focus states of operations (i.e.,
Madhya Pradesh, states in the northeastern region, Uttaranchal, and Kerala) but has also
provided assistance to other states, in particular Karnataka and Rajasthan, where the conditions
for urban sector reforms have appeared to be promising. In these states, ADB has had repeat
operations, progressively moving down to lower tier towns. Repeat operations have also helped
build the capacity of state and municipal governments to undertake complex urban sector
reform programs.
           5.      Project Implementation
17.    Only two projects--KUIDP and the Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Project (GERRP)--have been completed. The Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure
Development Project (RUIDP) and the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal
Environmental Management Project (KUDCEMP) are nearing completion. Project
implementation on average took about 2 years longer than anticipated, mainly due to the

9
    While ADB's first urban development project in India incorporated very diverse project components such as urban
    water supply, drainage and sanitation, roads, traffic management, low-income housing, slum improvements,
    residential and industrial sites and services, truck and bus terminals, microcredit mechanisms, and community
    development, most recent urban projects focus primarily on water supply and sanitation infrastructure, transport
    infrastructure, and community development, although a number also include income-generating development and
    slum improvement for the urban poor. Support for the development of commercial structures has been
    discontinued, as initial project components in this area were not very successful.
  138       Appendix 9


  complex nature of integrated urban development projects, which require close coordination
  among many agencies; capacity problems of comparatively new executing and implementing
  agencies; lack of suitably qualified local design consultants and contractors, some of whom
  have had to be replaced; the use of locally defined small procurement packages; and difficulties
  in getting the necessary government clearances in time.

        Table A9.1: Disbursement Performance of Ongoing ADB Urban Projects in India
                                   as of 31 January 2007

                                                        Project      Net ADB          Cumulative     Disburseme
                              Project Approval           Cost          Loan         Disbursement      nt as % of
            Project                  Date             ($ million)   ($ million)       ($ million)     Net Loan
RUIDP                          3 December 1998           362.00        250.00             230.11           92
KUDCEMP                        26 October 1999           221.40        145.00             125.84           87
CEIP                          19 December 2000           360.00        177.77              38.05           21
GERRP                           26 March 2001            475.00        338.00             335.09           99
MPUWEP                        12 December 2003           275.00        181.00               2.86            9
MPIJK                         21 December 2004           358.00        250.00               9.48           28
Tsunami Emergency                14 April 2005           100.00        100.00               3.14           27
KEIP (Supplementary Loan)     14 December 2006           113.60         80.00               0.00            0
Total                                                   2265.00       1521.77             744.57           49
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CEIP = Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project, GERRP = Gujarat Earthquake
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project, KEIP = Kolkata Environment Improvement Project, KUDCEPM = Karnataka
Urban Infrastructure Development and Coastal Environment Management Project, MPUWEP = Madhya Pradesh Urban
Wage Employment Program, MPIJK = Multisector Project for Infrastructure Rehabilitation in Jammu and Kashmir, RUIPD
= Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.

  18.    Despite the delays, most projects have been on track to achieve their anticipated
  physical outputs, with few changes in project scope. However, in many projects, progress with
  urban reforms and compliance with related loan covenants have proven to be substantially
  slower and more difficult than expected.
  B.      Assessment of ADB's Sector Assistance
          1.      Sector Positioning
  19.     ADB's urban sector assistance in India has been well positioned. ADB's sector strategy
  is largely in line with the GOI's urban development support concepts, which promote reform-
  linked urban infrastructure investment assistance and the provision of basic urban services,
  particularly to the urban poor. Contrary to other aid agencies, which have been favoring large
  urban transport, water supply, and sanitation projects in large cities, ADB has pursued an
  integrated multisector and multitown approach mainly for second- and third-tier loans to align its
  urban sector operations with national urban development programs and respond to demands
  from state governments, although complex project designs associated with this approach have
  meant long implementation periods and the need for substantial implementation support.
  Considering the urban sector developmental and political needs, almost all urban managers
  interviewed by the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) endorsed a multisector integrated
  urban development approach.
  20.     Although nearly 80­85% of ADB sector assistance has been allocated to urban core
  infrastructure components, which is appropriate, considering that ADB provides only ordinary
  capital resources lending in India, social infrastructure and community empowerment project
  components have almost invariably been included in ADB-assisted urban development projects.
  Doing so not only improves the quality of life of poor communities, which are often marginalized
  by more market-based approaches, but is a necessary (although not sufficient) condition for
                                                                                                     Appendix 9     139

gaining acceptance by the local communities and politicians for the fiscal and financial reforms
required to ensure the sustainability of urban investments.
21.     ADB's approach to urban sector development support in India has also been in line with
ADB's 1999 Urban Sector Strategy, which emphasizes the operational objectives of maximizing
the economic efficiency of urban areas; improving quality of life; reducing urban poverty; and
achieving more sustainable forms of urban development through the promotion of urban sector
policies for (i) promoting good governance,10 (ii) mobilizing financial resources, (iii) improving
urban management, and (iv) improving the design and delivery of integrated urban infrastructure
development projects or subsector projects.
            2.      Relevance
22.      ADB assistance for urban sector development in India is rated relevant for improving the
quality of life in urban areas through capital investments in basic physical and environmental
infrastructure. Most projects have been aligned with national and state urban sector strategies
and development guidelines. ADB projects have also been consistent with the new urban sector
initiatives of the Government that promote investment in conjunction with institutional and
operational reforms, and most ADB loan covenants have reflected the overall thrust of fiscal and
financial reforms promoted by the GOI (see Table A9.2). However, political and institutional
capacity issues affecting project sustainability were not always adequately addressed by ADB at
the project design stage.
           Table A9.2: Comparison of ADB Loan Covenants and JNNURM Reform Agenda

     Municipal Reform-Based Loan Covenants in                   Municipal Reform Guidelines in the JNNURM
                   ADB Projects                                                  Program
       ·    Rationalization of property tax;
                                                              Mandatory Reforms
            improvement in property tax collection
            efficiency
                                                              Urban Local Bodies/ Parastatal Level Reforms:
       ·    Introduction of fiscal and financial
            efficiency enhancement measures                       ·    Adoption of modern, accrual-based double
       ·    Introduction of land use conversion                        entry accounting system
            charges; indexation of rents from                     ·    Introduction      of   E-governance     using
            municipal properties with market rents                     information technology applications
       ·    Local resource generation and improved                ·    Property tax reform using modern
            municipal expenditure management                           technologies and realization of 85%
       ·    Improved cost recovery for water supply,                   collection efficiency within 7 years
            metering, and improved collection;                    ·    Levy of user charges to achieve full cost
            progressive block rate of water supply                     recovery within 7 years, with a limitation of
       ·    Improved wastewater management                             50% recovery of O&M costs in the northeast
            through drainage surcharge to cover the                    and other special category states
            O&M costs                                             ·    Internal earmarking of local body budget to
       ·    Assurance to operate and maintain the                      the basic services for the urban poor
            facilities created by the project                     ·    Provision of basic services to the urban
       ·    Adoption of financial management control                   poor, including security of tenure at
            system; positive closing balance in                        affordable prices
            budgets
                                                              Optional Reforms
       ·    Computerized double entry accounting
            and internal auditing procedures to be in
                                                              (Any two reforms to be implemented by states,
            place

10
     Good governance includes the principles of accountability, predictability, and transparency, as well as policies and
     mechanisms for decentralization, community participation, and increased private sector involvement.
 140          Appendix 9


      Municipal Reform-Based Loan Covenants in                 Municipal Reform Guidelines in the JNNURM
                    ADB Projects                                                Program
        ·   Fiscal management discipline to ensure           ULBs/ parastatals in each year):
            efficient and economical use of the loan
                                                                  ·   Revision of building bylaws to streamline
            proceeds for the beneficiaries
                                                                      the approval process
        ·   Rationalization and redeployment of
                                                                  ·   Simplification of legal procedures for
            municipal staff
                                                                      conversion of agricultural land to non-
        ·   Effective NGO and community
                                                                      agricultural uses
            participation
                                                                  ·   Introduction of property title certification
        ·   Preparation of urban development plans
                                                                      systems in ULBs
                                                                  ·   Earmarking of at least 20­25% of
                                                                      developed land in all housing projects (both
                                                                      public and private) for economically weaker
                                                                      section
                                                                  ·   Introduction of computerized registration of
                                                                      land and property
                                                                  ·   Revision of bylaws to make mandatory
                                                                      provision of rainwater harvesting in all
                                                                      buildings
                                                                  ·   Bylaws to reuse recycled water
                                                                  ·   Administrative      reforms    for    voluntary
                                                                      retirement, nonfilling of posts, etc.
                                                                  ·   Encouraging PPPs in all areas of ULB
                                                                      functioning.


ADB = Asian Development Bank, JNNURM = Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, NGO =
nongovernment organizations, O&M = operation and maintenance, PPP = public-private partnership, ULB = urban
local bodies.
Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.

 23.     For example, there has been reluctance on the part of some local urban governments to
 take over the assets created under ADB projects (Mangalore City in KUDCEMP, and Bhuj Town
 in GEERP) and reluctance of the local bodies to introduce cost-recovery measures (Calcutta
 Environmental Improvement Progam [CEIP], RUIDP) to manage the project assets. Complex
 multitown and multisector integrated development projects have required more time and funds
 than has been allotted to undertake the necessary financial, socioeconomic, and institutional
 analyses to assess the fiscal health and debt-bearing capacity of ULBs and arrive at appropriate
 designs, build consensus for all project components and urban reforms, and develop adequate
 implementation arrangements and capacity. A review of the above projects confirmed PPER
 findings for the KUIDP, which concluded that a longer preparation phase and better stakeholder
 consultations at the project design stage would have benefited both the quality of the investment
 components as well as consensus building within local governments and city populations.11
 Design and implementation according to beneficiaries' felt needs generally led to better
 postproject cost recovery and O&M.


 11
      Nonrepresentation of local communities in the investment decision-making process (KUDCEMP), and inadequate
      community consultation processes (GEERP) have been cited as reasons for the lack of community stakeholder
      ownership encountered for some ADB-funded project components. Although community consultations and
      participation components were usually included in ADB projects, a number of civil society members felt that these
      components were added mainly to satisfy internal policy guidelines and not necessarily to enhance the
      effectiveness of the project outcome.
                                                                                 Appendix 9   141

24.       Comparatively little time and staff and TA resources have been allocated by ADB to
help analyze and implement urban reform components, which require substantial policy
dialogue and capacity development efforts. A long-term systematic approach is needed, as well
as support for state and local governments to enhance fiscal sustainability and institutional
arrangements through expenditure reforms, local revenue mobilization, other enhancements in
the creditworthiness of local governments, the revision of intergovernmental transfer systems,
tariff reforms, regulatory changes, PPPs, and urban land reform.
25.      Increases in local tariffs and the introduction of charges for sewerage are by nature
politically charged. The selection of project towns under ADB-supported urban projects appears
to not always have taken into account the level of preparedness and commitment to actually
implement agreed upon reform measures. Selection of project towns according to demonstrated
reform commitment rather than infrastructure needs would have been preferable, as would have
been inclusion in the project design of incentive mechanisms for disciplined cost recovery and
resource mobilization.
26.     Experience with urban projects in India suggests that the recruitment of project
management and design and supervision consultants, the preparation of detailed project
designs, and the tendering of civil works usually take a minimum period of 18­24 months from
the date of loan effectiveness, depending upon the internal capacity of the implementing
agencies. Local conditions in many Indian cities often do not permit the use of modern
equipment and instead require labor-intensive approaches. In addition, many local contractors
tend to use outdated equipment and methods, are underfinanced, and are inexperienced in
urban infrastructure construction or rehabilitation. In smaller towns, ULBs acting as
implementing agencies require an extensive program of capacity development to precede and
accompany physical investments. Despite projects having been delayed by 2 years on average
(as is the case for urban sector projects ADB-wide), the use of overoptimistic implementation
schedules has continued, resulting in unwarranted expectations and consequent
disappointments.
       3.      Effectiveness
27.     Most ADB projects are being implemented satisfactorily and are rated effective. While
projects increased the availability of basic urban infrastructure services including water supply,
sanitation, and transport, and helped upgrade slum areas, they were usually less successful in
improving the financial and asset management capabilities of ULBs. Provision of social
infrastructure and pro-poor service delivery systems implemented in almost all ADB-supported
urban projects has generally been successful in improving the quality of life of targeted
communities.
28.     In addition to the rehabilitation of water supply distribution systems, including pumping
stations, implemented in all ADB projects, the water supply augmentation schemes supported
by ADB, for example the Bisalpur Water Supply Project under the RUIDP and the Mangalore
Water Supply Augmentation Scheme (part of KUDCEMP), have improved the water supply
conditions in the project towns by reducing nonrevenue water and increasing the actual quantity
and quality of water. These steps have improved the sustainability of these projects by
enhancing the community's willingness to pay for water in most project towns. ADB projects
also supported modern wastewater treatment plants, improving environmental quality and
increasing the availability of water supply for irrigation purposes (KUDCEMP, RUIDP).
Construction of drainage systems, particularly box drains and canal improvements (CEIP), has
been successful to mitigate floods in Kolkata and has benefited a large number of people with
significant economic benefits. Construction of modern landfill sites with mechanized waste
142          Appendix 9


separators and composting facilities has been very effective in improving the quality of life of the
people in many project towns (KUDCEMP).
29.    Delays in identifying and recruiting project management and design and supervision
consultants have invariably affected project implementation schedules, which might suggest the
need for bridging TA. However, barring initial project implementation delays, all projects, with
the exception of the CEIP, have achieved the outputs/targets satisfactorily without significant
time and cost overruns.
30.     Community awareness and participation programs have been successful in facilitating
the achievement of physical project outputs. For example, the establishment of project-specific
social development units (CEIP, KUDCEMP) and implementation of a communication and
media relation strategy (RUIDP) have been effective in informing the local community about
project objectives and purpose. Financial and technical support to form self-help groups and to
engage them in the door-to-door collection and transportation of solid waste has been very
successful in some cases (KUDCEM). Such community groups have also helped empower local
people and have facilitated the implementation of resettlement plans (CEIP). Nevertheless,
these efforts did not always manage to change the "user behavior" of the local community and
their willingness to pay for services, which undermines investment and impacts sustainability.
           4.       Efficiency
31.     Sector assistance is rated by the OEM as likely efficient, but on the low side due to
overdesign (KUIDP) and higher than expected investment costs (CEIP). As only one project has
been fully completed, the OEM arrived at the rating by assessing the soundness of economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) calculations at appraisal and the continued validity of underlying
assumptions.12 All projects had overall EIRRs exceeding 12% at appraisal. Based on field
observations, most of the investments in urban water supply and wastewater treatments
(KUDCEMP, RUIDP), drainage and canal improvements (CEIP), redevelopment of earthquake-
damaged towns (GERRP), and coastal environmental improvements (KUDCEMP) should
generate high EIRRs. In contrast, the financial internal rate of return of most of these projects
will be low compared with the returns estimated during project preparation due to poor
implementation of cost recovery and other financial management measures suggested as part
of loan covenants.
32.      Another perceptible financial benefit is the increase in land prices along the rehabilitated
infrastructure corridors, particularly along the improved water supply, sewerage, and drainage
lines. In many cases, land prices have increased by 30­35%. This is also true in the relocation
sites in Kolkata (CEIP) and Bhuj and Anjar (GERRP). Most project towns should benefit from
this incremental increase in land value by levying development charges and land transfer
charges and by revising property taxes. Improvement in the fiscal health of these towns should
improve their service solvency and capacity to service the project debts.
33.    For the completed KUIDP, the PPER calculated EIRRs between 16% and 45% for the
various project components, (which compares with appraisal estimates of 10% to 53%), with the

12
     Since most of the project towns have inadequate and poor supply of services such as water supply, sewerage, and
     roads, the resource-saving approach applied in these economic viability analyses is appropriate. The various
     assumptions used for estimating the EIRR of projects and subprojects are realistic, with the exception of those
     related to reduction in nonrevenue water and cost recovery in the water and sewerage sectors. While the resource-
     saving approach has been applied in revenue-generating activities such as water supply and sewerage, road
     improvements are evaluated based on the travel time saving and incremental land value generated by the
     investments. Similarly, the economic impacts of investments in nonrevenue-generating assets such as drainage,
     solid waste management, and slum improvements are evaluated based on the incremental increase in property
     value, a surrogate indicator of the economic returns to families.
                                                                                              Appendix 9    143

exception of one water supply component, which was overdesigned. To avoid this situation, the
ultimate focus in ADB interventions should be on the provision of affordable services and the
cost recovery thereof, not just the provision of civil works and equipment. Least-cost analysis
should identify the type of technical solution.
        5.       Sustainability
34.      ADB's urban development projects in India are less likely to be sustainable. The financial
feasibility analyses of the various investments undertaken in the projects are based on a few
basic component-specific assumptions such as (i) institutional and operational capacity to
introduce cost recovery through rationalization of water tariff/user charges; (ii) improved cost
recovery management; (iii) introduction of a sewerage and drainage cess; and (iv) private sector
participation in the management of facilities such as sewerage and wastewater treatment plants,
landfills, and door-to-door collection and disposal of solid wastes. Financial viability is
dependent on household affordability and fiscal viability, which require (i) property tax reforms
including improved tax collection, (ii) improved fiscal and financial management by the municipal
bodies to meet debt-servicing and service delivery obligations, (iii) political will to charge
increased user charges or rationalization of property tax and user charges, (iv) improved
technical capacity of the ULBs to manage the assets on their own or willingness to use the
private sector to manage the new assets, and (v) state government's willingness to meet the
financial gap through fiscal transfers in the medium term. Most of these assumptions have been
reflected in loan covenants. However, some turned out to be unrealistic in the medium term,
particularly when local political conditions forced local municipal councils and the state
governments to backtrack on some of the fiscal reforms.13 Many ULBs felt that the states
imposed investment decisions and related debts upon them, and as a result there is a general
unwillingness on their part to introduce either new taxes/user charges or improved cost recovery
measures. Also, lack of capacity, inadequate political will, and fragmented mandates requiring a
large number of different agencies to take joint decisions constrained the reform process.
35.    It is important to recognize that there has also been progress in a number of reform
areas supported by ADB assistance. For example, innovative service management initiatives
taken by the ULBs are encouraging. These initiatives involve the reduction in nonrevenue water
(RUIDP); participation of self help groups for door-to-door collection of solid waste,
implementation of the Nirmal Nagara Program, and property tax and water tariff reforms
(KUDCEMP); application of E-governance and computerized fiscal and financial management in
most project towns, private sector participation in the resettlement of affected families, and
management of community services (GERRP); and the establishment of a facility management
fund (KEIP).14
36.     Another issue challenging project sustainability is the poor institutional and operational
capacity of some ULBs for O&M of the assets created under the projects. Transfer of
international best practices and building internal capacity of the project implementation agencies
and the ULBs are some of the areas requiring more attention in future urban sector projects.
The effectiveness of the knowledge transfer process is limited, as most staff of project
implementation agencies are deputed from various government agencies for the duration of the
project only, and there is a mismatch between the capital investment and asset management

13
   The decision of the Mangalore Municipal Council to refuse to implement the capital value-based self-assessment
   scheme of the property tax (KUDCEMP); and the decision of the Rajasthan Government to abolish the property tax
   throughout the state (RUIDP); and the decision of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation to provide free water for
   residential use, except bulk metered water supply provided to large residential complexes (CEIP), pose serious
   risks to the financial viability of the infrastructure investments and threaten their sustainable operations.
14
   The Kolkata Municipal Corporation has introduced an Over Bridge Management Fund. Based on its success, the
   Corporation is planning to set up similar management funds for other facilities.
144          Appendix 9


functions of ULBs (RUIDP). There is a general perception among the implementing agencies
that ADB should not exit the urban sector projects as soon as the capital investment-related
loans are fully disbursed. Continued institutional and technical engagement of ADB to sustain
the urban sector investments and to improve local capacity to manage the assets created by the
projects over the medium term is what could differentiate ADB from commercial or institutional
lenders, according to many municipal administrators. Another way of addressing sustainability
issues related to the maintenance of physical assets could be by structuring construction
contracts for sewerage treatment plant, water treatment plant, landfills, and roads to include
service management contracts for the medium term. This practice has been very successful in
the case of the Dalawas sewerage treatment plant in Jaipur (RUIDP) and is worth replicating in
other ADB-funded projects.
           6.        Sector Impact
37.     Sector impact is rated modest but on the high side. ADB's projects have had a
significant impact on how similar projects are designed and implemented. The KUIDP was the
first major "integrated" multicity urban investment project in India in many years. As such, it
generated substantial experience and led to further statewide and country-wide policy initiatives.
ADB TA is providing inputs for the implementation of the JNNURM. ADB assistance also helped
build the capacity of urban management bodies. For example, such assistance enabled the
KUIDFC to undertake the design of the third Karnataka integrated urban development project by
itself.
38.      The GERRP had a significant impact on the reconstruction and rehabilitation of urban
infrastructure and redevelopment of city centers in the earthquake-affected towns in Gujarat.
This is the first time ADB has assisted in the redevelopment of city centers, and it has been an
excellent learning experience for the local governments and for ADB. Redevelopment of the city
centers with required basic infrastructure and community services has restored the economic
life of these towns, and the overall impacts and community satisfaction have been much higher
than expected. In the absence of completed benefit monitoring and evaluation studies, it is
difficult to quantify the actual level of impacts in the project towns. However, based on the
preliminary evaluation of the GEERP, it is estimated that the "normalized" quality of life index
has increased by 225% compared with the situation immediately after the earthquake, and by
18% compared with the situation before the earthquake.15 This is a significant achievement of
the project.
39.      The development of self-help groups and their mainstreaming with leading microfinance
institutions is a success story. While this component has done exceedingly well in the
KUDCEMP, their institutional viability and financial sustainability is a matter of concern in other
projects. In addition to empowering the local communities to participate in income-generating
activities, the participation of self-help groups in the door-to-door collection and transportation of
solid waste and awareness creation significantly improved community ownership in the projects.
Overall, the impacts of these community-based development initiatives have been satisfactory
in most urban projects.
           7.        Contributions to Development Results
40.     Urban development projects have proven to be effective mechanisms for addressing
social development concerns. ADB's urban projects in India will provide more than 10 million
people with improved water supply and more than 14 million people with improved sanitation

15
      The index is composed of the following indicators: availability of house, size of house, access to schools, basic
     amenities in house, access to primary schools, basic amenities in primary schools, access to functional health
     facility, access to surfaced roads, access to safe drinking water, adequate drinking water, and access to electricity,
                                                                                   Appendix 9   145

services. That should improve their quality of life and related health indicators in the respective
cities. About one million slum dwellers will have benefited from an upgrading of their areas. These
projects can have an important demonstration effect for other cities if sustainability issues can be
resolved. However, unless funds are available to maintain physical investments in operating
condition, the overall impact of the sector assistance will be reduced.
41.     Being environmental infrastructure projects in many cases, the overall environmental
impact of the projects is likely to be satisfactory. Improved provision and management of water
supply, wastewater treatment, drainage, canal improvements, solid waste management, road
and bridge development, and slum improvements have greatly contributed to the improvement
in the quality of life of the project towns. These investments also enhanced the economic
development potentials of the states and urban economies in particular. While the provision of
assured piped water supply has significantly improved the economic development potentials of
tourist towns in Rajasthan, it also improved the quality of health of people affected by
contaminated groundwater (RUIDP). ADB assistance also improved the quality of life for a large
number of people affected by frequent floods in Kolkata (CEIP).
42.     The main social safeguard issue experienced in the projects reviewed has been the
resettlement of people affected by canal and drain improvements (CEIP), urban redevelopment
plans (GEERP), and the laying of water distribution mains along the National Highway
(KUDCEMP). Resettlement plans followed ADB guidelines. However, the level of consultation
and community satisfaction in the compensation and resettlement processes have varied
significantly across these projects. While the CEIP and KUDCEMP have achieved reasonable
levels of community satisfaction, the resettlement plans implemented in the GEERP have
received mixed reaction from the people. Nearly 800 families that could not establish ownership
of the land/house to be eligible for government housing assistance continue to live in temporary
shelters located in unhealthy habitats. In other cases the land acquisition process and the
compensation packages did not meet people's expectations, because market prices for land
differed significantly from the applied registered values. This was one of the main reasons for
the delays experienced in land acquisition in urban sector projects, often forcing the government
to exercise its legal options.
       8.      ADB Performance
43.    ADB's performance has been mixed. While ADB has done a good and sometimes
outstanding job in facilitating the design and implementation of physical infrastructure
investment components, its policy dialogue on urban sector reform issues has been less than
successful.
44.     Many of the ADB-supported urban sector projects suffer from poor financial
sustainability. Political sensitivities and fund disbursement considerations appear to have
overshadowed effective implementation of fiscal management and tariff-related loan covenants
in a number of cases. Only 40% of surveyed executing agency (EA)/implementing agency staff
felt that the ADB project was beneficial to improving tariffs/cost recovery or municipal tax
revenues (see Appendix 8). Interestingly, some surveyed EAs indicated that ADB did not
provide any assistance to help with the identification or implementation of policy reforms and felt
that policy conditionality was developed without close consultation with relevant stakeholders.
Also, ADB appears to have continued to disburse loans although covenants were not complied
with. In the case of the CEIP, a supplementary loan was even granted.
45.     The limited expertise and experience of urban sector staff in ADB with regard to urban
financial and fiscal management issues necessitates more cooperation with the finance and
governance division of the South Asia Department, as will non-sovereign lending transactions in
146      Appendix 9


the urban sector. Joint strategies should be developed on how to deal with public resource
management and capacity development concerns at the local government level.
46.     In comparison with other external agencies funding urban sector programs, the main
comparative advantage of ADB, as perceived by central and local government officials, is its
technical capability to design infrastructure projects appropriate to the local environment through
the participation of international and local consultants and its willingness to revisit its own
internal operative procedures to facilitate project implementation. ADB implementation
assistance by staff and consultants was generally appreciated. Particularly the India Resident
Mission's support was highly valued, whereas a number of EAs felt that headquarters staff
should be less involved in the implementation of projects. While a number of EAs indicated that
they had experienced delays in obtaining ADB responses and approvals and found ADB
processes cumbersome, they expressed even greater difficulties with regard to government
procedures and clearances. ADB resettlement policies posed problems for investments that
involved land acquisition.
47.     ADB procurement guidelines have received mixed reaction from the project EAs. While
the ADB procurement guidelines have been acknowledged as one of ADB's most valued
contributions, and these best practices are beginning to influence improvements in government
internal procurement systems (RUIDP, GEERP), the multiple ADB approval and sanction
procedures have been considered as time consuming and cumbersome (KUDCEMP, CEIP).
Some of the projects have implemented E-tendering processes satisfactorily. Since this
innovative practice is aligned with the Government E-governance policy, a number of EAs have
suggested that ADB should review its procurement policy on E-tendering and also streamline its
internal screening and approval systems of procurement to reduce delays.
       9.       Project Performance Ratings
48.    The overall performance of the various ADB urban sector projects reviewed is
summarized in Table A9.3. The sustainability of the CEIP will be very challenging due to the
absence of any policy initiative to implement water charges/taxes for residential purposes,
except in a few large residential condominiums.
            Table A9.3: Overall Performance Rating of the Selected ADB Projects
                                  Likely          Likely          Likely         Likely
            ADB Project         Relevance     Effectiveness     Efficiency   Sustainability Likely Impact
       KUIDP                        S               S               PS            PS               S
       RUIDP                        S               S                S            PS              PS
       KUDCEMP                      S               S                S            PS              PS
       CEIP                         S               S               PS             U              PS
       GEERP                        S               S                S            PS              PS
                                                              Efficient (on                  Modest (on the
                                Relevant         Effective    the low side) Less sustainable   high side)
   ADB = Asian Development Bank, CEIP = Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project, GERRP = Gujarat
   Earthquake Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project, KUDCEMP = Karnataka Urban Development and
   Coastal Environmental Management Project, KUIDP = Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project,
   PS= partly satisfactory, RUIDP = Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project, S = satisfactory, U =
   unsatisfactory.
   Source: Country assistance program evaluation team.
                                                                                   Appendix 9   147


       10.     Overall Sector Rating
49.     Sector project assistance, although relevant and effective in delivering physical outputs,
is rated partly successful due to sustainability concerns. The rating is on the high side, as ADB's
assistance was generally well positioned. However, sustainability issues might negatively affect
potentially substantial socioeconomic and environmental impacts. ADB performance has been
mixed, with very good design and implementation support for physical investments offset by
weak policy dialogue on urban reforms.

       11.     Recommendations for Future Operations
50.      There is substantial need for urban infrastructure improvements, and ADB should
continue its operations in this sector. However, to help finance the massive related investment
requirements and to ensure sustainability of operations, urban sector fiscal reforms and
resource management issues need to be more proactively addressed. Discussions with the
various stakeholders revealed that ADB should support (i) improved and innovative
infrastructure lending, PPPs, and municipal bond market development; (ii) the transfer of
international best practices and long-term capacity development for policy reforms, asset
management, and project design and implementation based on adequate analysis of existing
capabilities in these areas; (iii) closer alignment of ADB's reform agenda with the JNNURM to
facilitate political buy-in and reform implementation; (iv) better consultation with stakeholders at
the project design stage to help build consensus, particularly for policy reform measures; (v)
local governments that have demonstrated commitment to the required fiscal and institutional
reforms and sufficient debt-bearing capacity; (vi) policy-based lending for urban sector reforms;
(vii) increased use of PPPs whenever possible; and (viii) use of the multitranche financing
facility (MFF) modality for complex multisector projects, among other things to facilitate
performance-based selection of project towns. Project implementation could be improved by
removing procedural delays, for example through the provision of bridging TA.
51.      ADB has already started to address some of these points. The use of the MFF modality
in recent projects has provided a mechanism for selecting project towns based on their
readiness and performance. A number of recent TA operations support nonsovereign
operations in the urban sector and promote PPP. Innovative financing options (e.g., municipal
funds, PPP) are being introduced for the more advanced clients that are receiving their second
and third ADB loans, as are performance-based contract and build-operate-transfer schemes. If
tariffs can only be gradually increased, establishment of ADB-supported contingency funds that
can tie over initial cash-flow mismatches for projects whose financials are acceptable over the
longer term could be considered to help attract private sponsors.
       MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
                       EVALUATION FOR INDIA



         On 18 October 2007, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.     General Comments

       1.      We appreciate OED's comprehensive and well-analyzed Country
       Assistance Program Evaluation (CAPE) for India. The CAPE provides a good
       overview on how ADB's India operations have gradually evolved from primarily
       providing financing in the mid-1980s to supporting the Government's efforts
       towards policy and regulatory reforms and infrastructure development thereafter.
       We are pleased to note that the Government of India (GOI) considers ADB as a
       "responsive and dependable development partner" as mentioned in Box 1 of the
       CAPE. This reflects both the maturing of ADB-GOI relationship and the natural
       evolution of services required by ADB's key middle-income clients such as India.

       2.     Overall, the CAPE has rated ADB's assistance to India as "successful"
       but on the low side, implying that it could have been better. We concur with this
       rating and endorse the overall conclusions and key recommendations of the
       CAPE, which will be addressed in ADB's upcoming Country Partnership Strategy
       (CPS) for India for 2008­2012.

       3.       The CAPE rated ADB's portfolio management as "modest, but on the high
       side", considering recent improvements. We note that owing to recent measures
       instituted by ADB and GOI, implementation performance significantly improved in
       2005 and 2006. These measures include (i) adoption of readiness filters to
       improve the quality-at-entry of projects and programs; (ii) regular, sector-focused
       tripartite portfolio review meetings with central and state level executing agencies
       (EAs); and (iii) devoting an increasing share of ADB's staff resources for
       strengthening the capacity of EAs in terms of project implementation.

       II.            Comments on Specific Recommendations

              Recommendation 1. To Improve Strategic Focus of ADB Operations

       4.      Recommendation 1(i). We agree with the CAPE's suggestion that entry
       into new sectors should be based on adequate sector analysis and a strategy for
       longer-term involvement. We note that the core focus of ADB's India operations
       (2008­2012) will remain on infrastructure development (transport, urban, and
       energy) including agribusiness and irrigation infrastructure and strengthening of
       governance and finance as laid down in the Country Strategy and Program
       (CSP) 2003, and later reconfirmed in the subsequent CSP Updates. With respect
       to agriculture and water resources--sectors where ADB is relatively new in
       India--several background studies are being undertaken, and substantial effort
       has been devoted to building relationship with the concerned Ministries over the
       past 2 to 3 years.
5.      Recommendation 1(ii). We note that given the sense of urgency in
speeding up the process of infrastructure development across the country, the
GOI has requested ADB to expand operations in poorer and weak capacity
states. Therefore, since 2003, ADB has been increasingly focused on the
relatively poorer and weak capacity states such as Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jammu
and Kashmir, Jharkand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttaranchal, the North
eastern region, and more recently Bihar to support GOI's efforts towards
reducing inter-state disparities.

6.     In order to maintain a balance between states of differing capacities as
recommended by the CAPE, the current and proposed country program
includes--in addition to weak capacity states--some relatively strong capacity
states such as Gujarat, Haryana and Andhra Pradesh, as well as states such as
Karnataka and Rajasthan where ADB has had long engagement, and where the
EAs are familiar with its policies and procedures.

7.      Recommendation 1(iii). We agree with the recommendation that
increase in lending volumes should be matched by adequate staff resources. An
assessment of the staff and Technical Assistance (TA) resources required for
effectively delivering the proposed program is being made for the forthcoming
CPS. However, we note that actual allocation of the staff and TA resources will
be subject to the ADB-wide Work Program and Budget Framework exercise.

8.      Recommendation 1(iv). We note that a detailed environmental
assessment is being undertaken for the India CPS, given the concerns about
managing the pressures on natural resources and the environment as a result of
India's rapid economic growth. It will consider the scope of including stand-alone
environmental projects and suggest ways of improving the mainstreaming of
environmental concerns in ADB's India operations as recommended by the
CAPE.

       Recommendation 2. To Improve the Quality of ADB's Sector Lending

9.      Recommendation 2(i). We agree with the observation that (a) financial
intermediation (FI) loans should not be pursued unless there is a well-
demonstrated demand for such financing, and (b) ADB is able to add more value
to financial market development by addressing structural impediments affecting
demand.

10.     On (a), while the performance of FI loans was not satisfactory, we note
that it was largely due to external factors such as the economic recession and
differences between ADB and GOI social safeguards. We note that these issues
are now being addressed and that the demand for FI loans remains substantial.

11.     On (b), it needs to be recognized that despite reforms being pursued by
GOI, the long-term debt market in India remains relatively underdeveloped.
Hence, demand for long-term loans from international financial institutions
particularly for infrastructure, trade, and housing is expected to continue until
such time that the domestic market is able to provide these resources. Therefore,
we believe that it is appropriate for ADB to continue to help fill these resource
needs while simultaneously promoting reforms through TAs and policy dialogue
with GOI to promote innovative solutions for long-term local currency markets
through sustainable FI products.
12.     Recommendation 2(ii). We appreciate the need for adequate
stakeholder consultations and a thorough assessment of the capacity of its
counterparts for improving project design and sustainability. South Asia
Department (SARD) project teams are already following this approach. The
CAPE notes the effort made by ADB to undertake consultation and encourage
participation of stakeholders to address the issues of sustainability, building
consensus, ownership and ability to pay for services. The inclusion of a case
study featuring a project (the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal
Environmental Management Project, Appendix 9, para. 39 of the CAPE report)
with significant participatory aspects helps illustrate our client-oriented approach.

13.     Recommendation 2(iii). We note that OED's recommendation for
improving the quality of project design and implementation is already being
addressed by SARD. SARD developed Project Readiness Filters to improve
quality-at-entry, and this has been strongly endorsed by GOI. SARD is also
encouraging advance action on procurement for speeding up contract awards
and disbursements.

14.     The increased focus being given to project implementation by SARD
Management and the sector focused tripartite portfolio review meetings (TPRMs)
are helping in the sharing of implementation experience among ADB staff and
EAs, working across different sectors and states. Many of ADB staff who
participate in TPRMs are also responsible for processing loans. Hence, the
TPRM discussions help them to factor in lessons learnt during implementation at
the project design phase and to prepare realistic implementation schedules and
arrangement. Results of these efforts over the past few years have been
encouraging. For instance, contract awards increased from $557 million in 2004
to $1,723 million in 2006, disbursements increased from $381.4 million in 2004 to
$701.4 million in 2006, and the proportion of projects-at-risk has fallen from 25%
in 2004 to below 10% in 2006.

15.     Recommendation 2(iv). We note that a system to enhance staff
incentives for project implementation has been established. The performance
development plan (PDP) process provides a mechanism for regional
departments to recognize appropriately the contribution made by staff working in
the areas of project implementation and portfolio management.

       Recommendation 3. To Improve Non-lending Services

16.      Recommendation 3(i). We note that our economic and thematic sector
works (ETSWs) have been guided by the principle that they should be
operationally relevant. For example, the recent ETSWs include among others: (i)
Prerequisites for Capital Formation in Agriculture: Public-Private Partnerships
(PPP) for Enhancing Rural Infrastructure; (ii) Scope of Transfer of Railway
Activities (Core and Non-Core) to Private Sector; (iii) Rural Electrification: Access
and Quality Aspect; and (vi) Promoting Energy Efficiency and Conservation. In
addition, SARD publishes a bi-annual South Asia Economic Report with a theme
chapter on emerging macro and sectoral policy issues, which helps guide both
lending and non-lending operations at the department level.
17.    Recommendation 3(ii). We accord high value to ETSWs. The PDP
process provides a mechanism for regional departments to recognize
appropriately the contribution made by staff through ETSWs.

18.     Recommendation 3(iii). We concur with OED's assessment that staff
with specialized skills in infrastructure regulatory, policy, institutional, PPP, and
financing management will be required in the coming years, especially for
effectively implementing the innovation and efficiency initiative (IEI) modalities in
India and for working on PPP projects. SARD is working with Budget, Personnel,
and Management Systems Department (BPMSD) to identify staff with skills
needed for the proposed operations. Recruitment of staff with the required
experience and skill-mix has been facilitated by the recent BPMSD initiative of
bulk recruitment for strategically important positions.

19.      Recommendation 3(iv). We agree with the CAPE suggestion that ADB
encourage the engagement of well-quality consultants in our non-lending
activities.

       Recommendation 4. To Increase Private Sector Operations

20.    Recommendation 4(i). We agree with the recommendation that the staff
strength in India Resident Mission (INRM) needs to be increased for effective
handling of business development and nonsovereign infrastructure financing
operations. However, this needs to be done within the constraints of available
resources on an ADB-wide basis. We note that a Private Sector Operations
Department (PSOD) staff has already been posted at INRM for the past two
years, and further resources for INRM are being considered.

21.     Recommendation 4(ii). We note that ADB plans to review the country
limits of nonsovereign exposure in 2008. In terms of leveraging additional
resources through cofinancing for economies like India's, there is significant
scope for commercial cofinancing and IEI-type initiatives. ADB also needs to
adopt innovative financial instruments such as currency swaps. PSOD and
SARD plan to work with other departments concerned to pursue a dialogue with
GOI for promoting long-term, fixed interest rate bearing local currency lending
through sustainable FI products.

22.     Recommendation 4(iii), (iv), & (v). We note that according to the CPS
guidelines, SARD and PSOD have been collaborating closely in preparing
integrated public and private sector roadmaps and identifying opportunities for
increasing nonsovereign operations in the infrastructure sector and for shifting of
funding from the public to the private and nonsovereign windows wherever
feasible. We encourage entities, which can borrow based on their balance
sheets, to access ADB's nonsovereign window.

       Recommendation 5. To Increase Responsiveness to Client Concerns

23.      Recommendation 5(i). We agree in principle with the need to
decentralize more of ADB's functions and delegate more decision-making
authority to INRM on project implementation matters. However, these are ADB-
wide generic issues, which have resource implications. We note that the ongoing
review of the resident mission policy will inform these recommendations.
24.       Recommendation 5(ii). While we support the need to improve and
harmonize with country systems, this needs to be recognized as an ADB-wide
policy issue, which is also related to the Harmonization (with multilateral
development banks) and Alignment (with country systems) Agenda under the
Paris Declaration. The Safeguard Policy Update, which is currently underway,
will inform these recommendations.

25.      Recommendation 5(iii). We agree, of course, with the CAPE's
recommendation that regular dialogue with senior-level officials is required. We
note that SARD undertakes regular dialogue with senior Government officials on
various issues, and that we will continue to work closely with our key
stakeholders in India.
                DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE

       Chair's Summary of the Committee Discussions on 24 October 2007

               Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India


1.      In introducing the topic, OED stated that this Country Assistance
Program Evaluation (CAPE) is the first for India and covers the last 20 years
(1986 to 2006), although most of the analysis focused on the last ten years. The
main purpose of the study was to provide input to the preparation of Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India. India is both a major shareholder and a
borrowing member country with substantial influence on ADB's portfolio. ADB's
assistance to India in the last 20 years has been about $17 billion in public
sector lending, $147 million in TA assistance, and $756 million in ADB's private
sector operations. There are three other Sector Assistance Program Evaluation
(SAPE) reports supporting this CAPE: one each on transport sector, energy,
and public resource management. This CAPE takes into account the findings
and recommendations of these three studies. Conforming to the requirements
of DEC, this CAPE has also incorporated the views of the Government of India
on its partnership with ADB. Management agrees with the CAPE's overall rating
of "successful", and concurs with the overall conclusions and key
recommendations.

I.       Project processing consumes more staff resources than project
         administration

2.      To a query by a DEC member, OED confirmed that in the case of India,
project processing consumes more staff resources than project administration in
terms of mission travel. Director General (DG) of the South Asia Department
(SARD), indicated that more resources for portfolio management have been
allocated in recent years with improved performance.

II.      Quality of assistance program has improved over time

3.     One DEC member noted the report's finding that the quality of the
assistance program during the latter 10 years of the evaluation period has
improved in comparison to the earlier 10 year period. He added that the report
observes that ADB has and could continue to scale up its assistance to India in
the coming years.

III.     Assistance to Rural Development

4.      Observing that there was a recent focus by ADB in rural development in
India, one DEC member asked how this would fit into the core of the evolving
Long-Term Strategic Framework (LTSF) plan of ADB. He pointed out that the
agriculture sector, perhaps with the exception of irrigation infrastructure, was
not playing a dominant role in the evolving LTSF. Another DEC member
observed that rural and agricultural developments are important to India, and to
China, and asked how ordinary capital resources (OCR) funding could be
provided to these sectors in a viable way. Another member, observing that while
the agriculture sector is important for poverty alleviation and while core priorities
under Medium Term Strategy (MTS II) of ADB have already been chosen,
asked OED to elaborate their views on this issue. OED responded that MTS II
does include irrigation infrastructure as a priority 1 sector. OED added that
evaluation results show that agriculture is a challenging sector and if ADB were
to continue to be involved in this sector, then it should know how to manage the
risks. In addition, quite often, the solution to poverty does not lie in the rural
areas, but elsewhere where jobs are being created and thus causing migration.
OED further noted that if ADB were to get involved in a sector, it should be
there for a long term and there should be strong country commitment. DG,
SARD responded that ADB is supporting India's rural development program to
make the growth process more inclusive. In 2006, it provided a $1 billion
program loan for strengthening rural cooperatives and improving availability of
credit in rural areas. Further, ADB will be providing assistance for strengthening
agribusiness and irrigation infrastructure, and improving water resources
management in selected states over the 2008-2010 period.

IV.    Safeguard Policies

5.      One DEC member noted that the report observes that ADB's safeguard
policies have created the perverse effect of the client deliberately avoiding ADB
projects that have sensitive environmental or re-settlement issues. He further
added that the report appeals to India to become more open to dialogue with
ADB and the Resident Mission (RM), and to update the Indian safeguard
policies. Another DEC member noted that report was pointing out that ADB's
safeguard policies were adding to the transaction costs of borrowing from ADB,
and stated that if a country is trying to develop its own safeguard policies, how
can ADB insist on its own system and not use the country's system of
safeguards. Is ADB going to continue to insist on using its own safeguard
policies or move towards using the country system, he asked. One DEC
member asked OED to clarify what it means by its statement in the report, "in
the mean time ADB should harmonize its approach to common safeguard
concerns in India." OED responded that three major evaluations completed by
early this year had fed into the ongoing safeguard review. The safeguard
systems in some countries are strong, while in others they are weak. In China,
and in some states of India, these systems are strong. In other countries, it will
be a very long time before ADB can use these countries' systems. OED would
recommend strengthening these systems progressively in a move towards
using them. While many DMCs would encourage ADB using their safeguard
system, many NGOs would oppose such a move. DG, SARD added that while
this is an ADB-wide issue, SARD is making all efforts to find ways of
harmonizing among systems of donors and aligning with the safeguard systems
of the institutions whose projects ADB is supporting.

V.      Resident Mission

6.      Noting that the report appeals to strengthen the India Resident Mission
(INRM) and observing that ADB's largest private sector operation is in India, a
DEC member asked if OED had a specific recommendation to strengthen the
private sector activities by the RM. Another DEC member stated that for a
country like India with a large pool of highly qualified economists and
management specialists, there is no reason why the RM could not be
strengthened with more and qualified staff. That would help to improve the
dialogue with the Central and State governments. Another member pointed out
that without delegation of appropriate level of authority to the RM, it would not
be able to function effectively. Yet another DEC member said that as the
Management had noted in its response, it is a bank-wide issue and
consequently should be addressed in that context and not in isolation. Another
DEC member noted that the government has specifically emphasized the need
for further decentralization to the INRM with adequate staffing and use of
country systems, and changes in business processes for streamlining ADB's
operation in India. He added that decisions on these issues should be finalized
before the CPS is finalized. OED responded that it has consistently advocated
strengthening of resident missions and Management has insisted that it is an
ADB-wide issue. OED has found from its studies that when the resident
missions are strengthened, the client, its executing agencies, and NGOs all get
better service. He added that this strategy would require developing an
accountability framework, delegating more authority, and allocating more staff. It
would necessitate in ADB changing its business model. This would have major
implication for ADB, and thus he cautioned that this should be preceded by a
major feasibility study. DG, SARD, while acknowledging that this is an ADB-
wide issue, said that in the case of India, they could not wait for the outcome of
ADB-wide review of RM policy. He added that SARD has found ways to provide
additional support to INRM by delegating more responsibilities by requesting
Private Sector Operations Department and the Office of General Counsel to
redeploy a professional staff position each to the INRM. The large operation in
India makes it possible to justify one of each of these specialized staff to be
redeployed. In addition, one position from one of the divisions in SARD also has
been reassigned to INRM. Further, the number of National Officers positions
has been increased from 11 to 19.

VI.    Number and quality of ADB staff for India operation

7.      A DEC member, noting that the report points out the need for
strengthening the quality and number of staff involved in the India operation,
said that both the donor and borrowing countries should form an alliance to
push ADB for necessary reform steps. Noting that the report points out that
ADB had not fully exploited its potential to assist India, another DEC member
asked OED to elaborate more on why this was the case. He asked OED if one
of the reasons why perhaps ADB could not give timely support to India was
because of lack of adequately qualified experts in ADB. He wanted to know if
there were other reasons for not fully exploiting ADB's potential in India.
Another DEC member, pointing out that the report makes it clear that there is a
need for specialized expertise in economic and sector work to develop new
funding methodology for public-private partnership etc., asked if ADB would be
able to deliver in this respect. He further asked how long it would take ADB to
deliver if it is not already in a ready state to deliver such services. Another DEC
member noted that the government expects ADB's operations in India to
expand to $4 billion per year and asked if ADB would be able to allocate the
necessary staff, technical assistance (TA) funds and other resources to rise up
to expectation. DG, SARD responded that it is crucial to help the Government
improve the capacity to promote public-private partnership (PPP), and so, ADB
has provided large scale technical assistance to set up PPP cells in 14 states.
These cells are in charge of identifying and carrying out preliminary assessment
of PPP projects. ADB's support to PPP is expected to be scaled up.

VII.    Coordination between Public and Private Sector Operations of ADB

8.      Noting the report's observation that there is potential for improving the
coordination between ADB's public and private sector operations, and pointing
out that there is an ADB proposal to merge the private sector operations within
the public sector operations, a DEC member asked what OED thought of the
plan. Another DEC member pointed out that the report states that there should
be synergy between ADB's public and private sector operations, and asked
what ADB is doing about it. Another DEC member, while agreeing with this
view, observed that the coordination between ADB's public and private sector
operations has significantly improved over the last couple of years. OED
responded that it had done an evaluation report on this issue which was
discussed by DEC in June. That study proposed two or three modes for
consideration. Responding to the specific question about merging PSOD with
Public Sector Departments, DG, OED said that the implications for such a
change would have to be considered. He noted that since staff in the public
sector are used to designing projects that are backed by government
guarantee, they may not be able to fully appreciate the risks associated with
private sector lending. DG, SARD responded that SARD is actively pursuing
projects in which both the public and private sector work together to achieve
project goals and to bring synergy on development impact through their
partnership.

VIII.   Access to Asian Development Fund (ADF)

9.     Pointing out that the report has classified ADB's assistance program to
be successful, but on the low side, one DEC member asked if the low side
rating may have been the result of India's lack of access to ADF. If India had
access to ADF, it could have helped India to eradicate poverty a little more. He
asked what OED thought of this lack of access of ADF to India. He further noted
that there are limits on ADB's assistance to any country and that for major
countries like India, and China, ADB's assistance may be even less than one
percent of the amount needed for development, and asked if ADB could have
provided more assistance then that would have made a difference.

IX.     More field office resources for improving project implementation

10.     A DEC member commended OED for recommending that more field
office resources should be added to improve project implementation. He added
that ADB should also provide more support for executing agencies (EA) and
other local entities in charge of project implementation.
X.      Knowledge Services

11.     Observing that demand for knowledge services from middle-income
countries like India and China are likely to increase, a DEC member asked if
ADB is ready to meet such demands. OED responded that clearly knowledge
management is an area where ADB could do more but has not been able to.
ADB is not as successful as it would like to be. The main reason is the skills of
the staff. ADB tries to outsource through TAs and consultants; these efforts are
sometimes successful and at other times not so.

XI.     Regional Cooperation

12.     Noting that India has been active in promoting South Asia Regional
Cooperation, a DEC member asked why the report did not deal extensively with
the issue and/or its recommendation for ADB's assistance to India to participate
in regional projects to integrate with the regional economies. OED responded
that there has not been much investment projects in the region. There has been
much policy dialogue that ADB supported. Now there are a few projects, but
they are not completed yet. It would be a good topic for the next CAPE to cover.
DG, SARD added that the first investment project in regional cooperation is
soon coming to the Board for its consideration. It is a project in information
communication technology. It is small, but there is an understanding among the
four countries about the benefit to be mutually shared.

XII.    World Bank versus ADB

13.     A DEC member asked OED what they thought of the relative
performance of the World Bank (WB) vis-à-vis ADB in providing assistance to
their members. OED responded that WB has three times as many staff in their
resident mission in India as ADB has in its resident mission in India. ADB
resident mission staff is under stress. The portfolio of WB in India is similar to
that of ADB. Consequently, with a larger staff, WB can generally do things
better than ADB. They do better in knowledge management, macro-economics
etc. They certainly do better on safeguard policies. It is a difficult comparison,
but in terms of resources, WB has much larger resources than ADB in every
country across the region. An OED staff added that in general, ADB fares better
in project management and does poorly in knowledge services and policy
dialogue and that perhaps reflect the quality of ADB's staff resources and its
reliance on TAs and consultants.

XIII.   Financial Sector Operations

14.     Noting that there were many cancellations in financial sector operation
due to lack of demand and other problems, a DEC member asked why this
happened and what could be done to prevent such a thing from happening in
the future. OED responded that due to unaddressed structural impediments,
there were not enough private sector infrastructure projects that would have met
the criteria set by ADB for its credit lines that supported infrastructure projects.
In the housing market, there were enough alternative financing resources
available locally at better rates. Initially, ADB's line of credit looked competitive
in terms of pricing. But as domestic interest rate, exchange rate, and guarantee
fees of the government changed ADB funds became unattractive. INRM staff
added that one of the reasons for the low demand for the loans was that ADB
was imposing its safeguards, particularly those relating to re-settlement, on the
sub-borrowers. As these would affect profitability, the private sector borrowers
were reluctant to accept these conditions and borrow. Another reason was that
there was surplus of liquidity in the economy, and the interest rates were not
favorable.

XIV.    Viability of Transport Sector Projects

15.     Recollecting that DG, OED had earlier stated in a previous DEC meeting
that internal rate of return (IRR) calculations of transport sector projects are
based on overly optimistic assumptions, and that these projects on average are
delayed by a year and a half, thus rendering these IRR calculations
meaningless, DEC member asked when ADB was going to learn the
appropriate lessons and take action to address these issues.

XV.     Anchor Expansion and Lending Volume

16.    The report's recommendation 1(iii) asks ADB to "anchor expansion in
lending volumes and the addition of new sectors and states to a country
strategy business plan which ensures that aspirations are matched by adequate
resources". A DEC member noted that the Management has sidestepped the
issue of developing a business plan as part of CPS.

XVI.    Economic and Thematic Sector Work

17.     A DEC member noted that the economic and thematic sector work as a
component of work program should be agreed with the Government of India as
part of CPS rather than being decided on an ad-hoc basis. He invited DEC to
take a position on this issue. He further pointed out that Management appears
to be sidestepping the related recommendation on this issue by OED.

XVII.   Headroom for Private Sector Lending

18.     Noting the Management view that use of currency swaps will increase
headroom for private sector lending, one DEC member asked how the currency
swaps would increase the headroom. INRM staff responded that exchange risk
is often too much for a private sector borrower to bear and currency swap is one
of the mechanism ADB has by which it eliminates the foreign exchange risk for
the borrower.

XVIII. Procurement from Non-member countries

19.    Noting that the Government of India has specifically suggested relaxing
procurement restriction from non-member countries for the PPP projects as the
Government of India system is based entirely on competition, one DEC member
asked SARD and COSO to respond to this suggestion. Country Director, India,
stated that the first stage of implementation of a PPP project is to select a
partner to undertake the PPP. Under the model concession agreement, the
partner will have to establish a company under the Indian Companies Act. Thus,
the nationality of the company that will do the project will be Indian.
Consequently, there is a difference between the traditional way of procuring civil
works and supplies. The Government of India is requesting ADB to reconsider
the way it applies the procurement guidelines. Principal Director, COSO,
responded that procurement from non-member country is a restriction imposed
by the ADB Charter. He added that COSO is looking at this issue in a creative
way. It is an important issue, particularly given the magnitude of the investment
needs. He agreed with the analysis of Country Director, INRM and added that
this is a financial engineering in a grand way and that it is not a procurement of
civil works for a simple project. He further added that COSO is consulting with
ADB's legal department and he was optimistic about a good outcome.

XIX.   Is ADB Operating in too many states for it to be effective?

20.     While acknowledging that it is important to be present in states where
there is poverty, a member asked if ADB is involved in too many states for its
operation to be effective. Is the span of control optimal? Country Director,
INRM responded that until 2003, ADB operation was focused on selective
states. In most cases, these states were considered to be reform minded. As a
consequence of ADB's success in these states, several of them are performing
better. He cited several examples to support his argument. This has allowed
ADB to expand its geographical coverage, which is also the wish of the
government.

XX.    Conclusions

21.    DEC Chair drew the following conclusions from the discussion:

       (i)     DEC noted the rating of successful on the low side. Some
               members emphasized that the report should give prominence to
               the recent period within the 20 year period the evaluation
               covered.

       (ii)    For better performance, what is important is knowledge, quantity
               and quality of resources.

       (iii)   DEC endorsed the policy of infrastructure led poverty reduction,
               but wanted Management to carefully analyze the consistency
               between LTSF and MTSII on the one hand, and emphasis on
               rural development and agriculture on the other.

       (iv)    Safeguards are important, but there is need to harmonize
               safeguard standards.

       (v)     Some members also encouraged the authorities to consider
               environmentally challenging projects.

       (vi)    The problem of coordination between ADB's public and private
               sector operations was emphasized, so was capacity
               development.
(vii)    The need for accelerating regional cooperation in South Asia was
         emphasized.

(viii)   The question of strengthening the Resident Mission as well as
         providing adequate financial resources was necessary to be
         resolved before drawing up the forthcoming country partnership
         strategy.
