INDIA:

CASE STUDIES ON
Assam Power Sector
Development Program

A Case Study from the 2007 Special Evaluation Study
on Energy Sector in India ­ Building on Success for
More Results



October 2007


Robert Schenck


Operations Evaluation Department
Abbreviations

ADB           Asian Development Bank
AERC          Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission
ASEB          Assam State Electricity Board
SMEC          Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation




Note
In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
    I.     Background
                               1.     India is one of the fastest growing developing
                               economies, having expanded by about 6% per annum in the
                               1990s and by some 8% in recent years. This growth and
                               rapid rate of industrialization and urbanization have fueled
                               energy demand so that in 2003 it ranked sixth worldwide in
                               primary energy consumption. Since the Asian Development
                               Bank's (ADB) power sector operations in India began in
                               1986, there have been 24 public sector loans for 21 projects
with a total value of $4.6 billion (29% of the total public sector lending to India). This has
been supported by an additional $337 million of loans through ADB's private sector
operations. One of the three state electricity boards that ADB provided program
assistance is Assam.

2.     ADB provided a policy loan (Loan 2036-IND)1 of $150 million and an investment
loan (Loan 2037-IND)2 of $100 million for the Assam Power Sector Development
Program. The loans were supported by technical assistance (TA), which was
administered by ADB but financed from the India Trust Fund of the United Kingdom's
Department for International Development. The loans were approved in December
2003. Two previous ADB TA grants had prepared the way for the loans by supporting
the development of a power sector development program and capacity building in the
Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission (AERC). The policy loan was divided into two
tranches of $90 million and $60 million. Conditions on the first tranche included actions
by the Assam state government to sanction necessary staffing for AERC, development
of an unbundled industry structure including at least three distribution companies as well
as registration of the new companies, commitment to budgetary support, some financial
restructuring, and filing of a tariff petition. The most important effect of the restructuring
has been the financial turnaround of the Assam distribution sector, which raised
revenues and reversed its cost increases.




1
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of   the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance Grants Assam Power   Sector Development Program. Manila (Loan 2036-IND, for $150
    million, approved on 10 December).
2
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of   the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance Grants Assam Power   Sector Development Program. Manila (Loan 2037-IND, for $100
    million, approved on 10 December).
2     Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program



                             8
                                 Figure 1: Declining Losses in Net Revenues
                             7
                             6          Average Cost to Serve
                             5




                     Re/Rs
                             4
                             3
                             2
                             1
                                                               Average Revenues
                             0




                                 FY86
                                 FY87
                                 FY88
                                        FY89
                                        FY90
                                        FY91
                                        FY92
                                                 FY93
                                                 FY94
                                                 FY95
                                                         FY96
                                                         FY97
                                                         FY98
                                                                  FY99
                                                                  FY00
                                                                  FY01
                                                                  FY02
                                                                            FY03
                                                                            FY04
                                                                            FY05
                             FY = financial year.
                             Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers.



3.     The detailed planning that preceded the loan had been complemented with a
commitment to reform from the power authorities in Assam. Throughout the sector,
there is an acceptance that the overall conditions imposed by ADB were well thought
out and necessary to support change. Financial restructuring would not have taken
place without ADB. Procurement procedures have been improved. There is general
support for the principle of unbundling.

4.       Unbundling is partly complete involving five companies: one each responsible for
generation and transmission, and three for distribution. The new companies are
established under the 1956 Companies Act and are owned by the state government.
The Assam State Electricity Board (ASEB) is not acting as a legal holding company. In
many ways, however, it continues to behave as a holding company and there is limited
separation between the finances and human resources of the five companies. The three
distribution companies, in particular, are still largely behaving as a single unit. Power
purchasing is a central function and the three distribution companies have identical
tariffs.

5.     Staffing issues have complicated the restructuring process. ASEB had around
16,000 employees when ADB became involved. There had been no recruitment for 10
years and, as a result, the workforce is aging. Many staff are approaching pension age
and there are few younger staff with the information technology skills needed to run a
modern utility. This has created many problems for ASEB. For example, most of the
linemen are aging and no longer able to climb poles. Clerical staffs have no experience
of working with computers. In the past year, ASEB has taken on some 70 graduates, 85
diploma engineers, and 45 accounts officers. There are plans to recruit 50 more
engineers this year. The new staffs are generally information technology literate and
enthusiastic.

6.      There is uncertainty over how many staff the new companies will need,
especially in distribution. Work undertaken by the Snowy Mountains Engineering
Corporation (SMEC) has estimated total staffing needs in the distribution companies at
14,087 people, which on some estimates is around current staffing levels. But recent
submissions to the regulator show total distribution companies staffing as 10,765 and
falling to 9,974 in FY2006­2007. SMEC's figures are not fully accepted, and it seems
                            Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program   3


that further analysis will be required in the new companies to establish final staffing
needs and the skills sets of those staff. At present, moreover, staff transfer between
companies without much consideration for procedures. The high levels of retirement
over the next few years offer an opportunity to restructure staffing, but the pension costs
are also high.

7.    As part of the process of reducing political interference in the sector, the
Government has established an independent committee to make senior power sector
appointments. It has external membership from organizations such as the Power Grid
and the Power Finance Corporation Limited. The current managing directors of the new
companies are temporary and one is on secondment from the public service.
Permanent appointments will be made through the committee.

8.     Pensions have proved to be a major issue. When ADB made its loan, there was
no employee database hence the uncertainty over the number of staff and their age
structure. Analysis undertaken in the past 2 years, with support from consultants, has
exposed a major shortfall in funding for pensions. This has been partially remedied. The
Government has provided additional funding and ADB has picked up $48 million of
costs through another project.

9.    Transmission and distribution losses have fluctuated since the ADB loans were
made, as shown in the following table.


                            Table 1: Transmission Losses ASEB

                         Financial Year             Transmission and
                                                distribution losses as a %
                                                of power available for sale

                           2000­2001                        39.80
                           2001­2002                        42.50
                           2002­2003                        39.07
                           2003­2004                        36.29
                           2004­2005                        38.94
                    ASEB: Assam State Electricity Board
                    Source: Operation Evaluation Mission.

10.     There are doubts over the reliability of the figures. In discussion,
PricewaterhouseCoopers suggested that the FY2004­2005 figure was a reasonable
estimate but the FY2003­2004 figure was too low and a more accurate figure would be
about 40%. Errors arise because a large number of consumers are not metered and
billing records are not reconciled properly. However, the figures do illustrate that there is
considerable scope for improving operational and financial performance by reducing
losses.
4     Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program


11.     There are still about 80,000 unmetered consumers in rural areas. A meter
installation program is in progress and all new consumers receive a meter. All 11-
kilovolt feeders are now metered, and this has exposed examples of very high losses
(e.g., 64% on one line). Only 25% of households are electrified and there is likely to be
considerable expansion in the next few years. In order to help meet this challenge and
manage losses, the distribution companies are introducing a rural franchising scheme
under which franchisees undertake billing and cash collection.

12      Accounting issues are many. As part of the efforts to improve their accounting
and finance, the distribution companies are starting to computerize--with the initial
focus on billing. There are around 150 accounting units, divided between 14 circles.
Computer billing is being rolled out in phases, with the first phase covering three of the
circles. The new systems provide better management information and enable faster
billing. Progress so far has been good, and plans call for achieving 100% coverage
within a period of 3 to 4 months. There is no communications connectivity between
offices or with the center at present. This impedes both effective backup procedures
and data consolidation. Full connectivity is likely to take time to achieve and involve a
combination of land lines, mobile communications, and very small aperture technology.
Data backup procedures involve keeping a copy of the data on site on tape, and there
are clear security shortcomings.

13.     There are plans to computerize other aspects of accounting in the longer term,
but this is bound to be both costly and time-consuming. Other deficiencies in accounting
systems will need to be addressed, such as the absence of fixed assets registers.
Further cleanup of accounting data is needed, which requires a more thorough
reconciliation of records between accounting units, circles and the head office.

14.    Pilot schemes are being initiated to demonstrate the
effects of monitoring and reconciling billing with meters,
decentralized     transformer    maintenance      and    parts
procurement, and customer service centers. The benefits of
increased metering and monitoring are being realized
through the faster identification of nontechnical losses and
matching transformer data with computerized billing of
meters. A pilot project reduced losses in one feeder having
mainly industrial customers from over 65% to 6% in only 4 weeks after the controls were
established (figure 2). A similar pilot project reduced transformer failures in one circle
from an average of 12% to 0% over a 22-week implementation period. Customer
service centers have been set up in several districts, where all customer service
requests and complaints are logged on computers and are being regularly monitored.
This has increased transparency, and customer response will in future be part of the
performance-based regulation of the Assam regulator. There has been widespread
acceptance of these pilot programs by management and employees and they are now
being gradually introduced throughout Assam.
                                    Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program       5



                                                          % Losses
                 Losses
                          Figure 2: ASEB Pilot Loss reduction Scheme
                  80%
                  70%
                  60%
                  50%
                  40%
                  30%
                  20%
                  10%
                   0%      Oct-05



                                        Nov-05



                                                 Dec-05



                                                           Jan-06



                                                                     Feb-06




                                                                                       Apr-06



                                                                                                May-06
                                                                              Mar-06
                Source: Assam State Electricity Board.


15.    ASEB has had difficulties in presenting audited accounts to ADB on a timely
basis. ASEB's accounts were unreliable and the audit reports on those accounts were
also unreliable in the sense that they were incomplete. Hence the level of assurance
that ADB has gained by seeking audited accounts is quite limited. It is entirely
appropriate and understandable that ADB should request the accounts, and the
timetable for completing the accounts and audit has generally been reasonable.
However, in these circumstances, ADB needs to take a long view and assess whether
progress is being made to improve accounts rather than becoming unduly focused on
whether exact deadlines are being met. Cleaning up accounts is often slow and
contentious, as it involves detailed reconciliation of ledgers, writing off old balances, and
recognizing losses that often occurred some years ago. Consequently, the process of
cleaning the accounts commonly delays the finalization and audit of the accounts. In
circumstances such as Assam faces, it is worth waiting and delaying the audit as the
resultant accounts are likely to be of a higher standard.

16.    ASEB has benefited significantly from TA, both before and since the ADB loans
were made. Currently, ASEB is receiving advice and support from SMEC and
PricewaterhouseCoopers. SMEC is providing implementation support on management
of the investment program as well as undertaking a systems planning study and
advising on various other aspects of reform implementation. PricewaterhouseCoopers
has been involved on various financial issues and is training and supporting ASEB in
loss estimation and reduction. All consulting support will be completed by the middle of
2007 upon completion of a systems study.

17.     There were initial spending delays with the project loans, largely because
capacity was lacking in ASEB. Staff lacked knowledge of ADB procedures and only
started to consider how to manage the loan funds after loan effectiveness. It then took a
year to appoint an implementation consultant. Tasks such as route surveys were also
initiated only after loan effectiveness, and the work was then delayed by flooding. With
hindsight, the surveys should have been undertaken earlier. However, progress has
accelerated since appointment of the implementation consultant. Currently, expenditure
is somewhat over 6 months behind schedule and a loan extension of up to 1 year will be
needed in order to complete the four remaining packages of works. The expenditure
6     Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program


program is now adhering to the revised timetable. This aspect of consulting support has
therefore been needed and it has worked well.

18.    A regulator has been appointed for the sector and is making tariff decisions. The
regulatory function is working well in some areas in that, for example, decisions and
correspondence are now made transparent through the internet. There have been some
losses of trained staff, however. Initial TA funding for setting up the regulator and
preparing tariff filings have established well documented procedures and guidelines for
future staff. The documentation was considered to be sufficiently detailed to permit a
continuity of functions without a loss of institutional memory. Additionally, the AERC is
assisting consumer representatives with understanding the regulatory process and to
make filings to express consumer concerns.

19.    The introduction of time of day tariffs has shifted about 7% of demand away from
system peak. Over time, there is an expectation that Assam will move toward a more
cost-related tariff structure for each of the distribution companies.

20.     Peak demand in Assam is currently around 750 MW, but this could rise to 1,000
MW if constraints on transmission and distribution were removed. There is about 380
MW of captive capacity in four refineries and paper mills, but the owners are currently
unwilling to sell surplus power to ASEB because they are apprehensive about
synchronizing with the grid. In any case, the energy would be expensive as the
generating sets burn heating oil. ASEB currently generates around 20% of its own
needs and it would like to increase this through rehabilitation of existing stations and
new construction. There is potential for hydropower development as well as new
thermal capacity.

21.    In order to sustain reform, ASEB will
undoubtedly continue to need consulting support, Assam wants and can use more of
                                                        ADB loans. There is potential for
certainly for the next 2 to 3 years and perhaps longer. rapid demand growth, which
Capacities of the new companies need to be requires more transmission
developed in many areas, including finance, capacity and significant
information technology, human resources, as well as performance improvements in
core engineering capabilities. Many on ASEB's staff distribution. The reform program is
are not accustomed to the business practices of a clearly incomplete and ADB needs
modern utility, and it has been a challenge for the to continue to be involved by
                                                        setting covenants that promote
consultants to ensure that ASEB staffs are fully further improvements and in
engaged with consulting projects, as distinct from financing both investments and
attending associated training courses. This has been technical assistance.
an issue with the systems planning study and parts of
the other work undertaken by SMEC. For example,
the work on staffing does not seem to be fully accepted within ASEB. The information
technology strategy component is essentially a long report that has not been read by
ASEB staff and seems to have little impact. PricewaterhouseCoopers seem to have had
more success in providing process consulting support, which engages with ASEB staff,
                           Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program   7


and it is this type of assistance which ASEB needs in future in order to develop its
capabilities.

22.      This lesson may be useful in designing future programs of support for state
electricity boards. There are a number of other points which may help to improve future
designs. First, the division of labor between different groups of consultants might be
improved. PA Consulting's work on finance was of very limited assistance to
PricewaterhouseCoopers in advising ASEB on financial issues. Second, for utilities with
limited internal capacity, such as ASEB, the implementation consultant to support the
utility in making use of ADB funds needs to be brought into place more quickly. Third,
work on performance improvement and on organizational restructuring and human
resource issues could beneficially be brought forward to earlier in the program. Fourth,
the Assam experience makes a clear case for the use of demonstration projects where
management and technological changes can deliver a better customer-focused service.

23.    Assam wants and can use more ADB loans. There is potential for rapid demand
growth, which requires more transmission capacity and significant performance
improvements in distribution. The reform program is clearly incomplete and ADB needs
to continue to be involved by setting covenants that promote further improvements and
in financing both investments and TA. The study concludes that the program loan and
associated TA are successful. The Project is not complete, however, due to earlier
delays. It is showing early indications, though, of a successful outcome.


II. Conclusions
24.    Tranche releases of policy loans and related
covenants have been well supported by ASEB and have
contributed to the major outcomes being achieved. The depth
and length of ADB policy dialogue and client interaction is
evident from the length of time in loan preparation and from
client responses. This was instrumental in matching client
capabilities and inputs with ADB assistance.

25.    The main lessons identified from the evaluation are (i) ADB's approach to lending
at state level has worked well and should be used as a model for future assistance, (ii)
sustained TA is needed to support the reform programs at state level, and (iii)
corporatization is providing benefits similar to those normally attributed to privatization.
ADB project loans and TA have resulted in both increased capacity to serve additional
load and, more importantly, greater reliability of service delivery. A significant portion of
the loans were used to upgrade systems that had suffered from a lack of expansion and
inadequate operations and maintenance. Maintenance has shifted from being primarily
reactive to preventive, and this has resulted in better quality of supply. Metering has
been widely implemented at all levels in the service delivery chain, and this is enabling
widespread detection and reduction of nontechnical losses.
8     Energy Sector in India: Assam Power Sector Development Program


26.    The study concludes that the policy shift adopted by ADB in 1996 has resulted in
a direct positive and sustainable impact:
       (i)     Financial restructuring together with tariff restructuring, as well as lower
               costs, have reduced the need for subsidies. This means fewer funds are
               required for the power sector, leaving more available for social sectors.
       (ii)    The increased quality of supply has improved the reliability of supply. This
               is a major attraction to industries that are heavily reliant on secure fuel
               supplies (such as the information technology industry) and will impact
               more highly on the developed states.
       (iii)   The concurrent development of regulators' expertise and independence,
               transparency, and consumer advocacy is removing political interference
               and providing a balance between the needs of consumers and industry.
               This has led to consumer involvement and a shift across many of the
               states to a service focus from a supply focus.
