COUNTRY STUDY ANALYSIS

Country Studies from the 2007 Special Evaluation
Study on Performance of Technical Assistance



June 2007



Ramesh Adhikari
Tyrrell Duncan


Operations Evaluation Department
Abbreviations
ADB           Asian Development Bank
ADTA          advisory technical assistance
COSO          Central Operations Services Office
CSP           country strategy and program
CSPU          country strategy and program update
DMC           developing member country
DMF           design and monitoring framework
EA            executing agency
LTSF          Long-Term Strategic Framework
MOF           Ministry of Finance
NBP           new business process
PPMS          project performance management system
PPTA          project preparatory technical assistance
PRC           People's Republic of China
QCBS          quality-and cost-based selection
RETA          regional technical assistance
SES           special evaluation study
SPD           Strategy and Policy Department
SRC           staff review committee
SSTA          small-scale technical assistance
TAIPF         technical assistance indicative planning figure
TA            technical assistance
TCR           technical assistance completion report
TOR           terms of reference
TPER          technical assistance performance evaluation report
TPR           technical assistance performance report




Note

In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
        Contents
                                                                         Page



I.      Introduction                                                     1
II.     Prioritization and Selection Process at Country Level            1
III.    Strategic Direction for TA at Country Level                      4
IV.     Consistency between Technical Assistance Program and Approvals   7
V.      Other Aspects of Strategic Focus                                 9
VI.     Formulation and Implementation of Technical Assistance           12
VII.    Concept Paper                                                    13
VIII.   Quality at Entry                                                 13
IX.     Resources to Support Formulation                                 24
X.      Quality Control                                                  25
XI.     Bunching                                                         28
XII.    Implementation Performance                                       28
XIII.   Consulting Services                                              31
XIV.    Executing Agency                                                 37
XV.     ADB Supervision                                                  39
XVI.    Outputs and Outcomes of Technical Assistance                     42
XVII.   Achievement of Outcomes                                          44
I.        Introduction
1.      This report assesses the country strategic focus of technical assistance (TA) based on
the findings from the five country studies: Fiji Islands, India, Kyrgyz Republic, Philippines and
Viet Nam. It asks whether TA was programmed and planned as an integral part of the country
strategy and program (CSP), and whether the CSP provided sound strategic direction for TA. It
then examines whether the choice of individual TAs was consistent with the adopted strategy
and program and factors that influence the effectiveness of the strategic focus of TA at country
level.

II.       Prioritization and Selection Process at Country
          Level
2.       The CSP does not Provide a Framework in which Coherent TA Strategies and
Programs are Developed and Justified. The special evaluation study (SES)1 examined the
way that TA is treated within CSPs in case study countries. The findings are summarized in
Table 1. In each country, the CSP formulation process of the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
focuses primarily on lending. The governments said that consideration of TA was usually limited
to briefly reviewing and approving a list of prospective TAs. In none of the CSP and country
strategy and program update (CSPU) documents reviewed was there more than a passing
discussion of TA in the main sections on country and sector strategy, and none developed a
distinct strategy and program for TA within the CSP.

3.      The governments expressed concern about this process, indicating that it led to an ADB
supply-driven approach to TA prioritization and selection at country level. This did not optimize
the effective use of TA in selected areas of focus. In India, the Ministry of Finance (MOF)
described how it received a continuous stream of ad hoc requests for approval of TAs from
ADB. In the absence of a well-defined TA program, it was virtually impossible for MOF to
objectively prioritize or monitor TA performance. In the other developing member countries
(DMCs), the finance ministries were critical that the TA selection process generally followed
ADB's proposals instead of selecting from short lists of priority TAs proposed by the
government.

4.      Therefore, it is not surprising that there was little consistency in the TA strategy and
TA program over the medium term (Table 1). There was a tendency for the TA program to
wander in terms of objectives and focus from year to year. This was possible because CSP
objectives were generally broad and permissive. Only in India and Viet Nam, where domestic
planning and approval procedures are stronger and the governments are firmer about limiting
ADB's support to particular sectors and activities, was this tendency more restrained. The lack
of DMC input into strategically programming TA is surprising given that ADB's Charter makes
clear that TAs should "meet DMC' requests..." These findings, together with the conclusions
reported in previous evaluations, suggest that ADB's model for programming and prioritizing TA
is inconsistent with the Charter obligation to give a major voice to DMC' priorities. This problem
needs to be addressed at the ADB corporate level and reflected in ADB's business processes.
Giving a greater voice to DMCs in selecting TA is the first step in improving TA quality.

1
    ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance. Manila.
2     Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance




     Table 1: Strategy for Technical Assistance at Country Level in Case Study Countries
                 Was there a Distinct TA          Was TA Strategy/Program             Was Support Concentrated on
                 Strategy/Program in the           Consistent over Medium-            Priority Sectors and Activities?
Country                   CSP?                               Term?
Fiji Islands    No                               No. Overall objectives for TA     Scattered. The process of selection of
                                                 in CSPs/CSPUs had some            sectors for TA is unclear. Much of the
                                                 consistency from year to          TA was reactive rather than planned
                                                 year, but over several years      and proactive, not sufficiently prioritized
                                                 the cumulative effect of          and hence widely scattered in terms of
                                                 adjustments was to erode          sectors and perceived priorities.
                                                 the original objectives.

India           No. CSP presented TA as          Partly. TA tends to follow the    Mostly concentrated in a few key
                being of peripheral rather       overall country strategy          sectors. ADB focused mainly on four
                than strategic importance.       because most of the TAs are       sectors: energy, transport, urban
                The objectives of TA in the      linked to demand-driven           development, and finance. Following
                country program were not         loans.                            ADB's adoption of poverty reduction as
                discussed.                                                         its overarching aim, the 2003 CSP
                                                                                   extended ADB assistance to the social
                                                                                   sectors.

Kyrgyz          No. There was no distinct        No. Although TAs usually          Some sector consistency but too
Republic        TA program. It is difficult to   followed the overall country      many sectors and fragmented
                discern a strategy for TA        strategy in terms of sectors      among subsectors. Sectoral focus did
                from the 1997 COS, the           of involvement, they were not     not change significantly, apart from the
                subsequent CAPs and              well-focused on priority          addition of the health sector. Given the
                CSPUs, or the most recent        activities within sectors. This   small size of the program, TA was
                CSP.                             was a problem given the           thinly spread across the sectors. Within
                                                 small size of the program.        sectors, TA was often spread over too
                                                                                   many different subsectors.

Philippines     No. There was no clear           No. In the 2002­2004 and          Scattered. During 2001­2005, there
                strategy for TA in the 1998      2004­2006 CSPUs, overall          were 45 TAs in 28 different agencies.
                COS, subsequent CAPs             objectives were stated in a       Attempting to do a little in many
                and CSPUs, or the 2005­          general manner that               agencies, where a lot was required
                2007 CSP. The latter had a       encompassed a wide range          from each one, was unlikely to have
                section on knowledge             of activities. Priorities were    much impact.
                products and services, and       not defined. The actual TA
                listed five broad areas in       program jumped from one
                which assistance will be         sector to the next and one
                provided, but gave no            activity within a sector to the
                indication of the role of TA     next.
                in the strategy.

Viet Nam        No                         Partly. Successive CSPUs       Fairly scattered. The strategy in the
                                           mainly followed the strategy   CSP was very broad, particularly in the
                                           set by the 2002­2004 CSP.      context of the limited size of the TA
                                           They also demonstrated that    program. The range of sectors covered
                                           there were midcourse           was ambitious but within each sector
                                           adjustments in the overall     attention was given to concentrating
                                           strategy to include new areas resources to a particular region.
                                           for support or drop programs
                                           being pursued by other
                                           bilateral aid partners. Except
                                           for infrastructure, changes in
                                           strategy were minimal.
    ADB = Asian Development Bank, CAP = country assistance plan, COS = country operational strategy,
    CSP = country strategy and program, CSPU = country strategy and program update, TA = technical assistance.
    Sources: Evaluation case studies.
            Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                      3



    5.       The selection process for TAs at country level did not follow a clear pattern. First, in a
    vertically integrated strategy, DMC objectives would be ranked for importance based on ADB's
    corporate objectives, which produce a base for establishing CSP priorities. No such ranking
    occurs in CSPs; nor is there a formal linkage of country strategy to ADB's corporate objectives.
    Secondly, the country objectives should be the basis for evaluating different alternatives and
    prioritizing them based on their expected contribution. That does not occur.

    6.     Incremental changes in CSP objective lead to inconsistency over the medium term. This
    is shown for the Fiji Islands in Table 2. Over a 3-year period, each CSPU slightly restated the
    overall objectives of ADB support. The cumulative effect was that objectives changed
    considerably, e.g., the change in Objective 1 from "essential physical infrastructure" in CSPU
    2004-2006 "productive physical infrastructure" in CSPU 2005-2007.

                             Table 2: Restating of Country Objectives in
                    Three Country Strategy and Program Updates for the Fiji Islands
CSPU                       Objective 1                            Objective 2                           Objective 3
2003­2005        To enhance local capacity for     To strengthen government                 To assist in creating enabling
                 stimulating economic growth       departments and policy formulation,      conditions for private sector, and
                 and poverty reduction             and reform implementation capacities     public-private partnership
                                                   to instill good governance, including    development
                                                   accountability
2004­2006        To support increased public       To strengthen the associated policy,     To support increased private
                 investments in essential          institutional and regulatory             sector participation and
                 physical infrastructure           frameworks, including setting            competition in key sectors by
                 development in key sectors for    appropriate tariffs and revenue          creating enabling conditions for
                 stimulating economic growth       collections to instill good governance   private sector, and public-private
                 and poverty reduction             and accountability                       partnership development
2005­2007        To support increased public      To strengthen the associated policy,      To support increased private
                 investments in productive        institutional and regulatory              sector participation and
                 physical infrastructure          frameworks, including setting             competition in key sectors by
                 development in key sectors for appropriate tariffs and revenue             creating enabling conditions for
                 stimulating economic growth      collections to instill good governance    private sector, and public-private
                 and poverty reduction            and accountability                        partnership development
CSPU = country strategy and program update.
Sources: Special evaluation study country case studies.

    7.       Too Often TAs are Spread Thinly Across Multiple Sectors and Executing
    Agencies. A consequence of the weaknesses in the process for prioritizing and selecting TA
    was the tendency to scatter TA widely rather than concentrate on priority sectors and activities.
    In Fiji Islands, Philippines, and Viet Nam, this problem was acute. In the Philippines, 45 TAs
    were provided to 28 different executing agencies (EAs) in the period 2001­2005. In the
    Kyrgyz Republic, although there was some consistency in the choice of sectors, TAs were
    scattered among subsectors and activities within these. The main exception regarding
    concentration of TA support was India. Strong government control over areas that ADB supports
    was fairly successful in limiting the range of sectors and activities within sectors.

    8.      A further shortcoming in the treatment of TA at country level is the absence of
    measurable objectives for the ADB country program. A country strategy needs a set of
    challenging goals, indicating where a program will be at the end of that planning period and
    providing reliable indicators so that progress toward the goals can be measured.
4     Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


9.      There is also a need for country strategy to address issues in an appropriate order, and
more programmatically, especially where long-term engagement is contemplated. For example,
there are constraints at each level of public administration in the Kyrgyz Republic and in many
parts of state administrations in India. Strategy needs to determine whether or not a constraint
at the EA level is due to a higher order constraint, e.g., at government level. This depends on
preparing diagnostic studies or situational analyses of a high standard before developing the
country strategy or the TA program. There was little evidence that these had been done in the
case study countries.2

III. Strategic Direction for TA at Country Level
          1.       Sector Level Strategy

10.     In Most Sectors, the Medium-Term Framework for Guiding TA Support is Weak.
The sector level objectives and strategies in the CSPs of case study countries were generally
vague. Some level of consistency between a TA intervention and strategy was not hard to find,
but the contribution of the strategy to guiding ADB support was often unclear or questionable.

11.     In India, for example, the country strategy concentrated on four sectors--energy, finance,
transport, and urban development--with a geographic focus on certain states. Within this
concentration, the program was to focus on (i) creating conditions for accelerated growth, which are
conducive for the private sector; (ii) generating jobs and increasing incomes from faster and broad-
based pro-poor economic growth; and (iii) improving basic social services to enhance human
development. To maximize the development impact, it targeted (i) support for policy reform; (ii)
innovation in project design, including public-private partnerships; and (iii) leveraging ADB
assistance with nonlending activities. Almost all TA in the finance and transport sectors could be
loosely associated with creating conditions for accelerated growth. Those in the urban sector could
be said to improve basic social services to enhance human development. Innovation in project
design was not apparent in any of the project preparatory TA (PPTA) grants in the SES sample. The
CSP did not explain how it intended to leverage ADB assistance with nonlending activities.

12.     Many of the CSPs for case study countries--especially more recent CSPs--included
sector road maps in the format required by the new business processes (NBP). However, ADB
needs to address a fundamental problem with such road maps. The purpose of a sector road
map should be to establish a framework agreed with the government to guide ADB lending and
TA support over the medium term. To be of value, this must be based on assessments of the
main sector needs and issues, taking into account support from other funding agencies; and
must establish realistic goals, targets, and strategies for steadily achieving them over the road
map period. Such a framework should be the product of extended negotiation with the
government, perhaps in the context of formulating a project or program. It cannot be simply
drafted by ADB. In contrast, as was evident in the CSPs of case study countries, the NBP type
of road map is essentially descriptive. It is primarily a document to comply with ADB's internal
bureaucratic produces, and seldom involves commitment on the part of the government to the

2
    For example, in providing support for state governments in India, ADB seems to have made no attempt to develop
    a statewide program of capacity building to prepare state agencies for the added complexities of managing projects
    and operating and maintaining their outputs. Another area is in the field of policy development, a generic and core
    area of government activity, where ADB invests a lot in interventions to formulate draft policy proposals but does
    little to raise the government's capacity to research and draft effective policy. There are many interventions at
    sector level which, as in the case of the Kyrgyz Republic, can be jeopardized if the central agencies of government
    do not possess the necessary capacity to develop or review policy proposals.
            Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                       5


few targets listed. Performance against targets is rarely measured.3 As a tool for guiding TA or
lending at sector level, it is shallow and inadequate.

13.     The country case studies examined whether there was any substantive form of medium-
term framework to guide TA at the sector level. As Table 3 indicates that there was no such
framework in most sectors; when a framework did exist, its quality was often unsatisfactory. This
is a serious weakness. As previous reviews of TA have recognized, unless a solid framework of
this kind is in place, the effectiveness of advisory TA (ADTA) and all ADB support is likely to be
reduced. Much ADTA is used for policy reform, change management, and capacity building. By
their nature, such activities need to be supported consistently for some years if they are to
produce results. The absence of a sound medium-term framework puts this at risk.

14.     Given these limitations in sector level strategies, potential synergies at sector level--
between TAs, and between TA and lending--are not being realized (Table 3). In the Fiji Islands
and the Philippines, synergy was particularly weak. In India, Kyrgyz Republic, and Viet Nam,
there were some examples of groups of TAs that reinforced each other--notably in the finance
sector in India and the Kyrgyz Republic, and in the health sector in Viet Nam--but this did not
apply to all sectors.

       Table 3: Strategy for Technical Assistance at Sector Level in Case Study Countries
                     Was there a Medium Term Framework/Road                   Were TAs Within a Sector Mutually
    Country            Map to Guide Use of TA in the Sector?                              Reinforcing?
    Fiji Islands   Generally no. There was an uncoordinated            Weak synergy. The lack of clear sector
                   approach to sector level TA strategy. There were    frameworks agreed between the government and
                   frequent year-on-year changes in the sector level   ADB meant that most TAs were ad hoc, and
                   TA program (as shown in various CSPUs/CSPs).        reactive rather than proactive, so synergies were
                   The exception was in water sector reform,           weak.
                   although these TAs were not successful.

    India          Partly yes. The latest CSP had sector road maps     In some cases, yes. An example of good synergy
                   for most sectors. TA was referred to in road        involved a sequence of TAs involving
                   maps, but few included defined TA strategies,       securitization.
                   and these were very broad (e.g., finance,
                   transport, urban). However, in some sectors,
                   notably transport, a framework for programmatic
                   support had been developed.

    Kyrgyz         Generally no. For most of the study period, the     In some cases, yes. There was good synergy in
    Republic       CSP simply stated the objectives for the sector,    the finance sector, and some in transport. The
                   with no medium-term framework.                      various strands of intervention were brought
                   Sector/subsector road maps incorporating TA         together into an increasingly effective strategy
                   were included in the 2004­2006 CSP, although        both at the country and subregional levels.
                   these were not used as a strategic tool to guide
                   ADB support. An exception was the finance
                   sector where a medium-term framework was
                   established when processing a program loan.




3
     In the agriculture sector in the Kyrgyz Republic, the objective was to increase farm and rural enterprise productivity
     and profitability. The road map in the CSP, however, did not indicate why or by how much.
6      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                   Was there a Medium Term Framework/Road                 Were TAs Within a Sector Mutually
    Country           Map to Guide Use of TA in the Sector?                             Reinforcing?
    Philippines   No. There were no sector road maps in the         Weak synergy. Within sectors, TAs were often
                  CSPs. ADB's sectoral goals were changing (e.g.,   only weakly related, and the impact on policy
                  education, transport, energy).                    reform and institutional development was limited.

    Viet Nam  Generally no. The CSP did not contain sector          In some cases, yes. Health sector reforms are an
              road maps. Sector strategies broadly followed the     example. There was also a geographical focus on
              country strategy set out in the CSP and CSPUs,        the Central Region.
              but without an agreed medium-term framework to
              guide ADB support in all priority sectors. One
              exception was in the power sector where a TA
              helped the government to develop a substantive
              road map for sector reform.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CSP = country strategy and            program, CSPU = country strategy and program
update, TA = technical assistance.
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

            2.       Alignment with DMC Priorities and Programs

15.   TAs can be More Determined by ADB Budget Allocations than by DMC Needs.
Government priorities tend to be stated in broad terms in TA papers. As a result, most proposed
TAs can be regarded as high priority. EAs regarded 98% of PPTAs and 92% of ADTAs in the
SES sample as high government priorities.

16.     In all case study countries, there were examples of TAs that were supply driven. A small-
scale technical assistance (SSTA) into access of the poor to higher education in the Philippines
came about more because of an unspent TA budget allocation rather than a need on the part of
the government. Its finding that the poor were being excluded from public universities was not
welcomed by the government. There were also cases of TAs that were largely for ADB use. An
example was the Pacific Island Economic Report4 prepared for the Fiji Islands. The government
regarded this as a report commissioned by and for ADB; it resented this, as it wanted to use the
TA funding to provide long-term advisory support for the Ministry of Finance and National
Planning. If needed, the report should have been treated as economic and sector work funded
from ADB's administrative budget. 5 Another similar example was an SSTA to prepare a
governance assessment for the Kyrgyz Republic. Such assessments are required for CSPs.
They are sometimes funded by TA and sometimes as staff consultancies. These should be
charged to the ADB staff consultancy budget for economic and sector work and not taken from
a DMC's TA allocation.

            3.       Alignment with ADB Corporate Priorities

17.     TA is Generally Linked to ADB Corporate Objectives. TA papers always link proposed
interventions to ADB's corporate priorities. Data on the linkages between proposed TA programs
and corporate strategic and thematic areas are included in the Regional and Sustainable
Development Department's annual 3-year ADB-wide knowledge products and services work plan.
However, the extent to which this information is used to inform management decision making--
rather just being a statistical reporting exercise--is unclear, as ADB does not appear to align TA



4
     ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to the Republic of Fiji for Supporting Economic Management and Development
     Policies. Manila. (TA 3960-FIJ, for $250,000 approved on 31 October).
5
     ADB TA has been used to finance similar reports for other Pacific island DMCs.
            Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                           7


proactively with ADB-wide sector policies (where they have been formulated). Few TA papers
include a section to demonstrate the relationship with ADB sector policy.6

18.     Under the overarching objective of poverty reduction and the strategic areas and
crosscutting themes of the Long-Term Strategic Framework (LTSF), lending for development
purposes is the principal activity of ADB. TA interventions that have little relationship to lending
or to the effectiveness of lending should be given greater scrutiny but this seldom happens.
(footnote 1).

             4.      Alignment with ADB Best Practice

19.       CSPs Pay Little Attention to ADB Success Stories Elsewhere in the Region. CSPs
give little attention to activities that ADB has successfully supported in other DMCs and in which
it has built up a track record of success. Consequently, ADB does not systematically build on
success to develop areas of comparative advantage. CSPs do not consider ADB operations in
other DMCs except where subregional programs exist. As a result, aligning CSPs with ADB best
practice and success stories elsewhere seldom occurs.7


IV. Consistency between Technical Assistance
    Program and Approvals
20.    The country case studies compared actual TA approvals with those stated in the CSP and
CSPUs over the study period. As Table 4 indicates, in each country except Viet Nam, the
approved TAs were often different from those in the planned program. Given the weaknesses in
TA prioritization and selection at country level, this was somewhat predictable. However, its extent
is alarming. In Fiji Islands, India, Kyrgyz Republic, and Philippines, more than half of TAs
approved during the study period had not been included in the CSP or a later CSPU. Only in Viet
Nam was the planned program followed in a more disciplined manner. Although some changes
from program are to be expected, the extent of the changes suggests that the strategy and
programming mechanism of the CSP is not treated seriously when it comes to TA.

            Table 4: Consistency of Technical Assistance Program in Case Study Countries
                          Were Actual and Planned TA Program
    Country                             Consistent?                          Were ADTAs Linked to Lending Activities?
    Fiji Islands   Inconsistent. The actual TA program did not closely       Mostly no.
                   follow country strategy as laid out in the annual
                   program and updates.

    India          Inconsistent. More than half of TAs approved in           Mostly yes.
                   2001­2005 were not included in the program. The TA
                   program for a particular year varied considerably
                   from one CSP/CSPU to the next.

    Kyrgyz         Inconsistent. Nearly three-quarters of approved TAs       Mostly yes. ADTAs were generally in the
    Republic       were not included in the 2001­2003 CAP, 2003­2005         same sectors as lending activities, but often
                   CSPU, 2004­2006 CSP, and 2005­2006 CSPU. The              not directly linked to lending. In some cases,

6
     Work is being done to improve this situation in one sector with support from a trust fund. The "Promoting Effective Water
     Management Policies and Practices" program monitors the conformity of proposed loans and TAs with water policy. As a
     result, an increasing number of water TAs now indicate how they conform with and contribute to water policy.
7
     ADB support for the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation is an exception. This has built on ADB's
     successful experience of supporting the Greater Mekong Subregion program, in some cases employing
     consultants who had worked on Greater Mekong Subregion to advise CAREC.
8   Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                     Were Actual and Planned TA Program
 Country                          Consistent?                       Were ADTAs Linked to Lending Activities?
               TA program for a particular year changed             they were for transition-related public sector
               considerably from one CSP/CSPU to the next.          reforms/capacity building necessary to make
                                                                    ADB's intervention in the country more
                                                                    effective.

 Philippines   Inconsistent. More than half of TAs approved in      Mostly no. Only a third of ADTAs in 2002­
               2002­2004 were not included in the 2002­2004 and     2005 were linked to loans.
               2004­2006 CSPUs.

 Viet Nam     Generally consistent. Except for timing differences, Often yes. TAs were often linked to lending
              actual TAs were generally consistent with the        activities, but not always (e.g., health).
              planned TA program.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance, CAP = country assistance plan,
CSP = country strategy and program, CSPU = country strategy and program update, TA = technical assistance.
Sources: Special evaluation study country case studies.

21.      CSPUs liberally added and removed proposed TAs with little or no explanation. As an
illustration of this problem, Table 5 shows the Fiji Islands' pipeline of TAs for 2005, first as
specified annually by three consecutive CSPUs, and then as actually approved in 2005. There
were continuous changes over the CSPUs, and the TAs that were approved bore little
resemblance to those in the CSPUs.

    Table 5: Fiji Islands Technical Assistance Program for 2005 as Reported in Country
                   Strategy and Program Updates and as Actually Approved

                                     TA Program for 2005 as Specified in
2003­2005 CSPU             2004­2006 CSPU               2005­2007 CSPU                 2005 Approved TAs
Multisector/Others      Multisector/Others        Multisector/Others                Agriculture and Natural
1. Skills               1. Urban Sector           1. Urban Sector                   Resources
    Development             Development               Development                   1. Strengthening
    and Employment                                                                      Commercial Agriculture
    Creation            Finance and Industry       Finance and Industry                 Development
                        1. Strengthening the       1. Strengthening the             2. Rural and Outer Islands
Transport and               Fiji Islands' Stock        Fiji Islands' Stock              Development
Communications              Exchange                   Exchange
1. Road                                                                             Law, Economic
    Infrastructure      Transport and                Law, Economic                  Management, and Public
    Development         Communications               Management, and Public         Policy
                        1. Road Upgrading            Policy                         1. Private Sector
                                                     1. Women's Action Plan II          Development Road
                                                     2. Strengthening                   Maps
                                                         Development Planning
                                                         and Implementation
                                                     3. Implementation of an
                                                         Efficient Audit System
                                                     4. Leadership Enhancement
                                                         and Advancement Project
CSPU = country strategy and program update, TA = technical assistance.
Sources: Special evaluation study country case studies.

22.    Table 6 provides data on this problem in the Philippines' program: 55 programmed TAs
did not reach maturation; only 20 were approved. Another 18 appeared without having being
programmed in a CSP or CSPU.
         Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                    9


            Table 6: Programmed and Approved Technical Assistance in Philippines,
                                        2002­2005
Country Strategy and Program                                   2002       2003       2004       2005        Total

Number of programmed but unapproved TAs                          22         16         11          6         55
Number of programmed TAs approved                                 6          2          5          7         20
Number of non-programmed TAs approved                             7          5          6          0         18

TA = technical assistance.
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

23.      A further issue examined by country case studies was whether approved ADTAs were
linked to lending activities. Findings on this question were mixed (Table 4). In India,
Kyrgyz Republic, and Viet Nam, there was a reasonably close linkage between ADTAs and
lending, with ADTAs often being used to address implementation, policy, or capacity building
issues associated with lending activities. However, in the Fiji Islands and the Philippines, many
approved ADTAs had no direct linkage to lending. It is not the case that all TAs should be linked
to the lending program. There are many thematic issues which are addressed with TA where
there is no lending program, e.g., the LTSF defines a key strategic area as governance. The
use of TA to address such issues is consistent with ADB's strategies and policies provided
(i) the government places priority on receiving assistance from ADB in this area, (ii) the TA is
consistent with the CSP, (iii) the TAs are not ADB-driven, and (iv) ADB has a long-term
commitment to the thematic area.


V.        Other Aspects of Strategic Focus
          1.       Positioning ADB for Longer-Term Focus

24.    ADB does not always Use TA Strategically to Position it as the Most Trusted
Adviser in a Sector. By spreading its TA too thinly and not developing a sufficiently
programmatic approach, ADB misses opportunities to develop a relationship as the
government's trusted adviser in the sectors and themes it assists. Such positioning is not
usually addressed in country strategies. In practice, strategic positioning is not applied
consistently in the programming of TA. Some examples from SES case study countries are
provided below:
       (i)    After establishing a strategic influence, ADB sometimes misses
              opportunities to consolidate its role. For example, in the Kyrgyz Republic, ADB
              implemented an influential ADTA in the President's Administration where it directly
              advised the President on policy matters. A follow-up ADTA ignored a key success
              factor by replacing the Russian speaker from the first TA with a non-Russian
              speaking one. The latter was unable to respond quickly enough to the requests of
              the President, nor discuss issues with him, and became marginalized.8
       (ii)   Strategic opportunities are overlooked. ADB did not recognize the potential for
              developing its influence and standing when it turned down requests from the



8
    ADB. 1999. Strengthening Capacity in the Office of the President. Manila (TA 3249-KGZ, for $340,000, approved
    on 30 August); and ADB. 2002. Strengthening Capacity in the Office of the President, Phase 2. Manila (TA 3859-
    KGZ, for $500,000, approved on 24 April). ADB. 2001. The technical assistance completion report for TA 3249-
    KGZ had said that "familiarity with the Russian language is a very important advantage in such a TA owing to the
    volume of documents that need to be read and worked on."
10 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                  Ministry of Finance and National Planning in the Fiji Islands to help strengthen its
                  capacity by providing long-term advisory support through TA.9
          (iii)   Opportunities are lost by spreading support too thinly. In the
                  Kyrgyz Republic, ADB has been the lead agency in education. It had a high profile
                  in basic education but then spread its work to other aspects of the sector. The
                  assistance it could provide to each education subsector was so low that the
                  Government turned to the World Bank for assistance. When ADB's country
                  lending and TA ceilings are low, the CSP must expressly guard against the risk of
                  spreading support too thinly.
          (iv)    Need for a focal point for geographically based ADB interventions. In India,
                  in operations in the focal states of Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and the eight
                  North East states, interventions tend to be managed on a sector basis. Without a
                  focal point for a state, there is sometimes no single person knowledgeable enough
                  to represent ADB with senior stakeholders, ensure that it is well positioned for
                  future work, and to deal with problems.
          (v)     Need for continuity of ADB presence and representation. Continuity can be
                  provided by a project officer, as was the case over a number of years of
                  successful ADB support for finance sector reform in the Kyrgyz Republic, or by a
                  consultant, as in the case of successful programs in the education sector in
                  Cambodia and Uzbekistan.
          (vi)    Need for continuity of ADB intervention strategies. Sector directors need to
                  ensure that ADB intervention strategies are institutionally embedded--not
                  personality driven--to remain intact when there are changes in project officer or
                  sector director.

          2.       Synergies

25.     A Program Should be More than the Sum of its Parts--CSPs Give Too Little
Attention to Producing Synergies between Different Elements of the Program. Synergy is
not a criterion applied to strategy development in CSPs. In India, ADB is operating in a number of
states across a number of sectors--particularly transport and urban development. There is
potential for greater synergy. For example, the state roads project in Chhattisgarh is supported by
a 3-year $1.6 million capacity building ADTA, principally to establish operation and maintenance
systems. There were concurrent loan projects in rural roads and in agriculture, in agencies that
were administratively weak. There was not only an opportunity for addressing public sector
weaknesses in a number of agencies in Chhattisgarh but, more specifically, for concurrently
introducing operation and maintenance systems in both the state and rural roads agencies.

26.     Occasionally, there were synergies. An example in India concerned securitization. A
regional TA (RETA) studying secured transactions reform in five countries started what became
a program. One of the countries covered in the RETA was India and the results raised its
interest. The RETA was followed by an ADTA in India to demonstrate how to operationalize
such reform. At about the same time, a governance ADTA was started on the administration of
justice in India. One of its diagnostic findings was that part of the reason for the bottlenecks in
the administration of justice was the number of cases concerning moveable securities. This TA
led to a PPTA and hence to a loan to improve courts administration, part of which is to address
the need to establish a registry of secured transactions.



9
    Some support was provided through SSTA, but this was much less than required.
          Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                     11


           3.       ADB Comparative Advantage

27.     ADB Comparative Advantages are not Systematically Applied to Country
Programs nor Systematically Improved through Strategic Use of TA. CSPs do not provide
a frank assessment of ADB's comparative advantage in a DMC. When comparative advantage
is discussed, it is usually limited to rhetoric to justify particular sector interests within ADB. TA is
a comparative advantage of ADB. Through TA, it can provide access to best international
practice--an advantage that is very marketable, particularly in rapidly developing DMCs such as
the People's Republic of China (PRC), India, and Viet Nam. Access to best international
practice is not, however, a comparative advantage that ADB has constantly promoted.

           4.       Confirmation of Government Commitment

28.       Most TAs Assume Government Commitment without Requiring Government to
Demonstrate it. A key success factor of any TA is government commitment to the TA's
objectives. This was noted by the 2003 review of TA, which proposed the introduction of a
checklist of good practices to enhance country commitment. Assessing government ownership is
difficult and CSPs provide no information to gauge a government's commitment to the individual
elements in a proposed program. Experience is one test. A second is the resources a government
is prepared to assign to collaborate with an intervention. In India and Viet Nam, budget allocations
tended to be well aligned, as the governments had a clear idea of what they wanted to use ADB
assistance for. In Fiji Islands, Kyrgyz Republic, and Philippines, some activities initiated ended
because of lack of budget. There were also issues over government's willingness to commit full-
time counterparts. One option for establishing commitment before the start of a TA would be to
require the government contribution to the TA to be provided in cash rather than in kind. Another
option, especially in new areas of support, would be to start TA support on a small scale, and then
provide further TA once criteria to demonstrate commitment have been met.

           5.       Identification and Addressing of Constraints

29.     Constraints to Effective Program Delivery are not Systematically Identified and
Addressed in CSPs. Producing planned outputs does not guarantee desired outcomes. There
are often constraints which prevent outcomes from being achieved unless they are addressed.
The constraints need to be examined in CSPs--both at country program level and at individual
intervention level. CSPs have a section on risks, and some sector road maps also list constraints.
However, none of the CSPs for case study countries attempted to demonstrate how risks and
constraints might be addressed and managed effectively.10




10
     The India CSP road map for transport addresses state capacity as follows: "At the state level, maintenance has
     been carried out by public works departments, but due to inadequate allocation of state budgets and inefficiency of
     PWD operation, maintenance works have huge backlogs. For rural roads, planning, systematic planning,
     execution, and financing schemes for maintenance are almost non-existent [sic]. ADB will help rural road
     authorities introduce sustainable maintenance mechanisms, including contracting out of operation and
     maintenance services to the private contractors." While this might elicit improvements, it does not address the
     constraint of state budgets, nor the potential unexamined constraint of a weak private sector which might be as
     unable to meet operation and maintenance requirements as the public authority. ADTAs can be used to address
     constraints, but if constraints are not identified systematically, that opportunity is lost. So is the opportunity to
     support a program of continuous improvement in an agency which identifies that agency's commitment to change,
     and address the constraints to improved agency effectiveness.
12 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


       6.      Manageability

30.     Resource Constraints are not Exhaustively Examined in CSPs. The CSP should
ensure that ADB has the quantity and quality of staff needed to manage the proposed program.
ADB should only enter into new areas when those conditions are satisfied. However, CSPs do
not include implementation plans that reconcile ADB's human and financial resources and the
needs to manage, process, and supervise the implementation of the program. This is a serious
weakness in ADB's business practices. In ADB's India transport operations, for example, only
one staff member in the South Asia Department had experience in railways despite a significant
railway program. None had experience in inland waterways--where ADB embarked on a
$900,000 PPTA (that was unsuccessful and abandoned before completion as there had been
inadequate initial consultations with government over the subregional character of the proposed
loan). In the Kyrgyz Republic, the CSP identified four strategic areas of activity. The first was
improving the provision of public services, which requires a critical mass of ADB officers with
experience in change management and capacity building. There was no such critical mass in
the Central and West Asia Department. CSPs do not influence ADB staff recruitment, so it is
hard to have confidence that the required staff expertise will be available to implement the
planned work program.

VI. Formulation and Implementation of Technical
    Assistance
       1.      Introduction

31.     This chapter examines how well ADB formulates and implements individual TAs, based
on findings from the SES sample. It considers the adequacy of the formulation process, TA
quality at entry, the resources provided for formulation, and the evidence on quality control.
Regarding implementation, it examines adherence to TA design, and the performance of
consultants, EAs, and ADB supervision.

       2.      Formulation Process

32.     The Operations Manual and New Business Processes do not Provide Enough
Guidance for Formulating Complex or Innovative TA Design. ADB's approach to formulation
of TA is based on the NBP. These outline the procedural steps in TA formulation--preparation of
a TA concept paper, fielding a TA preparation mission, and drafting, review, and approval of the
TA paper. However, they do not explain how to prepare a TA or what to include in the TA design.
Neither does the TA section of the Operations Manual, which is limited to defining types of TA,
financing arrangements, and approval authority. There is no other source of guidance on TA
formulation--such as a set of guidelines or a handbook.

33.     Following the 2003 review of TA, the Strategy and Policy Department (SPD) prepared
draft staff instructions for TA, which included guidance on the process and criteria for TA
formulation. These envisaged that formulation of a PPTA would require economic and thematic
assessments to justify the project, a sector road map, identified impacts of the proposed ADB
budgets, linkage with country strategy, DMC ownership commitments, and clearly articulated
outputs to enable a project or program to be processed. Similarly, the draft guidelines envisaged
that ADTA or RETA formulation was to identify a problem or an issue and design a set of
measures that would address this effectively, to be financed through the TA. The formulation
          Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                         13


stage would require a diagnostic analysis of the problem or issue to provide a justification for the
TA, a sector road map, identification of the contribution the intervention would make to the
country strategy, DMC ownership commitments, and clearly articulated outputs to address the
issue. However, these guidelines were not finalized or adopted.

34.    For TA formulation, the NBP refer only to the role of the mission leader--not to other
members of the project team. Within the SES sample, regardless of complexity, only the
mission leader took part in the TA fact-finding mission in virtually all cases. Some mission
leaders acknowledged that having a team would have improved the quality of TA formulation.

VII. Concept Paper
35.     Before a TA can be formulated, it is normally first identified and outlined as a TA concept
paper in the CSP or CSPU. If a concept paper is not included in a CSP or CSPU, it is
scrutinized through interdepartmental circulation, before being cleared by the responsible Vice
President. Within the SES sample, 73% of PPTAs and 64% of ADTAs were initially screened
through the CSP or CSPU process. TA concept papers tend to be very broad. In reality, the TA
concept papers included in CSPs receive little scrutiny. This means that weakly conceived
proposals may be included in the pipeline, often reflecting the interests of sector divisions rather
than any serious contribution to country strategy.

36.     Based on the opinions of project officers for ADTAs in the SES sample, both inter- and
intra- departmental scrutiny of concept papers added value in only about half the cases
(although the number of project officers who responded to this question was small). Therefore, it
seems that scrutiny is not always applied consistently or rigorously.


VIII. Quality at Entry
            1.       Diagnostic Analysis

37.     Diagnostics are Often Neglected or Conducted without Methodological Rigor. Most
ADTAs are intended to introduce some kind of change in the EA. Key to having change
accepted and introduced effectively is (i) management commitment to introduce the change,
and (ii) managing a core of staff that understands what needs to be done to achieve the
objective by the end of the TA.

38.     There are considerable variations between EAs in terms of the problems they face and
their capacity to implement a TA or a project. In India, many EAs at national level are highly
competent, but this is not always so at subnational level. Within the SES sample, the capacity of
state level EAs in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and the North Eastern states was weak.
Seven PPTAs were implemented in states or EAs with weak capacity. The PPTAs were seldom
required to assess EA capacity to implement the proposed investment project. However, all the
PPTAs required plans for some kind of institutional strengthening or, in one case, to implement
a program of capacity building.11 By focusing on plans for the future rather than the problems
and risks of relying on the initially weak capacity, the PPTAs may avoid asking hard questions
about the capacity of an EA to implement a project and maintain the infrastructure provided--a
condition that should be critical to any investment decision.

11
     If this actually took place, it had so little impact that senior officials interviewed by the evaluation study team could
     not recollect it.
14 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance



39.      The relationship between unsatisfactory diagnostics and adverse performance has been
referred to repeatedly by ADB reviews and evaluations.12 TA papers rarely include a satisfactory
diagnostic. Diagnostics for conventional loan projects, such as infrastructure projects, are
usually prepared by the PPTA consultants. This works satisfactorily if ADB has experience in
the sector and DMC, but diagnostics are essential if the sector or activity is new. According to
ADB's traditional approach to using TA, the initial diagnostic might recommend preparation of a
sector study under ADTA before considering individual investment proposals. The SES sample
included the case of inland waterways in India, where ADB moved too quickly to provide PPTA
for a new sector without conducting adequate diagnostics first. The PPTA proved too ambitious
in relation to sector challenges and the capacity limitations of the EA.

40.     A diagnostic analysis should set out to identify (i) current goals, objectives, and
performance levels of the area targeted for a TA; (ii) problems which have given rise to the need
for a TA; (iii) underlying causes of the problems; (iv) internal and external barriers and
constraints to address the problems effectively; and (v) organizational change strategies to
address the problems and their causes and to overcome any constraints. This should form the
basis for producing an overall plan to address the requirements for change. The plan would
include (i) a strategy for achieving the desired outcome, determining the time required to
produce the required changes in a sustainable way; (ii) an outline of a timetable; (iii) the
resources, both human and financial, required for such a change management program,
including the inputs required of the EA; and (iv) an identification of responsible parties and their
areas of responsibility. The production of such a plan would form a more transparent basis for
obtaining EA commitment to the proposed TA as well as enabling ADB to determine what kind
of commitment is required of it for the proposed outcomes to be achieved. Often, the plan would
require a reasonably long-term program of change and sustained ADB involvement over 5­10
years.

41.      ADB has not established an agreed methodology for conducting a diagnostic or situational
analysis. In 2001, SPD tested diagnostics tool kits in energy generation, transmission, and
distribution in Nepal; and in basic education in the state of Punjab in Pakistan. It took about 1 week
to collect the data and report preparation took 1 week more. The tool kits were written up for use by
ADB and placed on the website. There was no evidence of their use in any TA in the SES sample.

42.     Many TAs address issues like capacity building, institutional reform, and policy
development, in which the ADB staff responsible have little or no experience. ADB provides no
training in information gathering and diagnostics to assist project officers to improve their
competencies in these areas. Mission leaders are rarely joined on TA fact-finding missions by
other professional staff who might contribute to the initial diagnostic. Such a diagnosis is a
necessary precursor for the ADB staff concerned to be able to discuss with the EA precisely
what is required to achieve the intended outcomes. As a result, terms of reference (TOR) are
often unrealistic as they do not identify key agency weaknesses. The EA experiences
unrealistically raised expectations of the capacity of the proposed intervention to achieve
change. However, what it must do to secure the change is rarely defined and agreed to by the
EA. An example of how poor diagnostics can undermine a TA is in Box 1.




12
     See, for example, ADB. 1994. Report on the Task Force on Improving Project Quality. Manila.
           Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                   15




                         Box 1: Poor Diagnostics Leading to Failed Technical Assistance

     A $560,000 project preparatory technical assistance was proposed to develop a microfinance project for rural
                                   a
     finance in the Philippines. No market research was conducted to assess the market for the proposed product, nor
     for what kind of product the market wanted. There was no survey of microfinance institutions, or of the demand for
     credit, or of the credit instrument to be provided. At the time, the Government was emphasizing thrift and savings as
     a source of funding for micro-credit rather than borrowing. The executing agency and the consultants were aware of
     this policy position but the Asian Development Bank staff did not take it into account. In the end, $450,000 of
     technical assistance was spent on a solution that could not find a market.
     ________________________
     a
         ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for Microfinance for Rural Development.
         Manila. (TA 3814-PHI, for $560,000, approved on 19 December)


43.         Failing to produce a realistic diagnostic has three serious sets of consequences:
            (i)    TOR are incomplete, so consultants make proposals with an incomplete
                   understanding of problems to be addressed. This increases the risk that an
                   inappropriate selection of consultants will be made, as certain expertise might be
                    overlooked.
            (ii)    The diagnostic has to be prepared at the inception stage, by which time:
                    (a)    The budget for the TA has been determined and cannot be varied upwards.
                           The sensible approach would then be to reduce the scope of the TA if the
                           budget is insufficient, but this is usually resisted as it is perceived to reflect
                           poorly on the TA design and the division responsible. Consultants then
                           have to do as much as they can of the activities specified, as they have
                           contracted to perform them all.
                    (b)    The inputs of the consultants are determined, and the consultants have
                           usually been mobilized. It is difficult to vary the approach at this stage
                           because of budget constraints, and since the timetable for consultants has
                           been used as the basis for contracting them.
            (iii)   The initial expectations of the EA have to be revised, which can cause loss of
                    confidence in the TA. EA ownership may suffer.

            2.       Country Ownership

44.      The Extent of Country Ownership is Often Weak. The degree of DMC and EA
ownership has been frequently referred to as a key ingredient for ensuring TA success. The
World Bank defines country ownership as meaning "that there is sufficient political support
within a country to implement its developmental strategy, including the projects, programs, and
policies for which external partners provide assistance."13 While this definition addresses the
political dimension, it does not reflect the responsibilities and accountabilities that come with
ownership. In contrast, Sharpe et al.14 have suggested five key principles for making a country-
led approach work:
         (i)   Support country strategies ­ funding agencies should base their country
               strategies on their partner's country plans, rather than their own analysis of
               priorities.


13
     World Bank. 2004. Country Development Framework. Washington, DC.
14
     S. Sharpe et al. 2005. United Kingdom: More Country Ownership. In Finance and Development. Volume 42, No. 3.
     Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. (September).
16 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


           (ii)    Match aid instruments to country needs ­ funding agencies must listen to partner
                   countries' priorities for aid delivery.
           (iii)   Harmonize aid ­ funding agencies should not try to do everything everywhere.
           (iv)    Make aid flows more predictable ­ without this, it is risky for recipient
                   governments to make long-term spending commitments.
           (v)     Insist on mutual accountability ­ funding agencies should be accountable to
                   developing countries for how aid is given, just as developing countries should be
                   accountable to their own people and to funding agencies for how aid is used.

45.     When the TA program is reviewed against these five principles, it can be seen that ADB
has made considerable headway in moving toward more country ownership. However, more
needs to be done to develop DMCs' responsibility and accountability for TA. The concept of
ownership is rooted in the notion that possession of an asset will encourage the owner to make
better use of it. For example, many countries have implemented land reform policies which
transfer ownership rights to producers (and implicitly responsibility and accountability for the
land) in the knowledge that production will subsequently increase, and this has indeed been the
outcome. In the case of TA, the increasing transfer of ownership of the TA process to DMCs is
expected to result in similar gains in TA relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability--
not only for specific TAs but also for the overall TA program and TA development and
implementation processes.

46.    There are a number of means through which the level of DMC ownership could be
increased:
       (i)   Ensuring that DMCs, rather than ADB, play the dominant role in selecting
             and prioritizing TAs. A key criterion for effectiveness and sustainability is that
             the EA should have a strong need for the TA, supported by high-level
             commitment. This was found in Philippine ADTAs on anti-money laundering 15
             and reform of the Securities Exchange Commission.16 In the former, the TA was
             needed because the Philippines had an urgent need to get off the Non-
             Cooperative Countries and Territories list of the Financial Action Task Force on
             Money Laundering--given its dependence on overseas workers' remittances. In
             the latter case, the Securities Exchange Commission faced a crisis over a
             number of scandals, including insider trading, and its future was under threat.
             The crisis ensured Securities Exchange Commission management buy-in for the
             TA. However, such crises are not common, so government commitment usually
             needs to be demonstrated before a TA is designed. This was the case with
             capital market reforms in India. The Government had a clearly stated objective
             for such reforms and showed its commitment over a series of ADTAs to support
             the reforms. However, for many other TAs in the SES sample, even though the
             objectives were high government priorities, commitment never reached the
             intensity required. That often became evident early in TA implementation when
             full-time counterpart staff were not provided, and additional budget appropriations
             were not provided to secure the desired changes.
       (ii)  Involving EAs in the development of TAs and their objectives. The NBP
             allow 2 weeks for a TA fact-finding mission. While this would allow someone with
             the right expertise to prepare a diagnostic and scope the intervention, it would
             generally not be long enough to fully engage an EA and other stakeholders in

15
     TA 3847-PHI: Strengthening the Anti-Money Laundering Regime, for $1 million, approved on 19 March 2002.
16
     TA 3245-PHI: Nonbank Financial Sector Development, for $2 million, approved on 25 August 1999; and TA 3773-
     PHI: Strengthening Market and Regulatory Governance, for $1 million, approved on 15 November 2001.
       Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                 17


                 deciding on an approach to address the problem and to ensure government
                 ownership and a satisfactory level of stakeholder support. In 44% of ADTAs in
                 the SES sample, mission leaders estimated that the EA's contribution to the
                 design and monitoring framework (DMF) was "less than 20%." Where a number
                 of agencies were involved--as in the urban sector and some finance sector
                 projects--stakeholders crucial to TA effectiveness sometimes made little to no
                 contribution to the DMF, were not involved in designing the TA, and therefore
                 had doubtful commitment to its objectives. These findings indicate that TA
                 designs are typically driven by ADB staff.
        (iii)    Actively involving EAs in consultant selection. EAs have frequently
                 commented that they wish to be more involved in the selection of consultants,
                 particularly to ensure a good cultural fit. In response to these issues, the Central
                 Operations Services Office (COSO) at ADB carried out a pilot study in 2004 where
                 EAs were delegated responsibility for consultant selection in 20 TAs in 10 DMCs,
                 subject to adherence to ADB guidelines and procedures. The pilot study only
                 appears to have worked well in the PRC where selection for all three pilot PPTAs
                 was completed in 2004. Of the two ADTAs, one was completed in 2005 but one is
                 still outstanding. Preliminary analysis indicates that this delegated responsibility is
                 more likely to succeed where an EA is used to working with ADB. As a result of
                 this study, COSO has included a statement in the revised guidelines: "In order to
                 increase ownership of TA projects and improve sustainability of project benefits,
                 ADB may, in particular circumstances, delegate responsibility to a borrower
                 ("delegated TA") to recruit and supervise TA consultants." This is an important
                 change and those responsible for future TAs will need to implement this wherever
                 possible, while recognizing that it will not be possible to move immediately to full
                 delegation. Anecdotal evidence from the PRC suggests that the pilot study caused
                 a considerable extra workload for those EAs involved, as all steps in the
                 recruitment process had to be agreed and signed off by ADB. It is hoped that,
                 following the pilot, more responsibility and accountability for the recruitment
                 process will also be delegated to EAs where feasible.
        (iv)     Ensuring strong commitment from all involved EAs in TA implementation.
                 In interventions that concerned multiple agencies, ADB relied on the EA to
                 secure the commitment of other agencies. Sometimes, this would have required
                 prior studies or market research to determine the extent of support, but such
                 studies were usually not performed. For example, in the Philippines, urban sector
                 TAs in low-cost housing and solid waste management failed because buy-in from
                 local government units did not materialize.18 In the Kyrgyz Republic, ADB tried to
                 secure buy-in for several TAs by appointing central agencies like the President's
                 Administration, Office of Prime Minister, and MOF as EAs in the expectation that
                 they could achieve the necessary coordination of line agencies.19 However, this
                 was not effective as TA implementation is usually not a core responsibility of
                 central agencies.
18
   ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for Preparing the Metro Manila Urban Services
   for the Poor. Manila (TA 3760-PHI, for $1 million, approved on 5 November); and ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance
   to the Republic of the Philippines for Metro Manila Solid Waste Management. Manila (TA 3848-PHI, for
   $1.25 million, approved on 18 March).
19
   PPTAs in community-based early childhood development and vocational education and skills training,
   strengthening corporate governance and judicial reforms, and customs modernization.
18 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


           (v)     Giving more power to EAs to supervise consultants and to participate in
                   payment decisions. The SES found that in 30% of ADTAs and 77% of PPTAs,
                   consultants viewed ADB as their client rather than the EA. This does not foster a
                   satisfactory relationship between the consultant and the EA. Requiring EAs to
                   participate in the overall supervision of consultants, reviewing their outputs, and
                   recommending payment against agreed milestones are all ways in which EAs
                   can feel more closely involved in TA implementation.
           (vi)    Giving EAs a formal input into the evaluation of consultant performance.
                   Involving EAs in this way will improve the ability to rate consultant performance
                   from the EAs' perspective in addition to ensuring that EAs feel that their views
                   are being heard.
           (vii)   Ensuring that EAs contribute a portion of the actual costs of the TA. EAs
                   often make in-kind payments (such as the provision of office space) which are
                   valued at widely differing rates. Such a payment could consist of a fixed local
                   currency contribution toward the overall budget. This transfer of some
                   accountability to EAs would act as an incentive to ensure effective
                   implementation but would also mean that EAs would be more proactive in
                   discussing TA implementation with ADB.

           3.      Achievable Set of Objectives

47.      Objectives Established for TAs Varied Between the Attainable and the Unrealistic.
There was little relationship between size of TA and realism of objectives. SSTAs were just as
likely to have unrealistic objectives as were $1 million TAs. In many cases, objectives were
realistic. In others, they were too ambitious and could be only partly achieved within the TA
resource. Comparisons between one TA and another in the same DMC revealed wide
divergences in the realism of objectives. For example, in the Philippines, two TAs addressing
organizational problems in the relatively small Securities and Exchange Commission were
allocated $3 million, (footnote 6) whereas another TA for $775,000 was expected to strengthen
management capacity at all levels of the country's large technical education and skills
development system, as well as design and implement major programs related to quality
assurance and training, and graduate employment. 20 There is little justification for unrealistic
objective setting. If the original objectives were important but TA resources were insufficient, ADB
should be willing to provide an extension or continuation of the TA if the initial work is successful.
A more programmatic option is to start support at a low level and provide further support as the
commitment of the EA is established and the likelihood of success becomes more guaranteed.

48.    Complexity makes change management programs more difficult--especially for the EA.
Good programs limit the number of changes to be addressed at any one time. There is a basic
psychological rule that good managers can cope with, possibly, three major long-term problems
at one time. Beyond that, each additional problem produces increasingly unmanageable stress.
Box 2 describes the case of an SSTA that had objectives which were too ambitious in relation to
resources provided.




20
     ADB. 2000. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for Strengthening Management Capacity and
     Improving Quality of Technical Education and Skills Development System. Manila (TA 3482-PHI, for $775,000,
     approved on 24 August).
          Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                      19



                                          Box 2: Overly Complex Objectives
    A small-scale technical assistance (SSTA) for $150,000a was provided to improve the regulation and supervision of
    derivative instruments in India. It drafted new regulations and proposed measures to improve risk management. It
    partially provided solutions to removing impediments to the development of new derivatives products. It was supposed
    to produce trained officials but addressed the requirement through a study tour to Australia and the Republic of Korea.
    The SSTA was also required to improve derivatives monitoring and surveillance systems, establish associated
    regulatory and surveillance systems for new products, develop more diversified products that appropriately meet client
    requirements, and develop an appropriate incentive structure. These requirements--supposedly important to the
    success of the development of an effective derivatives market--could not be addressed within the SSTA resources.
    The unrealistic objectives had a number of consequences:
      (i) The Government's expectations were raised that more would be accomplished than was possible.
      (ii) Since the Government assumed the SSTA would address all the objectives, it did not seek funds from other
            sources to carry out the tasks that were omitted.
      (iii) The Government now has a partial answer to the issues it wished to address but progress is delayed while
            the gaps are filled.
      (iv) An excellent study was prepared but, because of inflated expectations, the Government was disappointed by
            the outcome, and the reputation of the Asian Development Bank was not enhanced.
________________________
a
    ADB. 2003. Technical Assistance to India for Regulation and Supervision of Derivative Instruments. Manila
    (TA 4203-IND, for $150,000, approved on 22 October).

49.     One of the criteria for selecting an operational division director should be his or her
capacity to evaluate the realism of a TA, based on their experience in implementing loans and
TAs. Either that criterion is not being applied in selection processes or division directors are
abrogating this important responsibility. This is important because an unrealistic set of
objectives places a TA in an unwinnable situation. The objectives cannot be achieved with the
resources allocated and there is bound to be a disappointed client. Within the SES sample,
resources were considered "just right" in less than 25% of TAs.

           4.       Type of Assistance Model

50.    ADB has not Standardized its TA into Models, Products, or Standard Practices.
Within the three types of TAs--PPTAs, ADTAs, and RETAs--ADB has not established
standardized TA models, products, or practices that could be documented, marketed to clients,
and improved upon over time based on experience. In the absence of standardized approaches,
many TA papers borrow from a previous TA paper addressing the same kind of problem.
However, little or no attempt is made to learn from the experience of the previous TA, so many
new TAs repeat the same errors of formulation.

51.    There is little provision for a seamless progression from one TA to the next as few
interventions are regarded as being part of a longer-term program of assistance. Too frequently,
where there is a succession of TAs--as occurred in the anti-money laundering interventions in
the Philippines and the provision of policy advice to the President's Administration in the
Kyrgyz Republic--there is a marked gap between the completion of the first TA and the
mobilization of the second, and different consultants are recruited. This results in loss of
experience gained and relationships developed on the first TA.

           5.       Matching Scope to Budget

52.   TA Budgets are often Arbitrary, not based on Requirements for the Intervention.
For 73% of ADTAs and 53% of PPTAs in the SES sample, the TA budget was determined on a
20 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


"top-down" basis by director generals or directors, and given to mission leaders irrespective of
what was really needed to do the work. As a result, there were a number of anomalies:
       (i)   In India, 33% of ADTAs in the SES sample were for $150,000 and 43% of PPTAs
             were for $1 million--corresponding to the approval ceilings for directors and the
             President respectively. Many of the SSTAs were too small to complete the
             assignments as well as the EA might have wished.
       (ii)  Unanticipated TAs were often resourced using any unallocated TA budget under
             the technical assistance indicative planning figure (TAIPF) or by reducing the
             budgets of other TAs in the pipeline. For example, in 2003 the Government of
             India made an unexpected request for assistance to de-mutualize Indian stock
             exchanges (there were over 20) and to help develop a market for derivative
             instruments under its capital markets reform program. ADB provided two TAs
             each of the maximum SSTA grant of $150,000, neither of which was sufficient to
             complete the work required.21
       (iii) The country programs of Cambodia, Kyrgyz Republic, and Uzbekistan all had
             ADTAs to improve the regulatory capacity of central banks over credit unions. The
             first was in Cambodia in 1999, for $1.45 million. The Kyrgyz Republic (for
             $550,000) and Uzbekistan (for $400,000) TAs were both approved in 2002. With
             much lower budgets than in Cambodia, neither TA was able to produce
             sustainable improvements.
       (iv) Given that DMC ownership is such an important criterion for success, responding
             to a DMC request with an arbitrary budget allocation does not signal to the DMC
             concerned that ADB is taking its request seriously.

53.     The country case studies provided evidence from EAs, project officers, and TA
consultants that the time allowed for TAs is usually too short. This problem was especially
serious for ADTAs. As Figure 1 shows, EAs in the SES sample considered that the length of
time allocated to ADTAs was just right in only 32% of cases and far too short in 26% of cases.
ADB staff concerned considered that the length of time was far too short in 30% of ADTAs and
slightly too short in a further 28%. PPTAs fared slightly better, with 53% being regarded as
having sufficient time allocated to them both by EAs and ADB staff (Figure 2). TA consultants
broadly corroborated the EA and ADB staff views on time allowed for TA. These findings point
to ADB's difficulty in estimating implementation schedules, despite consultants' inclusion of such
a schedule in every proposal.




21
     ADB. 2003. Technical Assistance to India for Demutualization and Consolidation of Indian Stock Exchanges.
     Manila (TA 4202-IND, for $150,000, approved on 21 October); and ADB. 2003. Technical Assistance to India for
     Regulation and Supervision of Derivative Instruments. Manila (TA 4203-IND, for $150,000, approved on
     22 October).
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance   21



                     Figure 1: Appropriateness of Length of Time Allocated to ADTA


              Agency View                                           ADB Staff View




    ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
    Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.




                  Figure 2: Appropriateness of Length of Time Allocated to PPTA

                Agency View                                          ADB Staff View




    ADB = Asian Development Bank, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
    Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.




54.    Within the SES sample, there were similar issues over the time allocated for training.
EAs considered the length of time just right in 46% of interventions. In 54% of the cases, the
length of time allocated for training was too short.

55.     In the case of PPTA, as the Operations Evaluation Department pointed out in its annual
report on loan and TA portfolio performance for 2005, the average PPTA budget decreased by
18% in real terms over the period 1996­2005. During that time, several additional policy
requirements were added to the PPTA tasks. Consultants sometimes struggle to address all the
tasks required. This leads them to do the work themselves rather than engage the EA as a
partner in the design work. Consequently, ownership and understanding of the project design
may suffer, and EA capacity to design projects is not built up.

56.     How could so many TA projects have passed through ADB's checks and reviews without
someone suggesting that the objectives were too ambitious for the time and resources allowed?
Why was this not corrected by sector directors or the offices of directors general? Why was it
not challenged during interdepartmental circulation? These are not new issues. Such problems
have been pointed out repeatedly by past OED evaluations. However, in this area, ADB has
failed to become a learning organization to use evaluation findings to make systemic
22 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


improvement in how it formulates new TAs. In the final analysis, this is a case of departmental
management failure--responsibility for which rests with directors general and directors.

           6.       Terms of Reference

57.     Typical TOR for TA Projects do not Require Consultant Companies to
Demonstrate their Expertise on How to Address the Problems at Issue. The TOR for PPTA
are structured to inform consultants of the inputs and outputs required to design a loan. This
approach to TOR is satisfactory so long as the PPTA work is limited to project preparation, and
does not extend to tasks of a more advisory nature. ADTAs and RETAs are usually intended to
produce outcomes that involve introducing the basis for some kind of change. However, in
ADTAs designed to address institutional problems, the TOR typically do not stipulate the
outcomes to be achieved. Instead, they specify inputs in terms of type and quantity of experts. If
inputs are wrongly specified, the consultants can seek a contract variation, but in practice it may
only be discovered that they are wrong when most of the inputs have been used. Once the
consultants have delivered the inputs required, and produced the output (usually a final report),
their task is complete--regardless of the quality of solutions they have provided. Any flaws in
their proposals are left for the EA to resolve. As the EA required assistance in the first place, it
often has neither the capacity nor the competencies to correct the flaws. In such situations, the
likelihood of less than optimal solutions and outcomes is great.

58.    Use of TOR that focus on addressing a problem or producing a specified outcome have
one important advantage for more complex ADTAs. They allow each consulting firm making a
proposal to apply its "corporate mind" to identifying the best way of resolving the stated
problems. Short-listed firms with relevant experience may often offer good ideas. Some of these
might be incorporated into the winning proposal (commercial confidence restrictions
notwithstanding) at the time of contract negotiations.

           7.       Work Scheduling within the Agencies Concerned

59.    Work Schedules were not Prepared as Part of TA Design. The template for TA
papers does not contain an explicit time schedule for key tasks and none of the TA papers
examined as part of this study included such schedules. As a consequence, EAs sometimes
had unrealistic ideas about what to expect from the TA and underestimated their own role. The
absence of a work program in the TA paper made it difficult for ADB to monitor the progress of
an intervention. Although a fixed work program is not always appropriate,22 it is essential to
have government endorsement of a sequence of steps to be followed at the appropriate time to
secure a change, with a realistic assessment of the resources required at each stage. However,
the absence of a time schedule does not mean that TA mission leaders do not prepare them.
Consultants typically include such schedules in their tender documents, and these could be
used as the basis for inclusion in the TA paper template.

           8.       Design and Monitoring Framework

60.    The DMF usually does not Include the Type of Performance Indicators Needed for
Effective Monitoring and Evaluation of TA. ADB's results-based approach to development
assistance uses the project performance management system (PPMS) for monitoring and
evaluation of loans and TAs. The PPMS aims to provide feedback throughout the project cycle

22
     Sometimes flexibility is needed to allow for the difficulties of a change program and determine when the timing is
     right to move ahead.
         Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                23


so that team leaders can take corrective action to achieve the desired results, and to derive
lessons from subsequent project evaluation. As regards TA, it has four components--DMF,
technical assistance performance report (TPR), TA completion report, and technical assistance
performance evaluation report (TPER). The PPMS is described in Appendix 17 of the SES on
Performance of Technical Assistance. (footnote 1)

61.     The DMF establishes the targets and performance indicators used by each component of
the PPMS.23 A well-prepared DMF is, therefore, critical for successful monitoring and evaluation.
Use of some form of DMF has been mandatory for loans and TA since 1996.24 A participatory
approach is encouraged in the development of the DMF to facilitate stakeholder understanding
and participation in TA, thus increasing country ownership and cooperation.25 However, results
from the SES sample show this was only followed infrequently. ADB staff reported that the EA's
contribution to the DMF "exceeded 50%" in only 32% of ADTAs. From an accountability and
performance assessment point of view, most DMFs in the SES sample had two significant
weaknesses: (i) they did not present monitorable indicators in the form of measurable targets
related to the objectives set for a TA, and (ii) they did not present indicators with which to assess
ADB's performance criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability.26

62.     A 2003 SES by OED on project performance management found that the quality of DMFs
of ADTAs approved in 2002 was poor.27 In response, ADB Management produced an action plan
to improve DMF quality. A follow-up OED assessment of all loans and TAs approved in 2004
found that there had been a modest improvement in DMFs for ADTAs. By 2005, almost half of
approved ADTAs had DMFs with goals and purposes that were rated "satisfactory" or better
(Table 7). While this progress is acknowledged, clearly more progress is needed as even the
2005 figures are not acceptable for an institution like ADB that is focused on achieving results.

                 Table 7: Quality of Design and Monitoring Frameworks for ADTAs
                           (% of TA frameworks rated "satisfactory" or better)

      Level                                        2000             2002            2004             2005

      Goal/Impact Level                             21                  12           29                48
      Purpose/Outcome Level                         20                  12           23                60

     ADTA = advisory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
     Source: Operations Evaluation Department.

           9.      Exit Strategy

63.    Exit Strategies are not Produced for ADTAs. Within the SES sample, few TAs
included a strategy to ensure that the process of reform or change was maintained after TA
completion, and to plan for further ADB support at later stages of the reform program or open up
opportunities to assist other areas of strategic importance. Having an exit strategy is particularly
important since ADTAs are typically underfunded. This point is underscored by responses from

23
   ADB. 2006. Operations Manual. Section J1/BP: Project Performance Management System. Manila, (24 January),
   para. 2(i).
24
   For PPTAs, a DMF for the proposed project is one of the outputs of the TA.
25
   Ibid.
26
   Many DMFs for TAs in the SES sample provided only the vaguest of indicators/targets, e.g., "improvements to ...,"
   and "impediments removed."
27
   ADB. 2003. Project Performance Management in the Asian Development Bank and its Projects in Developing
   Member Countries. Manila.
24 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


85% of ADB staff and 95% of EAs that saw the intervention as a step in a more general reform
program requiring further assistance in the future.

64.      TA papers only occasionally make provision for dissemination of results within ADB or
externally. The final reports of TA consultants are now made available on the catalogue of TA
consultant' reports on ADB's intranet site, but no summaries are provided for wider use by
Communities of Practice and professional staff. This neglect of dissemination means that TAs
have less influence than they should, and lessons from past TAs are not built upon systematically.
A line item for dissemination should be included in the standard format of the TA cost table.

65.     Another factor is language. As ADB works in English, its published TA reports are
usually not written in the languages most widely used in recipient countries. Yet, ADB rarely
makes provision to translate these into local languages. ADB's narrative style of presentation is
also not reader-friendly. Senior officials and members of civil society in DMCs and senior ADB
staff need more easily accessible information. A line item for translation should be included in
the standard format of the TA cost table.

IX. Resources to Support Formulation
          1.       Staff Inputs

66.     Many Staff are Too Overloaded to Commit Enough Time to TA Design. Appendix 9 of
the main report, (footnote 1) provides estimates of the time spent by ADB officers formulating TAs
in the SES sample, together with estimates of their total annual workload on loans and TAs. This
shows that the actual staff time on TA formulation was significantly less than the staff coefficient
used by the Budget, Personnel and Management Systems Department. The average time was
2.6 weeks for ADTAs and 3.0 weeks for PPTAs.28 This compares with current staffing coefficients
of 5.0 weeks for ADTA and 10.0 weeks for PPTA. In all countries except the Fiji Islands, the
average overall annual workload of the officers concerned was 1.5 person years or more, a clear
indication that staff were overloaded. Workloads were particularly high for staff working in India,
and in the urban, education, and transport sectors. This evidence of overloading staff was
consistent with SES findings of inadequate diagnostics, poor scoping of TA projects, weak DMFs,
and inadequate briefing of EAs to secure a realistic commitment to the work of the TA. This
reflects poorly on divisional management. One of the prime responsibilities of divisional managers
should be to match work programs and available resources. One of the consequences of
accepting overly ambitious work plans seems to be allocating insufficient staff time to TA
formulation and supervision. This has adverse consequences for TA quality.

          2.       Experience and Expertise Mix

67.     ADB Officers Usually had Expertise Relevant to the Sector or Technical Area. In
most cases, ADB staff who designed TAs in the SES sample had experience relevant to the
sector to be addressed. So, for example, transport TAs were generally formulated by transport
economists or transport engineers, and education TAs by education specialists. This was
generally sufficient for ensuring that PPTAs were prepared by suitable staff.




28
     In the SES sample, 6.0 weeks was the longest time taken to prepare an ADTA or a PPTA. Those inputs were
     claimed both by a very inexperienced project officer and some experienced project officers.
            Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                     25


  68.    Most ADTAs Address Policy Reform, Capacity Building, and Change Management,
  but Few ADB Staff have Experience and Expertise in these Areas. Many ADTAs involved
  more than sector or technical issues. As Table 8 shows, most involved institutional
  strengthening, public sector reform, and skills transfer. Further analysis of the SES sample
  showed that slightly over a third of ADTAs had their primary focus on capacity building, 23% on
  change management, and 15% on policy development.

                                       Table 8: Principal Activities of ADTAs
                                             (% of TAs in each country)
                                            Fiji                  Kyrgyz
Question                                 Islands       India     Republic            Philippines       Viet Nam     Average
Step in general reform program              80         100           93                  100              100         95
requiring further assistance?
Recommendations for policy reform?        100            89          92                    83               75          88
Recommendations about functioning           70           75          85                    78               89          79
of agency?
Seek to transfer skills to the agency?      68           44          85                    83               80          75
Any training of staff?                      80           50          91                    78               60          74
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Special evaluation study sample.

  69.    Given the frequency that they are addressed, it is clear that the core competencies of
  some ADB staff should involve policy reform, capacity building, and change management.
  However, few operational staff have senior level experience of directly managing change within
  an organization. Consequently, ADTAs in these areas are frequently formulated by ADB officers
  who lack the necessary experience. Based on the SES sample, it appears that sector directors
  seldom take steps to strengthen formulation by assigning staff or staff consultants with relevant
  experience to assist the mission leader in designing such ADTAs.

  X.         Quality Control
  70.     ADB's quality control systems for TA impose significant bureaucratic costs without
  providing effective quality control.

             1.       Departmental Management

  71.      Quality Control is Spread Too Widely with the Result that Responsibility for
  Quality is Not Clear and is Easy to Evade. The NBP provide a chart showing delegation of
  authority. Essentially, this identifies who is responsible for approving various operational
  activities. It does not show who is responsible and accountable for quality.29

  72.    The NBP make ADB officers responsible for TAs they formulate. That is clear so long as the
  mission leader remains involved for the duration of the TA. However, this occurred in only 43% of
  ADTAs and 58% of PPTAs. For a short-term instrument, the incidence of ADB staff change is high
  and has led to justifiable complaints from DMCs. The process for handover and transfer of
  accountability is not formalized. The successor simply inherits something he or she was not
  responsible for initiating. Recognition tends to end with the approval of the TA paper, not with
  successful completion of the intervention. There is no realistic assessment of the progress of the TA
  at handover and no adjustment to performance and development plans of ADB officers to identify
  29
       The presumption that the approving position would also be accountable for quality is invalidated by the fact that the
       President is responsible for many of the final approvals. He cannot be held accountable for the quality of TA papers.
26 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


the level of performance required to produce a "satisfactory" rating or better for the management of
the TA. Within the SES sample, there was a tendency for quality of supervision of ADTAs to decline
with a change in ADB staff. This was not evident with PPTAs, where the incentive of processing the
eventual loan was sufficient to stimulate interest in the success of the intervention.

73.     Another weakness in quality control is that there are no ADB-wide checklists to ensure
that common issues of importance have been addressed in TA formulation. The NBP do not
require this, and there are no staff instructions for TA formulation. Checklists would provide an
accountability trail that the ADB officer and director have fulfilled their responsibilities. PPMS
provides a management checklist for PPTAs, but the SES found no evidence that it is
consistently applied by any operations division. Some departments have experimented with
introducing their own checklists, but these have not been applied consistently and lack the
authority of an ADB-wide checklist.

74.    Departmental management sometimes abdicates responsibility for quality. There was an
example from the Kyrgyz Republic where the director and officer disagreed about the design of
a PPTA. Rather than being firm about what he believed to be right, the division director tried to
resolve the situation by requiring the TA paper to be reviewed by a staff review committee
(SRC) meeting.

75.     The SES did not make a systematic study of support provided by divisional management
to officers preparing TAs. However, it did identify three cases where no management or other
support was provided. It was apparent that some division directors took substantial interest in
the development of TA papers in their divisions while others did not. Personal relationships
often appear to have been a factor. In some cases, collaboration between a division director
and the officer concerned was good. Where this was more uncertain, and the officer had less
access to the director--which was likely to occur with junior staff--collaboration and assistance
were infrequent. Further evidence of difficulties in the director/staff relationship was provided by
the 2003 staff engagement survey,30 which found that only half of staff were satisfied with their
immediate manager. Good quality control relies on effective management of staff. If that is done
poorly, quality control suffers.

76.     Officers for TAs in the SES sample confirmed that the contribution of their departments to
quality control was disappointing. As Figure 3 indicates, 44% of ADB officers considered that
departmental processes of review of TA papers added little to no value. Attached TAs received
even less scrutiny than stand-alone ADTAs, as the focus of quality control was on the loan.




30
     Hewitt. 2003. Staff Engagement Survey. Manila: ADB.
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance   27



                       Figure 3: Value of Departmental Review of TA Paper
                                     Useful
                                      31%

                                                                           Little
                                                              Other        19%
                                                              44%          Nothing
                                                                             25%
                                      High
                                      15%
                                                Very high
                                                  10%
                                                                        Sample size: 52


                TA = advisory technical assistance.
                Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.



       2.     Peer Review

77.     Systematic Peer Review of TA Papers has Lapsed. The NBP envisaged that sector or
crosscutting committees would be responsible for peer review of draft TA papers. When these
committees were subsequently dismantled, their peer review function lapsed. Some regional
departments introduced their own approaches to peer review or quality control. These tended to
concentrate on loan projects even though TAs can be important in terms of positioning ADB for
future work. When Communities of Practice were established in 2006 to revive some of the
sector and crosscutting roles of the earlier committees, peer review was not included among
their responsibilities.

       3.     Interdepartmental Circulation

78.     Interdepartmental Circulation Added Little to No Value in Just Under Half of TAs.
The formal interdepartmental circulation process tends to be haphazard and limited to support
offices. There is no guarantee that the officer assigned to read a TA paper will have appropriate
background knowledge or treat this work seriously. Excellent work in commenting on TA papers
goes largely unrecognized in performance and development plans. As Figure 4 shows within the
SES sample, although project officers said interdepartmental circulation was useful in 54% of
TAs, in 46% of the cases they said it added little or no value to a TA paper.


                                Figure 4: Value of TA Paper Circulation



                                Useful                                      Little
                                 46%                                        21%
                                                              Other
                                                              46%
                                                                            Nothing
                                                                             25%

                                         High    Very high
                                         6%        2%
                                                                      Sample size: 48
                TA = advisory technical assistance.
                Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.
28 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


       4.      Staff Review Committee
79.     For TA, the Use of the Staff Review Committee is almost Defunct. Prior to the NBP,
the SRC chaired by the director general concerned was designed to be a key element in TA
quality control. However, the quality of the discussions and comments declined in terms of value
added. Thus, the NBP made it optional for departmental management to hold an SRC meeting.
In the SES sample, only 37% of TA papers had an SRC, and 67% of those were approved in
2002 or earlier. An analysis of PPIS data indicates that, by 2005, SRCs were held for only 15%
of TAs approved that year. Thus, in practice, the senior level scrutiny of TAs that resulted from
SRCs has effectively ceased for the large majority of TAs.

XI. Bunching
80.      There is Still Substantial Bunching of TA Approvals at Year-End. In 1996, ADB began
a drive to space TA approvals more evenly over the year. As Table 9 shows, this had some
success until 2002. Since then, the percentage of TAs submitted for approval in December
exceeded the apparently unsatisfactory baseline level of 1995. Over the SES study period, about
a quarter of TAs were approved in December. Given the large number of TAs approved in the
rush to the end of the year, it appears likely to OED that many do not receive sufficient attention
from either senior staff or Vice Presidents. The sheer numbers overwhelm the ability of senior
staff to provide a rigorous quality control function. The 1-year allocation of TAIPFs provides an
institutional incentive to have TAs approved by the end of the year--a "use it or lose it" incentive
system drives the TA approvals. A more flexible TAIPF allocation system, allowing some
carryover of the unutilized TAIPF into the next year, may help to address this issue.

            Table 9: Percentage of TAs Approved in December, 2000­2006a
             Year               ADTA and PPTA                RETA              Total
             1995                   27                         33                28
             2000                   29                         22                27
             2001                   21                         27                22
             2002                   28                         38                30
             2003                   36                         26                33
             2004                   44                         44                44
             2005                   27                         37                29
             2006                   23                         26                24
             ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical
             assistance, RETA = regional technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
             a
               Excludes supplementary TA approvals.
             Source: Asian Development Bank.


XII. Implementation Performance
       1.      Adherence to Design

81.      The TOR and Targeted Outcomes for ADTAs usually do not Provide a Reliable Guide
for What can Realistically be Achieved by the TA Consultants. The result of mismatches
between TA scope and resources, and vagueness in the TOR was that, in many cases, the TA
consultants were left to do what they could to make progress toward the TAs' broad set of aims up
to the inputs limits fixed by their contract. TA designs rarely made sufficient allowance for the speed
       Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                  29


that public sector change takes place in DMCs.31 Consequently, it was common for consultants'
inputs to come to an end long before government had decided whether to proceed with the
recommendations included in the final report of the ADTA.

82.    Although many TAs sought to transfer ideas and practices to DMCs, what was actually
implemented was rarely what could be termed a best practice model. Among TAs in the SES
sample--especially in the Philippines and the Kyrgyz Republic--the international consultants
often based their policy and other proposals on policies and practices they were familiar with,
often taken from their own home country. For example, in the Philippines, the consultants
preparing an urban services project proposed to use a community land trust model taken from
Boston, Massachusetts which was too sophisticated for the Philippines.32

83.       Another problem experienced with trying to transfer best practices was that it is difficult
for DMC governments and EAs to assess how effective a proposed policy or practice will be if
they have not seen it operating in practice. Study tours are an answer to this predicament.
Within the SES sample, where well-managed study tours were included, they were effective.
This occurred in a number of TAs in India. In the Kyrgyz Republic, a study tour to Spain helped
to introduce the department of water resources to the idea of water user associations. From this
visit, it also got the idea of reorganizing itself along watersheds.

84.     Consultants generally followed designs as closely as possible given the limitations of the
designs. Where they did not, it was usually because the design was too ambitious. In such
cases, they tended to concentrate on the priority tasks and address the lower priority tasks only
to the extent possible, given the resources. Such changes were rarely recorded and did not
result in formal changes in the scope of a TA or the TOR of the consultants. ADB officers
concerned report that there is a disincentive to seeking changes in the scope of a TA since it is
regarded as reflecting poorly on the quality of a design and performance of the project officer.

85.     ADB was rarely willing to provide supplementary TA to correct for mismatches between
TA scope and resources. Analysis of TA approvals indicates that only 3.5% of TAs approved in
1969­2006 had supplementary TA approved. For some TAs within the SES sample, ADB was
unwilling to spend the full approved amount of the TA even though there were further tasks for
which the remaining funds were needed.

        2.       Schedule

86.     The TA Closing Dates Stipulated in the TA Paper are Flexible and are Often not
Adhered to. The closing date of a large number of TAs required extension from the target date
stipulated in the TA paper.33 Of 994 TAs financially closed from 2004 to 2006, 402 (40%) were
either completed before or within a year of the original completion date stipulated in the TA paper.
The rest were completed over an average period of about 2.4 years. Given that the remuneration
schedules of consultants are based on these timetables, there are strong incentives for consultants
to report on time. Similarly, closure of accounts required further extension of completion dates. Only
139 (14%) of the 994 TAs were financially closed within a year of the target completion date in the

31
   For example, in India, a public information dissemination specialist was given 2 months to develop a plan to
   disseminate information, build support for a fiscal consolidation program, and to assess the required capacity
   building for an effective information dissemination program. Support for a fiscal consolidation program generally
   cannot be built so quickly.
32
   ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for Preparing the Metro Manila Urban Services
   for the Poor Project. Manila (TA 3760-PHI, for $1 million, approved on 5 November).
33
   The original TA completion date and account closing date as stipulated in TA papers are largely the same.
30 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


TA paper. The balance were financially completed over an average period of 2.8 years. On average,
TAs remain open about 10 months after physical completion. Remaining TA resources are often
used for "associated" activities to further the achievement of goal or purpose.

          3.       Process
87.     TA Papers Often Neglect the Question of Effective Process to Achieve Sustainable
Results. To contribute to an effective process to bring about changes, the proposals for change
developed under an ADTA need to be accepted and implemented by the client. This often requires
approval of legislation or regulations and building up agency capacity to perform key activities. Each
of the steps involved in obtaining approval and initiating implementation needs to be incorporated
within an overall change management program. Many ADTAs in the SES sample were not
conceived within this kind of process framework, and this limited their contribution. However, there
were also some notable success stories. Box 3 presents an example where limited inputs from an
ADB RETA enabled implementation of a significant change management program in Bangalore,
which had marked impacts on public health and the overall "liveability" of the city.

                            Box 3: Good Practice in Urban Change Management
Background. A regional technical assistance (TA) set out to introduce benchmarking and process reengineering in 10
Asian cities. Each city selected its priorities for reengineering and established a small task force to map the relevant
processes and make recommendations for changes. They were then supported by international consultants working
directly with the task forces for intermittent periods and providing remote support through e-mail.
The Approach. Bangalore was one of the 10 cities. It selected taxation and public health as its priorities. It began the
change process by establishing two working groups to study existing processes and identify opportunities for
improvement. In 1999, the heads of the municipal public health and taxation departments visited Australia on a study
tour and training program. They examined rates assessment and collection methods, and solid waste management.
The TA consultants provided inputs to the change program as requested by the two heads and made short visits to
Bangalore. The resulting proposals for change were accepted by the municipal authorities:
  (i) In 2000, the state government set up the Bangalore Agenda Task Force, a public-private partnership with the
        private sector bringing capital, knowledge, materials, and training capacity. It monitored the solid waste
        management improvement program and provided ideas for the improvement of the city. It became responsible
        for organizing the training of municipal officials.
  (ii) The Bangalore public health team began by determining the extent of the problem--a critical initial step in
        change management. The whole of Bangalore was mapped and surveyed for solid waste management.
        Officials were then able to calculate the staff needed in terms of sweepers/collectors, the amount of waste likely
        to be generated, and the number of trucks needed for each area. Garbage collection in some wards was
        outsourced to private contractors to introduce competition for the municipal work groups.
  (iii) State government legislation was passed to change property tax to a self-assessment basis. This raised an
        extra $24 million in the first year--more than enough to fund all the changes in garbage collection.
  (iv) The public health department established a charter with service standards and a telephone complaints center.
        In poor areas, street volunteers reported to the center if the garbage service did not come. Health inspectors
        were given two-way radios so the center could have them deal with a complaint on the day they were made.
  (v) Health officials held rallies and meetings with resident groups, local leaders, and volunteer organizations to
        explain the new system, a key element being to separate organic and recyclable waste. Street plays were
        developed, targeted at schoolchildren and the illiterate.
  (vi) The City Corporation passed an ordinance forbidding people from dumping their garbage and establishing on-
        the-spot fines for illegal dumping. It also imposed a fee for garbage collection, attached to the property tax.
  (vii) Collection and incineration of toxic and medical waste was outsourced and paid for by those making the waste.
Outcomes. The streets of Bangalore are now largely garbage free. The program's most notable outcomes included
an estimated 50% decline in gastro-enteric diseases in poor areas; improved attendance of slum children at school
because of decreases in enteric and skin diseases and fevers; and improved status of wards based on a basket of
indicators including complaints, communicable diseases, and the number of dumps.
________________________
a
    ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance to the Philippines for Microfinance for Rural Development. Manila (TA 3814-PHI,
    for $560,000, approved on 19 December).
          Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance     31


XIII. Consulting Services
88.     ADB Could do More to Improve Relationships with Consultants to Optimize Value
Added. ADB outsources its TA to consultants who, therefore, play a crucial role in the
performance of TA. They also contribute to ADB's reputation and the comparative advantage it
enjoys through TA. Based on the SES sample, consultants performed satisfactorily. About 90%
of the EAs and 87% of ADB officers said the consultants enhanced ADB's reputation. Whether
they did so with distinction would require more detailed investigation. The relationship between
ADB and the consultants is not straightforward. ADB in effect acts as the broker and paymaster
between the DMC EA client and the consultant service provider. This relationship has proved
confusing for consultants as, in 30% of ADTAs and 77% of PPTAs covered by the SES, they
regarded ADB as the client and not the EA.

89.     There are few incentives for consulting firms to engage or develop permanent staff to
supply the work which ADB and its DMC clients demand. COSO has attempted to introduce the
use of framework contracts to foster longer-term relationships with consultant firms but, to date,
this idea has not yet been approved by the Board. In many cases, this situation means that ADB
is outsourcing work to firms which are themselves outsourcing the work to nonpermanent
members of staff. This creates a long command chain between the DMC client and the
outsourced consultant, and raises issues of effective supervision and quality control.

           1.       Recruitment of Consultants

90.      Consultant Recruitment Places Too Much Weight on Short-Term Financial Savings
for ADB Rather than the Long-Term Development Benefit for the DMC Client. As more DMCs
become middle-income countries, their requirements for ADTA are changing. DMCs need exposure
to international best practice in terms of policy, administrative efficiency, and effectiveness. Among
the leading sources are management consulting firms in the developed world or companies
specializing in some technical field like engineering, education, or health services. Generally, other
than for some of the technical fields like engineering, ADB cannot directly access this market as fee
rates are often too low. Major management consulting firms have reacted to these rates by bidding
for work through their local franchises, which is probably beneficial for the development of in-country
consulting capabilities but raises a number of questions. These include whether the franchisees
have (i) the same capacity as their parent firms in exercising technical quality control, (ii) a capacity
to supplement local skills with any necessary specialized international best practice skills, and (iii) a
capacity to staff teams from their own employees and produce better integrated teams compared
with consultant companies that staff teams from independent consultants recruited from their
databases. In the 24 ADTAs studied in the finance sector, only three used the consulting services of
one of the big accounting firms. 34 COSO conducts 20­30 seminars each year in both donor
countries and DMCs on procurement and consulting service opportunities, policies, and procedures.
The primary audiences at these events are consulting firms. COSO also meets many consultant
delegations at ADB Headquarters.

91.    In the SES sample, 29% of EAs expressed dissatisfaction with the process for selecting
ADTA consultants and 24% with PPTAs. While these were a minority among EAs, they were a
substantial number and should be a cause for concern for ADB. Many EAs were dissatisfied



34
     The quality of consultant work in these three cases was excellent.
32 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


with being excluded from the process of consultant selection35--particularly those in India and
Viet Nam (other recent OED evaluations found similar dissatisfaction in the PRC). In response
to these issues, COSO carried out a pilot study in 2004 where EAs were delegated
responsibility for consultant selection for 20 TAs (including 5 in the PRC), subject to adherence
to ADB guidelines and procedures. The pilot appears to have only worked well in the PRC,
where selection for all three pilot PPTAs was completed in 2004. Of the two ADTAs, one was
completed in 2005 but one is still outstanding. As a result of this study, COSO has included a
note in the revised guidelines which states "In order to increase ownership of TA projects and
improve sustainability of project benefits, ADB may, in particular circumstances, delegate
responsibility to a borrower ("delegated TA") to recruit and supervise TA consultants." It is to be
hoped that, following the pilot, more responsibility and accountability for the recruitment process
will also be delegated to EAs.

92.     The EAs also complained about too much use of international consultants and too little
use of national consultants, and that the recruitment process did not attract the best national
consultants. In 39% of ADTAs in the SES sample, the consultants said that quality- and cost-
based selection (QCBS) restricted the quality of experts they recruited. In 36% of PPTAs, ADB
fee rates restricted the quality of national consultants recruited.

93.      There has been no systematic study of how effective QCBS has been in relation to the
actual performance of TAs. However, a QCBS review by COSO in 2005 36 (with a sample of
274 contracts) revealed that 80% of QCBS contracts during the review period were awarded to firms
whose technical proposals were ranked first. Of the remaining 20%, the majority were technically
ranked second with a close margin to those ranked first. ADB does not attribute the additional costs
of rectifying poor PPTA studies to the overall project cost, but according to project officers they can
be significant. 37 It also does not assess the cost to ADB of a failed TA--other than that the
investment was nonproductive. Consequently, it is not possible to determine the extent to which
QCBS produces true cost savings, if at all. Supervision becomes a critically important function when
less competent consultants are employed. Good consultants need less supervision.

94.     Based on a small number of cost accounts examined by the SES, consulting firms' profit
margins on ADB TA work are often slim, making the work less attractive commercially. Low
margins lead to lower quality because firms have no margin to reinvest in areas like research
and development, or improved quality control systems. It also leaves little budget for exercising
quality control. The SES found, for example, a surprising number of team leaders proved
unsatisfactory and had to be replaced. On only one occasion--where a TA in the Philippines
was being supervised by the local office of the British Council--was the team leader replaced
before being requested by ADB or the EA.

95.    ADB contracts individual experts working for a consultant company to provide a given
number of days of inputs rather than asking consulting firms to produce the required outputs for
a given price. This practice is often inefficient and erodes firms' profit margins. Consulting firms
have to use highly priced specialists inefficiently on mundane tasks like collecting and collating

35
   At the Conference on Water Financing Program 2006­2010 held from 26 to 28 September 2006, the Viet Nam
   delegation said there was a need for greater ownership on the part of EAs and closer interaction between
   consultants and EAs. The Pakistan delegation said there should be stronger accountability linkages between
   consultants and EAs.
36
   Board Information Note: QCBS: Update, 29 June 2005.
37
   In one case in India, QCBS led to selection of a firm that was not ranked first for technical quality. The SES rated
   the performance of this TA as poor. Extensive additional ADB missions were required to correct poor work done by
   the consultants, and the associated costs almost certainly exceeded the original cost differential in the bids.
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance     33


data rather than using national consultants or more junior staff to perform such tasks under their
direction, and bringing in the specialists for client management and the high-level work of
analysis and formulation of issues and recommendations.

96.     ADB does not do enough to encourage the development of national consultant industries
and provides few incentives for national consultants to invest in their own development.
Exceptions are the seminars which are held in DMCs on developing national consultants, and
three TAs to the PRC on developing the national consulting industry. Unfortunately, the TA in the
PRC is currently stalled, awaiting relevant approvals. This could take a long time as there are
communication difficulties between the two key agencies involved. National consultants are
frequently employed on the basis of time inputs rather than on the basis of producing outputs (or
outcomes). Consequently, they are given an incentive to extend the amount of time rather than
complete the work. In the Kyrgyz Republic and the Philippines, there were some complaints from
EAs of national consultants being absent from the assignment (e.g., trying to manage two
assignments at the same time). This can also be attributed to non-output based employment
conditions.

97.    There is often little incentive for international consultants to develop the local consultants
they engage. Under QCBS, the latter could be potential competitors. Standards of local
consultants in many DMCs need to be improved. Organizations establishing professional
standards and running courses to improve and update competencies could make a major
contribution. ADB does little to foster the development of such institutions.

98.      ADB's Contract Administration Pays Too Much Attention to Minor Details. Nearly
half (43%) of consultants experienced problems with the administration of their contracts. This
meant they had to devote time to resolving administrative issues, further eroding their margins.
The most frequently mentioned issues were (i) delays in processing contract variations; and
(ii) delays in payments--with final payments taking up to 18 months for some TAs in the SES
sample, even though the delays were over something fairly minor.

       2.      Performance of Consultants

99.      Most Consultants Performance was Rated as "Satisfactory", but Too Many Were Not.
In general, EAs expressed satisfaction with the performance of TA consultants. As shown in Figure
5, 83% rated performance as "satisfactory" or better. ADB officers had a similar view. There was,
however, variation in satisfaction levels between the DMCs in the sample. In particular, EAs
considered 24% of PPTA consultants "unsatisfactory" in India and 33% in the Kyrgyz Republic. As
India is one of ADB's largest borrowers, this level of dissatisfaction is a cause for concern.
34 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                                   Figure 5: Views on Consultants Performance

                             Agency View                                         ADB View
                 Not
             Satisfactory                             Very
                17%                                Satisfactory       Not
                                                      32%         Satisfactory
                                                                     16%

                                                                                                   Very
                                                                                                Satisfactory
                                                                                                   51%
                                                                  Satisfactory
                                                                      33%
              Satisfactory
                  51%
     ADB = Asian Development Bank.
     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.



100. One particular issue of concern, which reflects on recruitment, was the disappointing
performance of some team leaders. An unsatisfactory team leader results in the TA beginning
poorly; credibility with the client being jeopardized; a hiatus in implementation; poor use of
remaining contracted inputs during the period when a replacement is sought; and, frequently,
the new team leader having too little time to get the TA back on track. Unsatisfactory team
leadership was at its worst in the Philippines, where 30% of team leaders had to be replaced. In
each of the other DMCs in the sample, one or two had to be replaced.

101. Unsatisfactory team leadership is limited to the kind of consulting firms selected. Many
companies do not assemble teams from their own staff, in which case there would have been a
progression of staff from team membership to team leadership, and from small TAs to large,
complex TAs. If team members come from within the firm, they have a shared organizational
culture, and regard themselves as answerable to the team leader. When consultant companies
assemble their teams from databases, they often do not look sufficiently into the track record of
the consultants, and rely on the marketability of their resumes. Consultants recruited to teams in
these circumstances usually do not share a common organizational culture. Often, they do not
regard themselves as members of a team but as individual technical consultants responsible for
meeting individual TOR. Although ADB's scoring system for rating consultant proposals gives
extra points if team leaders are members of the firm, this has not been enough to counter the
trend toward assembling teams from databases.

102. The consequences of poor team leadership were often severe. Two examples from the
Philippines are indicative. In a solid waste management TA,38 team members could not agree
how to approach the complex activities required by the TOR. The team leader was unable to get
them to work together. Although the team leader was replaced, the TA performed poorly and the
EA was disappointed with the work. In a TA to develop poor urban communities,39 weak team
leadership resulted in each member of the consulting team following his TOR without any
attempt to integrate their work to produce a coherent TA design. A further TA was required to
integrate all these inputs, and design an investment project.



38
   ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for: Metro Manila Solid Waste Management.
   Manila (TA 3848-PHI, for $1.25 million, approved on 18 March).
39
   ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for Preparing the Development of Poor Urban
   Communities Project. Manila (TA 3291-PHI, for $850,000 approved on 10 November).
           Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                  35


103. As Figure 6 indicates, EAs found consultants at least "satisfactory" in communicating best
practice in 84% of cases. However, 16% of EAs rated consultants poorly at presenting best practice,
rising to 22% in India and 25% in the Philippines. This is an area in need of improvement.


                               Figure 6: Agency View of Communication of Consultants

       Communicating Best Practice -                              Communication of Consultants -
       Agency View                                                Agency View
                                                NotNot
                                             Satisfactory
                                            Satisfactory                                                 Not
                                                   16%
                                               16%                                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                                   Not Satis-
                                                                    Satisfactory
                                                                   Satisfactory                          12%
                                                                       51%
                                                                      51%                           factory
        Satisfactory                                                                                 12%
          Satisfactory
           59%
              59%                                       V.
                                                       Very
                                                   Satisfactory
                                                   Satisfactory
                                                      25%
                                                       25%                                         V. Satis-
                                                                                                         Very
                                                                                                     Satisfactory
                                                                                                    factory
                                                                                                     37%37%
                                        Sample sizes: 95, 69
     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.


104. ADB does not make full use of the potential contribution of national consultants to client
relations and to the continuity and influence of the TA. The lower fee rates of national
consultants provide an opportunity to extend the duration of a TA. This is important in change
management and policy reform programs. In India, changes are extensively debated and only
advance after slow and careful consideration. Having a national consultant continuing to work
on a TA enables the work to remain active and advice to be provided, as well as presenting the
opportunity for the national consultant to act as a conduit to the international consultants
engaged for the TA. If inputs of international consultants are provided on an intermittent basis,
the EA and national consultants can have access to their experience over a longer elapsed
period. National consultants understand local issues better than international ones, and are
better equipped to present draft policies in an appropriate way for government or ministers to
make a decision, and to conduct consultations with stakeholders.40

             3.          Consultants and the Client

105. The Consultant Often does not Regard the EA as the Principal Client for the TA.
ADB contracts consultants to work in an EA, sets the TOR, provides supervision and monitors
progress, and determines when payment is warranted. This causes ambiguity for consultants
over who is the effective client, as shown in Figure 7. In 30% of ADTAs and 77% of PPTAs, the
consultants considered ADB was the client. Such a high focus on pleasing ADB first rather than
the EA is likely to erode the EA's confidence that the TA is to help it address some development
or organizational priority of its own or to formulate a project that it fully endorses. (para. 88)




40
     National consultants should not be used if they lack the expertise needed. One example was an anti-money
     laundering TA in the Philippines where there is no resident expertise. The requirement for national consultants in
     this ADTA meant that a firm of lawyers was contracted, but provided no useful inputs. International consultants
     should have been specified.
36 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance



                         Figure 7: Who is the Effective Client of the TA Consultant?




         ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance,
         PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
         Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.


106.   There are two important issues concerning the clear identification of an effective client:
       (i)   Commitment is likely to be reinforced if an agency is the client and plays the major
             role in the identification, specification, and management of TA. This does not
             necessarily occur: (a) 13% of EAs did not believe there was adequate consultation
             to develop the TOR for ADTAs, (b) 18% of EAs did not consider that the ADB fact-
             finding teams had adequately evaluated the resources required for an ADTA, and
             (c) 29% of EAs expressed dissatisfaction with the process for appointing
             consultants for ADTAs.
       (ii)  Where change is an objective of an ADTA, either in the context of policy reform or
             in the way in which an agency is managed, keeping the client in agreement with
             findings, analysis, and proposals is a very important aspect of successful
             consultancy. Timing is a particularly important constituent of client persuasion,
             and that requires a close working relationship between the consultant and
             decision makers. Timing can be frustrated if the consultant first has to clear issues
             with ADB before taking them to the decision makers. Access to decision makers
             can also be compromised by ADB locating reporting relationships at the wrong
             level of an EA. This sometimes occurs because of ADB's overreliance on the
             persuasiveness of final reports and its belief that decision makers are more likely
             to be influenced by the written word than verbal persuasion. Management
             consultancy is most successful when it draws the client along in agreement with
             the progress from early findings to recommendations.

107. In ADTAs directed at complex government reform, the question of the effective client
becomes more confused but equally critical. ADTAs, in their design, often do not identify all the
important stakeholders in a reform issue. This is sometimes a critical omission, especially in
DMCs with consensus approaches to decision making. An example of the potential threats to full
effectiveness can be taken from ADB's work in capital market reforms in India. ADTAs generally
supported organizations, which was to be the focus of a particular reform program. Most of these
organizations were also subject to regulatory oversight that was important for the reform program.
This was provided by the Reserve Bank of India and the Securities Exchange Board of India. In
ADTAs, the former was rarely engaged as a client by consultants while the latter was prominent in
         Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance            37


one ADTA directed at reforming the mutual funds industry.41 The effectiveness of a number of TAs
would have been improved had more attention been paid to these regulatory authorities,
particularly involving them in the process of formulating proposals for reform.

108. Client management by the consultant is a major requirement of change management and
policy reform consulting assignments in developed countries, and should be equally important in
DMCs. Making sure the client supports proposed changes as the solutions emerge, and supports
the way in which they are to be implemented, is an important aspect of change management. It is
especially important when the TA is managed from Manila, since the ADB officer only makes two
or three short visits, with no guarantee that these will be times at opportune for progressing the
proposed changes. Client management is time-consuming and requires a close relationship
between consultant team leader and agency head, but TAs usually budget little time for it.

XIV. Executing Agency
109. Executing Agencies do not Always Engage Fully in the Implementation of TA. A
key success factor for sustainable change is that consultants are available for long enough to
train and coach agency staff to manage the changes introduced. In some cases, the most
effective approach is for the consultants to report to the task force steering the change
proposals. This was the case in the reform of tax administration in India described in Box 4. For
PPTAs, the consultants should help train EA teams in designing projects for themselves.
However, for this to be possible, EAs must make counterparts available and appropriate funding
must be provided in the TA budget. In the SES sample, the provision of a full-time counterpart
team was not the norm. Usually, counterparts were allocated on a part-time basis to assist a
project team only as required. Counterpart personnel allocated were insufficient to form a team.
Their major task remained their normal duties in the agency. They tended to assist the
consultant team with the identification and retrieval of information necessary to the work of the
TA. EAs considered that full-time counterparts were provided to 54% of TAs, while consultants
considered that this occurred in 31% of TAs.




41
     ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to India for Reform of the Mutual Funds Industry. Manila (TA 4010-IND, for
     $800,000, approved on 4 December).
38 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


              Box 4: Good Practice in Change Management in Tax Administration in India
The Task. The objective of the technical assistance (TA) was to strengthen tax administration. The definition of tasks
was flexible, changing in line with the Ministry of Finance's (MOF's) perception of changing priorities. These mainly
focused on (i) strengthening risk assessment-based scrutiny/audit capacity in the Central Board of Direct Taxes
(CBDT) and the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC); (ii) expanding the tax base by strengthening service
tax administration in CBEC; (iii) undertaking business process reengineering of critical functions and institutional
strengthening; (iv) improving the quality of taxpayer services offered by CBDT and CBEC; (v) building capacity in
CBDT in the emerging areas of international taxation and transfer pricing in order to facilitate foreign investment and
enhance revenue mobilization; and (vi) helping to improve the capacity of the National Academy of Direct Taxes and
the National Academy of Customs, Excise and Narcotics.
Background. A task force had reported to MOF on direct and indirect taxes, identifying improvements to be made to
tax administration. From 1997 to 2004, the Canadian International Development Agency provided expertise to assist
the Department of Revenue (DOR) in modernizing tax administration. Several initiatives were undertaken, such as
reorganization of business processes of CBDT and CBEC, preparation of a new audit manual for indirect tax, and
design of charters setting out the values and service standards of the two boards. MOF preferred to seek the
assistance of multilateral agencies for the next stage, as they were expected to have access to international best
practice rather than best practice in a bilateral country of the donor only.
The Approach. Eight working groups were established, each reporting to a steering committee chaired by the
Secretary, DOR. The groups requiring consultancy assistance drafted terms of reference that were endorsed by the
Secretary. The group then identified the consultant with whom they wanted to work. Contracts were made with each
consultant based on home office work and three short-term assignments in India.
The sequencing of the work took into account the needs of the two boards. The first part of the TA focused on
preparation of manuals to standardize the work processes of the two boards, and reorganization of some directorates.
The second phase focused on strengthening training and taxpayer services. Between November and early April,
senior staff of the two boards are usually busy with preparing the union budget. To ensure that TA work was not
adversely affected, care was taken to ensure there were officers in the TA working groups who were not directly
involved in the budget process.
Training was to be institutionalized in two training institutions. This will need support, possibly through another
advisory TA .
The change process has been driven by each of the two boards, with assistance from internationally reputed
consultants. Recommendations for change were made by each working group on a continuous basis, which is
consistent with process reengineering best practice, and implemented immediately when they were accepted. For
example, a number of noncore functions such as the allocation of a taxpayer's identification number were outsourced;
the discretion-based scrutiny of taxation returns was replaced by a computer-generated system that randomly
examines 2% of tax returns; the number of customs clearance procedures was reduced by 67%; and a risk
management assessment system was introduced in both boards.
Client Management. The TA was managed from ADB India Resident Mission by a national officer. He developed
regular contacts with all the main drivers of the program including the Finance Minister's office, senior management in
MOF, and with each working group, as well as briefing and debriefing consultants appointed to assist. ADB's own
commitment to the process is reinforced by the officer, whenever possible, attending working group meetings.
________________________
a
  ADB. 2003. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building for Tax Administration. Manila (TA 4267-IND, for $1
  million, approved on 16 December).
Sources: Evaluation case studies.




110. Weaknesses in the way consultants are used also hinder institutionalizing improvements
in EAs. First, consultants rarely work with teams established by an agency to be responsible for
driving the changes required by the EA. Second, TAs often do not allow enough time to transfer
skills to EA staff. The tighter the TA time requirements, the greater the incentive for consultants
to complete an assignment themselves rather than embark on the time-consuming approach of
       Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                 39


coaching counterparts to do the work.42 Third, TA designs tend to focus on report production
and give less emphasis to the more difficult task of supporting EA personnel to do the work of
change management or policy reform themselves. The typical TA is concluded by the
acceptance by ADB of a draft final report in English prepared by the consultants, which usually
presents an in-depth review of the issues which were addressed, and proposes a number of
recommendations. The alternative of a less well-written report by an EA team in the language of
the DMC or draft policy proposals being presented to the government rarely seems to be
considered acceptable by ADB.

XV. ADB Supervision
        1.       Staff Inputs

111. ADB does not keep statistics on staff inputs for TA supervision. OED'S 2006 Report on
Loan and TA Portfolio Performance commented that only 18% of ongoing TAs had review
missions in 2005 and only 30% had inception missions. Although this data excludes TA
supervision undertaken while ADB officers were on other missions to the country concerned or
support provided by staff in resident missions, the basic message that ADB is providing too few
staff resources for TA supervision is endorsed by the findings of the present evaluation
regarding supervision of TAs in the SES sample.

112. The Philippines presents an interesting exception. Here, most TAs were implemented in
Manila, where ADB Headquarters is located. ADB officers had frequent and direct contact with
the consultants contracted as well as with the EA to ensure smooth progress of the TA.
Relationships were generally excellent. The close relationship also resulted in the ADB staff
concerned being able to respond more quickly when problems occurred. Other OED studies
(e.g., country assistance program evaluations for Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
and Uzbekistan) found that DMCs believed that the supervision of TAs processed by, or
delegated to, the resident mission was better, on average, than TAs administered from Manila.

        2.       Experience and Expertise Mix

113. Project Officers are Valued by EAs for their Competence. EAs for TAs in the SES
sample were generally satisfied with the competence of ADB officers they dealt with. All EAs
and consultants rated ADB officer competence at least "satisfactory". EAs also rated the quality
of ADB supervision as "satisfactory" or better in 86% of TAs, as shown in Figure 8. Consultants
rated supervision similarly. ADB's responsiveness was also rated "satisfactory" or better in 85%
of cases by EAs and in 90% of cases by consultants. These positive findings seem somewhat at
odds with the limited number of TA supervision missions, even allowing for supervision by
email. 43 Nevertheless, the 15% of negative ratings may still be cause for concern, since if
departmental management was managing its DMC client effectively, there should be a
mechanism for EAs to deal directly with the director if they are unhappy with an officer, so that
responsiveness should be close to 100%.



42
   In the case of collaboration between counterparts and consultants, interviews with EA personnel were at variance
   with the information collected in the questionnaires. Interviews indicated that counterparts generally played a
   subsidiary role. Data collected from questionnaires showed that consultants helped the agency perform the
   required work in 65% of the cases.
43
   For reasons of self-interest, there may have been an upward bias in how EAs and consultants rated ADB staff.
40 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                  Figure 8: Perceptions of ADB Supervision and Responsiveness




     ADB = Asian Development Bank.
     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.



114. Discussions with EAs suggested that officers who lacked experience had greater
difficulty solving problems during implementation. For example, the EA for a TA on natural gas
development in the Philippines said that the officer had insufficient experience to be able to
resolve disagreements over technical issues between the EA and the consultants. ADB does
not provide staff with training in TA supervision. There is also no established methodology for
TA supervision, other than a provision in the NBP for a certain number of supervision missions
to be conducted for each TA. ADB staff consequently developed a multitude of approaches to
supervision, not all of which are effective.

       3.        Client Management by ADB

115. ADB Neglects Client Management for TA. Effective client management has numerous
advantages. It (i) signals to the client or customer his or her importance to ADB; (ii) enables ADB
to position itself effectively for future work; (iii) guarantees quality of service with the client,
knowing who to contact when there are important issues to discuss; (iv) provides opportunities for
ADB to influence directions the client might take in the way in which it conducts its operations; and
(v) improves the likelihood of TA achieving its desired outcomes. Based on the SES sample, the
overall impression was that ADB does not always treat client management seriously enough. In
some cases, ADB's contact with the EA for a TA was so infrequent that the EA did not find it
useful to ask ADB for help when problems arose. ADB was sometimes represented by officers
whose expertise was not suited to the TA in question, or who lacked credibility at the level they
were required to interact (e.g., a junior officer trying to offer advice to a permanent secretary in
India). This is harmful to ADB's reputation and standing as a development partner.

116. A common problem for client management was the frequent turnover of project officers.
The project officer was changed during the course of implementation for 52% of ADTAs.
Frequent changes give the appearance that a TA and, consequently, a client, are not high
priorities for ADB. This was often exacerbated because, in many cases, there was no process of
         Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance         41


informing the EA in advance and no formal handover from the outgoing to the incoming officer.
There were cases when it took ADB more than 3 months to assign the new staff.

117. Two very successful sequences of TA in the finance sector show why continuity of ADB
staff concerned is so important. In India, an ADTA on secured transactions reform developed
from a RETA that had examined the subject in broad terms in five countries, including India.45
The RETA and the ADTA were developed by the same ADB officer. It was then established in
another ADTA that secured transactions were a major reason for bottlenecks in the courts
system linking the first TA to one in court administration and, potentially to a proposed loan. In
the Kyrgyz Republic, the financial sector reform program is being managed through a
combination of ADTAs, RETAs, and program loans. This strategically important program
benefited from the officer remaining with the division responsible for an extended period.

118. Customer satisfaction levels and how an organization compares with its competitors are
important ways of assessing how well an organization is performing. A useful indicator is how well
ADB is rated in comparison with other funding agencies. Figure 9 shows that ADB is regarded as
"better than most" or "the best" in 63% of cases. However, it was only rated "the best" in 14% of
cases. In India, for example, only the National Highways Authority of India regarded ADB as "the
best." While clients are not dissatisfied, ADB should be aiming for higher client satisfaction than this.


                                       FigureA8.9:
                                      Figure       Agency
                                              9: Agency      ofof
                                                          View
                                                        View      ADB
                                                                ADB
                                                    The Worst
                                                       1%
                                      The Best                  Worse than Most
                                        14%                          0%


                                                                          Average
                                                                           36%




                                Better than Most
                                      49%
                  ADB = Asian Development Bank.                                   Sample size: 86
                  Source: Operations Evaluation Mission estimate.



119. About 14% of funds allocated to ADTAs in the SES sample remained unspent. The failure
to spend all the funds approved for a TA was a contentious issue among EAs in the SES sample.
EAs said ADB did not inform them about the status of expenditure and commitments against TA
budget. This hindered their ability to use all the TA resources. Some TAs had unspent balances
that could have been used to significantly increase TA impact--for example, by providing support
for initiating implementation of the changes proposed in the TA report. While EAs viewed many
TAs as a step in a broader reform program, ADB's failure to spend the full TA allocations
suggested it did not. However, the cancellation of TA may be for valid reasons: (i) the job is
finished, (ii) the TA is not producing results, (iii) the TA budget is allocated for specific TAs and is
45
     ADB. 1998. Technical Assistance for Secured Transactions Law Reform. Manila (TA 5773-REG, for $300,000,
     approved on 6 January).
42 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


not available for ad hoc transfer, and (iv) the funds could be better used through cancellation and
recycling into the overall TA budget. In all cases, there is a need for a rigorous assessment of the
pros and cons of canceling vs. extending the TA, e.g., whether surplus funds could be used for
increasing the impact of TA by supporting implementation. One possible option for addressing the
TA bunching problem would be a TAIPF allocation system that would permit some carryover of
funds to the following year or a 3-year TAIPF identified in a CSP.

XVI. Outputs and Outcomes of Technical Assistance
       1.      Introduction

120. This section examines the outputs and outcomes of the TAs in the SES sample
compared with the outputs and outcomes expected in the respective TA papers. Assessing TA
outcomes was made more difficult by the poor quality of many of the DMFs. Sometimes, the
outputs and outcomes stated in the DMF were misleading as (i) outcomes were used for
impacts, outputs for outcomes, and sometimes inputs for outputs; and (ii) indicators/targets
were often vague or difficult to measure. Generally, the DMFs did not provide a sound basis
against which to evaluate the success, or lack thereof, of TA achievements. In some cases,
therefore, the SES had to restate the outputs or outcomes based on the intentions described in
the narrative of the TA paper. There were cases where not all the stated outputs or outcomes
were achieved, but where this was due to the DMF being overly elaborate, and not because of
inadequate TA performance. In such cases, the SES used the outputs or outcomes that were of
central importance to TA success as the basis for evaluation.

121. One situation the SES could not correct for was when weaknesses in selection and design
led to a less than appropriate TA intervention that targeted a set of outputs and outcomes that
were unlikely to produce a lasting solution to the problem. This reflects the problem that ADB
defines success as the completion of the consultant's report. There is little follow-up from ADB
and no funds for consultant assistance to help implement the recommendations. In such cases,
TAs sometimes achieved their stated outputs but their real contribution was low. Consequently,
the assessment of outputs and outcomes in some cases may overstate true TA performance.

       2.      Achievement of Outputs

122. TAs were "Generally Successful" at Producing Outputs. Within the SES sample,
59% of PPTAs satisfactorily provided the expected outputs, and a further 11% exceeded them.
It is reasonable to infer that 70% of PPTAs achieved their outputs sufficiently for a loan project
to be processed without requiring unnecessary extra work by ADB. ADTAs were also "generally
successful" at producing outputs, with 49% providing the expected outputs, and a further 23%
exceeding them. Figure 10 shows that more than 90% of ADTAs produced suitable proposals
for policy reform and that 37% produced proposals that were acted upon fully--which is
surprisingly high given the difficulties of introducing policy reforms. This is testimony to the
general quality of advice provided by consultants.
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance   43



                   Figure 10: Performance of Recommendations for Policy Reform




   Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.




123. As Figure 11 shows, where recommendations were made to improve the functioning of
an EA, in 37% of the TAs they were acted upon substantially and in a further 54% they were
partially acted upon. However, 59% of EAs found the recommendations were not easy to
implement, suggesting that more time was needed to convert recommendations into a form that
can be more readily implemented. It also indicates that more consideration might have been
given to assisting governments and EAs to achieve the consensus required through workshops
and other mechanisms, especially where several agencies were involved.

           Figure 11: Whether Recommendations to Improve Functioning of Agency
                                    were Acted Upon




   Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.


124. Skills transfer produced more modest results (Figure 12). While most EAs were satisfied
with the approach, in only 22% of cases did this lead to marked improvement in performance of
staff trained. Training financed under ADTAs is typically delivered by the consultants
responsible for the technical tasks. It is optimistic to assume that they can deliver training
effectively. Few technical specialists are trained as trainers. Their broad range of experience in
similar situations makes them ideal to play a supporting role to the professional trainer, but
training should be provided by professionals--ideally from the DMC concerned so that language
of instruction ceases to be a constraint. This is an observation made in previous OED
evaluations, but it remains incompletely addressed in TA design.
44 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance




                                          Figure 12: Impact of Skills Transfer



             Not                                           Very                No                  Marked
         satisfactory                                  satisfactory       improvement            improvement
             14%                                           30%                8%                     22%




                                                                         Some
           Satisfactory
                                                                      improvement
              56%
                                                                          70%
     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission estimate.



125. TAs in the SES sample generally did not institutionalize training. The exception was a
TA for tax administration reform in India where the tax administration had its own training
institutions. Where training is institutionalized in a local academic institution or in the training
units of agencies that possess such units, it can be continued after the consultants leave and
directed at new entrants into the agency, thus addressing the constraint of staff turnover. There
are a number of longer-term disadvantages of training delivered by consultants. It is generally
one-off; weak in terms of pedagogy and teaching method; and is not accessible once the
consultants leave except, in a limited way, where they have produced training manuals.

XVII.               Achievement of Outcomes
          1.        Approach to Evaluating Outcomes

126. The SES evaluated TA outcomes in terms of their relevance, effectiveness, efficiency,
and sustainability, and in overall terms, in each case using a four point rating scale of 0­3.46

          2.        Overall Performance

                    a.       ADTAs

127. The Overall Performance of ADTAs Exceeded Expectations. As Figure 13 shows,
72% of ADTAs in the SES sample were rated "successful" or "highly successful".47 India and
Viet Nam were standouts, with 92% "successful" or better. Fiji Islands, Kyrgyz Republic, and
Philippines were close to the historic average rating, with 61­64% "successful" or better.




46
   For individual TAs, each criterion and overall TA performance were rated on a scale of 0­3 where, for example,
   highly successful = 3, successful = 2, less successful = 1, and unsuccessful = 0. Mean scores for each criterion
   and for overall TA performance were calculated as simple averages.
47
   For an explanation of the rating descriptions used in ADB evaluation reports, see ADB. 2006. Guidelines for
   Preparing Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance             45




                                      Figure 13: Study Evaluation of ADTAs


                               Successful
                                 49%


                                                                Other             Less Successful
                                                                27%                     26%
                                                                                  Unsuccessful
                                                                                       2%



                                   Highly Successful
                                          23%                                       Sample size: 66

              ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
              Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.


128. These findings need to be seen in the context of wider evaluations of TA. Comparative
figures are given in Table 10 below. It can be seen that there is a strong similarity between the
ratings from the SES sample compared to all past TPAR/TPER ratings.

                                     Table 10: TA Performance Ratings
       Item                                        Sample         Proportion Rated (%)
                                                    Size    HS/GS/S        PS                  US
       TPAR/TPERa                                    185      63           30                   7
       Total SES sample                              110      72           24                   4
       Philippines (SES)                              23      61           26                  13
       Kyrgyz Republic (SES)                          19      53           47                   0
       Fiji (SES)                                     14      71           29                   0
       Viet Nam (SES)                                 24      92             8                  0
       Viet Nam (TPAR/TPER)                           16      56           44                   0
       India (SES)                                    30      77           17                   6
       India (TPAR/TPER)                              13      62           39                   0
       GS = generally successful, HS = highly successful, PS = partly successful, S = successful, SES =
       special evaluation study, TA = technical assistance, TPAR = technical assistance performance
       audit report, TPER = technical assistance performance evaluation report, US = unsuccessful.
       a
         Sources: Postevaluation information system and fieldwork undertaken for this SES.

129. A further issue is the differences between the evaluation ratings of TA given by technical
assistance completion report (TCR) (largely carried out by the project officer responsible for the
TA) and those from TPARs/TPERs (carried out by OED). Table 11 clearly demonstrates that
TCR ratings are better than those from TPARs/TPERs. This difference becomes clearer when
TCR and TPAR/TPER ratings are available for the same TA, as shown in Table 12.
46 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                                     Table 11: TA Evaluation Results
 Item                                         Total No. of                         Proportion (%)
                                               rated TAs           HS/GS/S              PS               US
 Self-Evaluation
        TCRs                                     1,532                 81               17                  2
 Independent Evaluation
        TPARs/TPERs                                185                 63               30                 7
        Attached ADTAsa                            142                 49               33                18
        Total                                      328                 57               31                12
  ADTA = advisory technical assistance, GS = generally successful, HS = highly successful, No. = number,
  PS = partly successful, S = successful, TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report,
  TPAR = technical assistance performance audit report, TPER = technical assistance performance evaluation
  report, US = unsuccessful.
  a
    Evaluations as part of project/program performance audit reports to which they are attached.
  Sources: TCRs and TPARs/TPERs circulated as of 31 December 2006.

              Table 12: Comparison of TCR and TPAR Ratings for TAs with Both
 TPAR Rating                                                 TCR Rating
                            HS/GS/S                    PS                     US                    Total
 HS/GS/S                      75                        2                                            77
 PS                           23                       13                                            36
 US                            4                        1                      3                      8
       Total                 102                       16                      3                    121
               = upgraded                  = retained                 = downgraded.
GS = generally successful, HS = highly successful, PS = partly successful, S = successful, TA = technical
assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report, TPAR = technical assistance performance audit report,
US = unsuccessful.
Sources: TCRs and TPARs/TPERs circulated as of 31 December 2006.

130. The figures indicate that, in dynamic economies with a good selection of sectors, TA can
deliver an excellent product tailored to the requirements of the DMC and EA. In India's case in
the finance sector, ADTAs did very well in providing a good combination of international best
practice supported by local expertise that delivered the product in a form the Government of
India could use effectively. ADB's successful support for the health sector in Viet Nam had
similar characteristics. In the Fiji Islands, Kyrgyz Republic, and Philippines, international and
national consultants were sometimes used less effectively, and there was a tendency to
propose solutions not tailored to the local situation.

131. This good overall rating is not a reason for complacency. The TAs examined in this
evaluation do not reflect a random sample of TAs ADB-wide or in the five case study countries.
The figures are greatly influenced by the excellent results from India and Viet Nam. Ongoing
work by OED on sector assistance program evaluations for India suggest that the finance
sector, which accounted for 83% of the SES sample of ADTAs in India, achieved a level of
success not approached by other sectors. The results from India and Viet Nam also significantly
inflated the mean scores for capacity building and change management, two activities that
remain a weak link in ADB's ADTA products.

132. It should be understood that the SES evaluated each ADTA in isolation and not as a
step in a broader involvement or program. It also discounted unreasonably complex objectives
so that the evaluation was based on the resources available and how well they were applied to
EA priorities. Had a programmatic criterion and achieving the full range of stated objectives
been used, the success rate would not have been as high.
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance     47



                 b.        PPTAs

133. Thirty Percent of PPTAs were "Less Successful" or "Unsuccessful". Given their
linkage to loan processing, quality at entry, and general project quality, the overall performance of
PPTAs was disappointing. As Figure 14 shows, the SES found that 70% of PPTAs were
"successful" or "highly successful", but 30% were "less successful" or "unsuccessful". The findings
suggest that the performance of PPTAs in the urban sector was particularly weak. The PPTA
design in this sector seems to give too little attention to commitment of municipalities and to
bridging the gap in administrative capacity between secondary and tertiary levels of government.

                                      Figure 14: Study Evaluation of PPTAs


                                                                              Less Successful
                         Successful
                                                                                   21%
                           59%
                                                               Other
                                                               30%


                                                                             Unsuccessful
                                                                                 9%
                                           Highly
                                         successful
                                            11%                              Sample size: 44
            PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
            Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.



       3.        Comparison of ADTA and PPTA Ratings with Benchmark

134. ADB has set no target for what it considers "satisfactory" performance of TA at
departmental and divisional levels in relation to OED's four evaluation criteria and in overall
terms. A benchmark of this kind would seem to be essential for results-based management. The
SES adopted a benchmark based on levels of TA success that ADB might reasonably target--
in particular that, on balance, 5% of TA should be "highly successful", with 70% "successful",
20% "partly successful", and 5% "unsuccessful". This is based on the idea that (i) since TAs are
relatively small-scale interventions, a 75% success rate should be achievable; (ii) given that
ADTAs (and RETAs) address some areas of greater difficulty, such as capacity building, it is
reasonable to expect a degree of partial success; and (iii) occasional failure may be tolerated
both to recognize that constraints may sometimes be insuperable and to encourage innovation.
These targets produce a target mean of 1.75 on OED's 4-point scale, which is just below the
"successful" rating. Scores for relevance should be higher as all TAs should be relevant. Many
should be highly relevant, suggesting a target mean score for relevance of 2.5.

135. Figure 15 compares the overall performance of ADTAs and PPTAs against the
benchmark. The SES sample had a higher proportion of TAs rated "highly successful" and "less
successful" TAs, and a lower proportion rated "successful". This pattern was more marked for
ADTAs, partly because of the high success rate in the finance sector in India and the health
sector in Viet Nam.
48 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance



                     Figure 15: Evaluation Ratings for SES Sample Compared with
                                          Benchmark Ratings




           ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance,
           SES = special evaluation study, TA = technical assistance.
           Source: Operations Evaluation Mission estimate.




136. This analysis raises the question of whether different benchmarks should be used for
PPTA and ADTA. There should probably be a lower tolerance of poorly performing PPTAs,
given that their outputs are known and--unlike most ADTAs--they do not depend on changing
human behavior. A comparison of ratings for the SES sample and the benchmark against all
TAs rated in TPARs/TPERS is shown in Figure 16.

                                               A8.16:
                                        Figure16:
                                       Figure         Comparison
                                                  Comparison     of SES,
                                                             of SES,     Benchmark,
                                                                     Benchmark, andand
                                                                                    Past
                                                    Past TPAR/TPER
                                                       TPAR/TPER     Ratings
                                                                  Ratings

                                  80

                                  70
                                  60
                 Proportion (%)




                                  50                                                      Benchmark
                                                                                          SES ADTA
                                  40
                                                                                          SES PPTA
                                  30                                                      ALL TAs
                                  20
                                  10
                                  0
                                       0      0.5      1       1.5     2          2.5
                                                     Average Ratings

              ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical
              assistance, SES = special evaluation study, TA = technical assistance, TPAR =
              technical assistance performance audit report, TPER = technical assistance
              performance evaluation report.
              a
                The OED TPER/TPAR database aggregates evaluation scores for the
                "satisfactory"/"generally satisfactory"/"highly satisfactory" ratings. The rating for
                each such evaluation is derived from a weighted average of the scores for
                relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact.
              Source: Operations Evaluation Mission estimate.
                Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance                  49


                 4.       Performance by DMC

      137. Performance of ADTAs Exceeded Target Scores for Relevance, Effectiveness, and
      Efficiency while PPTAs were Marginally Below. Tables 13 (ADTAs) and 14 (PPTAs) show
      the scores for relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability for the DMCs in the SES
      sample. For ADTAs, the mean scores for relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency exceed the
      benchmarks while sustainability is below its benchmark. PPTAs perform less well, with all
      ratings falling below the benchmarks. Sustainability falls markedly below the benchmark, which
      suggests downstream problems for project processing, design, and implementation teams to
      resolve if they are to be fully effective (though in this sample, a number of PPTAs that rated
      poorly have not yet resulted in a loan).
                                       Table 13: Performance of ADTAs in
                              Relevance, Effectiveness, Efficiency, and Sustainability
                                                                                      Mean Score
                                                         Fiji       India            Kyrgyz
   Criterion           Benchmark           Total      Islands                       Republic     Philippines         Viet Nam
   Relevance              2.50             2.53         2.45        2.67              2.62           2.11              3.00
   Effectiveness          1.75             1.86         1.64        2.42              1.54           1.89              1.83
   Efficiency             1.75             1.80         1.64        2.17              1.46           1.78              2.00
   Sustainability         1.75             1.62         1.36        1.82              1.36           1.50              2.20
   Overall                1.75             1.94         1.82        2.42              1.69           1.72              2.17
  ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
  Sources: Evaluation case studies.

      138. Downstream problems also result in costs to ADB, which are not attributed by ADB
      systems to the costs of a project. Six of the PPTAs in the SES sample failed to produce a
      project. One of these PPTAs was approved but the consultants were never mobilized. The other
      five cost just over $4 million in total, equivalent to 15% of the total approved value of PPTAs in
      the SES sample.48 Thus, 85% of PPTAs led to projects, a rate which reflects the generally good
      selection of potential projects. The $4 million cost of PPTAs that did not lead to a project
      represents a small cost compared to the cost of 15% of projects subsequently failing.
                                       Table 14: Performance of PPTAs in
                              Relevance, Effectiveness, Efficiency, and Sustainability
                                                                                      Mean Score
                                                                                         Kyrgyz
 Criterion            Benchmark         Total        Fiji Islands           India       Republic       Philippines      Viet Nam
 Relevance               2.50            2.41             2.00               2.33          2.17            2.40           2.75
 Effectiveness           1.75            1.70             2.00               1.61          1.83            1.00           2.00
 Efficiency              1.75            1.70             2.00               1.72          1.67            1.20           1.83
 Sustainability          1.75            1.35             2.33               1.29          1.17            0.60           1.83
 Overall                 1.75            1.73             2.33               1.56          1.67            1.20           2.08
PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

      139. Of the DMCs in the sample, India and Viet Nam exceeded the benchmarks for all criteria
      for ADTAs. The Kyrgyz Republic and the Philippines, on the other hand, generally failed to meet
      the benchmarks; the Kyrgyz Republic and the Fiji Islands performed particularly poorly on the
      criterion of sustainability. With PPTAs, the Fiji Islands and Viet Nam scored well across all criteria
      while the Philippines did not, with a very low score for sustainability. While the sample is too small

      48
           Actual money spent on PPTAs is more difficult to calculate, but the figure represents at least 14.6% of the total
           actual expenditure on PPTAs in the sample.
   50 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


   to draw definitive conclusions, it is interesting to note that the success rates of ADB-funded
   projects approved in the 1990s in the Philippines is lower than in the other case study countries.

              5.      Performance by Sector

   140. Finance, Health, and Agriculture were the Three Best Performing Sectors with a
   Significant Sample Size. Results of ADTAs and PPTAs by sector are presented in Tables 15
   and 16. ADTAs in the financial sector did outstandingly well in both the Kyrgyz Republic and
   India. This reflects well on the divisions responsible. It performed less well for PPTAs, with one
   each in the Philippines and the Kyrgyz Republic not producing a loan.49 ADTAs for sectors and
   themes that are prominent in ADB's corporate priorities performed less well than the
   benchmark. Urban, transport, water and education, and governance did not match the
   benchmark standard though the SES sample was often too small to be significant. With PPTAs,
   urban, transport, education, and governance as well as finance did not meet the benchmark.
                                    Table 15: ADTA Performance by Sector
 Sector                 Total       Relevance        Effectiveness    Efficiency     Sustainability     Sample Size
 Benchmark              1.75           2.50               1.75           1.75            1.75
 Finance                2.25           2.54               2.21           2.08            1.91               24
 Governance             1.69           2.69               1.62           1.62            1.25               13
 Urban                  1.57           2.29               1.57           1.43            1.00                7
 Education              1.60           1.80               1.80           1.60            1.00                5
 Transport              1.00           2.00               1.00           1.00            1.00                2
 Agriculture            2.00           2.83               1.50           1.83            1.83                6
 Energy                 2.00           3.00               2.00           2.00            2.00                1
 Health                 2.50           3.00               2.33           2.17            2.50                6
 Water                  1.00           2.00               1.00           1.00            1.00                2
 Mean                   1.94           2.53               1.86           1.80            1.62               66
ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

                                    Table 16: PPTA Performance by Sector
                                                                                                          Sample
   Sector                  Total        Relevance     Effectiveness     Efficiency     Sustainability      Size
   Benchmark               1.75            2.50            1.75            1.75            1.75
   Finance                 1.25            1.50            1.50            1.50            1.25              4
   Governance              1.00            3.00            1.00            1.00            1.00              1
   Urban                   1.40            2.80            1.20            1.20            0.50              5
   Education               1.67            2.00            1.67            1.67            1.33              3
   Transport               1.63            2.38            1.69            1.81            1.31             16
   Agriculture             2.00            2.43            1.86            1.57            1.75              7
   Energy                  2.00            2.50            2.00            2.00            2.00              4
   Health                  2.33            3.00            2.33            2.33             --               3
   Water                   3.00            3.00            2.00            2.00            3.00              1
   Mean                    1.73            2.41            1.70            1.70            1.35             44
  PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
  Sources: Evaluation case studies.




   49
        The Kyrgyz Republic design was used by the World Bank. This was more a failure of ADB strategic positioning
        than a failure of the PPTA.
           Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance       51


    141. The generally poor results for the urban, transport and education, and for governance
    sectors raise the question of effective risk management. Generally, in ADB, all TAs are treated as if
    they are likely to experience the same level of risk of success or failure. They are also assigned to
    an ADB officer, often with little attention to the experience of that officer. Risk management requires
    that an assessment is made of the risk of failure of a particular proposal against a number of criteria
    which might include, for example, the importance of the TA to future ADB business and its
    reputation in a DMC, the track record of the sector, the EA's track record, the degree of difficulty of
    the proposed intervention, the experience of the officer, the complexity of the TA, and other factors
    which lead to a risk level being established. The level of risk might determine whether or not the
    contract is let on a QCBS basis or a quality-based consultant selection basis, and to determine the
    degree of supervision and divisional management attention paid to the preparation of the TA design
    and, subsequently, to its implementation. In India, for example, risk levels were high where TA was
    delivered to state authorities. It was low in the finance sector, where the competence of MOF was
    very high, as was its commitment to success.

             6.      Performance by Activity

    142. Most Activities Performed Close to the Benchmark or Exceeded it Against All
    Criteria except Sustainability. Results by major TA activity are shown in Table 17. Project
    preparation was the only activity that consistently rated below the benchmark. Of the activities
    that had reasonable sample sizes, project preparation was the weakest performer, followed by
    capacity building, which was particularly weak in the Kyrgyz Republic. Sustainability was
    consistently weaker than effectiveness, indicating problems with institutionalizing change in
    EAs.

                                      Table 17: Performance by Major Activity
 Sector                       Total     Relevance    Effectiveness   Efficiency   Sustainability   Sample Size
 Benchmark                    1.75         2.50           1.75          1.75          1.75
 Policy Development           2.33         3.00           2.33          2.33          1.67              3
 Change Management            1.80         2.47           1.93          1.80          1.53             15
 Capacity Building            1.87         2.65           1.65          1.61          1.62             23
 Conduct Specific             2.00         2.09           2.09          1.91          1.67             11
    Technical Studies
 Project Preparation          1.73         2.41          1.70          1.70           1.35             44
 Strengthen Monitoring and    2.00         2.67          1.67          2.00           1.33              3
    Evaluation Systems
 Policy Development and       1.90         2.30          1.80          1.70           1.56             10
    Capacity Building
 Others                       2.00         3.00          1.00          2.00           2.00              1
 Mean                         1.84         2.45          1.78          1.75           1.50            110
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

             7.      Performance by Size of TA

    143. There is No Correlation between Size of TA and Performance. Tables 18 and 19
    compare the overall ratings of TAs with the TA amount. The results indicate little correlation
    between TA amount and success.
52 Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance


                            Table 18: Average TA Amount by Overall Rating
                                                  ADTA                                       PPTA
                                                 Average     Sample                         Average      Sample
 Rating                             %            Value ($)    Size                %         Value ($)     Size
 Exceeds expectations               22.7         522,733       15               11.4        742,000         5
 Meets expectations                 50.0         490,061       33               59.1        575,000        26
 Low                                25.8         467,588       17               20.4        614,000         9
 Negligible                          1.5         600,000        1                9.1        615,000         4
  Total                            100.0         493,364       66              100.0        605,591        44
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

                                  Table 19: Overall Rating by TA Amount
                                             ADTA                                           PPTA
 TA Amount ($)                     Mean Rating   Sample Size                 Mean Rating           Sample Size
 0­199,999                             1.9           18                          2.0                    8
 200,000­399,999                       1.8            5                          1.5                    2
 400,000­599,999                       2.0           18                          1.5                    8
 600,000­799,999                       1.9           14                          2.0                   10
 800,000­999,999                       2.3            4                          1.6                    7
 1,000,000+                            2.0            7                          1.6                    9
 Mean                                  1.9           66                          1.7                   44
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
Sources: Evaluation case studies.

        8.       Sustainability

144. Sustainability is the Weakest Performing Criterion. Sustainability is a major issue for
ADTAs. As Figure 17 indicates, about 56% of ADTAs were rated at least likely to be
sustainable, but 44% were rated less likely to be sustainable. Concern over sustainability was
clear from the interviews with ADB staff and consultants who rated only about 40% of ADTAs as
having a high probability of sustainability. If there are major concerns about sustainability, the
long-term impact of ADTAs is open to question.

                               Figure 17: Sustainability of Impacts of ADTA


                                Likely
                                 41%                                          Less Likely
                                                                                 36%
                                                             Other
                                                             44%
                                                                              Unlikely
                                                                                8%
                                 Highly Likely
                                     15%
                                                                     Sample size: 61


               ADTA = advisory technical assistance.
               Source: Operations Evaluation Mission data.


145. Ratings for effectiveness and sustainability should be balanced. An effective TA should
produce sustainable results. Sustainability was rated lower than effectiveness in 33% of TAs. In
      Country Study Analysis: Special Evaluation Study on Performance of Technical Assistance   53


8% of TAs, sustainability was rated more highly than effectiveness. In these cases, although
outputs were disappointing they endured. Figure 18 compares sustainability with effectiveness.
The entries to the right of the shaded diagonal squares show the number of TAs where
sustainability was rated lower than effectiveness. The discrepancy indicates that TA designs and
management of TA should pay more attention to the factors that contribute to sustainability.


                         Figure 18: Sustainability and Effectiveness

                                                       Sustainability
                                                   3     2      1       0

                               Effectiveness   3   9     7


                                               2         15     9       1


                                               1         3      11      3


                                               0                2       1

                                                          Sample size: 61
                      Source: Operations Evaluation Mission estimate.


146. A number of well-known issues adversely affect sustainability. The approach to
addressing such issues should have been discussed in the TA paper and reflected in the
assumptions and risks column of the DMF, but this was rarely done. Such issues include
(i) regular changes in the senior personnel of EAs, (ii) the TA incorrectly assuming that EA
budgets would be increased to ensure changes would be sustained, (iii) counterpart staff not
being full-time, (iv) the TA budget was not fully spent even though the objectives of the
intervention were not met, (v) lack of interest on the part of both ADB and the EA in follow-up
after the submission of a consultant's final report and conclusion of an ADTA, (vi) unintegrated
approach to the management of sector and country/regional programs, (vii) frequent changes in
ADB project officer and lack of interest from officers who inherit the TA, (viii) absence of
accepted methodologies for change management, and (ix) TA designs often allowed too little
time to complete the main tasks and stabilize changes sustainably.

147. For PPTAs, there is a body of experience in ADB of designing effective PPTAs. Papers
tend to be more rigorously scrutinized by directors. However, the average TA amount has
decreased in real terms by 18% since 1996, during a period when project preparatory work was
expanded to cover safeguard requirements and more detailed socioeconomic analysis. One
result is that consultants often experience serious time constraints in addressing adequately all
the tasks required. This means they have less time to engage EA staff in the design work. The
EA, which will implement, operate, and maintain the project, becomes peripheral in the design
work and therefore may have less understanding and ownership of the design. While ADB
encourages a participatory model to ensure that projects have the support of beneficiaries, it
does not appear to encourage such a model for EAs. This can affect sustainability by acting
against the development of the EA's capacity to implement a project.
