INDIA:

CASE STUDIES ON
Private Sector Development and
Operations

A Case Study from the 2007 Special Evaluation Study
on Private Sector Development and Operations:
Harnessing Synergies with the Public Sector



June 2007


Bob Finlayson


Operations Evaluation Department
Abbreviations

ADB           Asian Development Bank
CFS           complementary finance scheme
CSP           country strategy and program
FDI           foreign direct investment
GDP           gross domestic product
NBFI          nonbank financial institution
NPL           nonperforming loan
PPP           public private partnership
PRC           People's Republic of China
PSD           private sector development
PSDS          Private Sector Development Strategy
PSIF          private sector infrastructure facility
PSOD          Private Sector Operations Department
PSO           private sector operation
SAPE          sector assistance program evaluation
SIDBI         Small Industries Development Bank of India
SME           small and medium enterprises
TA            technical assistance
VCF           venture capital fund
WTO           World Trade Organization


              WEIGHTS AND MEASURES


km            kilometer
MW            megawatts



Note
In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
Contents

                                                        Page

I.     Investment Climate                                1
II.    ADB's Country Strategy and Development Program    5
III.   PSD Issues in India                              10
   I. Investment Climate
       1.     Background
1.     India's economic liberalization reform process started approximately 15 years
ago. At the time, because of a socialist philosophy, Government regulation and
administrative processes at the national, state, and local levels were extensive. Public
sector investment dominated the economy. The economy was inward oriented, based
predominantly on agriculture with a large public sector and an import substitution policy.
High tariffs protected domestic indusStry. Following a balance of payments crisis in the
early 1990s, the Government decided to review the import substitution policy and began
to introduce a program of market liberalization. This program has been largely
successful, and it has laid the foundation for India's impressive economic performance
over the past decade.

       2.     Macroeconomic Stability
2.      India avoided the worst effects of the Asian financial crisis due to the rigid foreign
exchange controls that were in place. Similar to the Philippines, the fiscal deficit is the
primary risk to macroeconomic instability, and political constraints have made it difficult
to implement reforms that are needed in taxation, public expenditure reduction, and
privatization of commercial state enterprises. Nevertheless, the Government has started
to make progress on fiscal reforms, although monetary policy continues to be subject to
high levels of political influence.

       3.     Competition and Trade
3.      The Government has started to liberalize the economy
under its obligations to the World Trade Organization (WTO),
which India joined in 1995. Despite these measures, increased
agricultural tariffs and the imposition of anti-dumping duties have
offset reductions in the overall rates. The Government also has
moved to modernize domestic competition, and introduced the
new Competition Act (2002). The Government has removed bureaucratic restrictions on
business licensing. Nevertheless, the regulatory environment is still very constrained
compared to other countries in the region, and price controls and state monopolies
continue to be prevalent. Obsolete labor laws further constrain the development of a
competitive manufacturing sector in India.

       4.     Privatization
4.     Privatization has not been a feature of private sector development (PSD)
programs in India. A Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment, headed by the Prime
Minister, was set up in 2000 to supervise a divestment program. The policy was
unsuccessful. By 2005, the Government had divested its controlling shares in only 17
industrial companies and 19 hotels. The Government continued to own 222 public
2      India: Case Studies on Private Sector Development and Operations


sector units, of which 130 were incurring losses. With the change of Government in
2004, the divestment policy was put on hold.

       5.     Public Private Partnerships
5.      Public-private partnerships (PPP) have played a limited role in India, and almost
50% of the PPP investment has occurred in Gujarat. Given the fiscal constraints, PPPs
are being given a larger role to play in financing infrastructure. The Government has
established a PPP Appraisal Committee at the national level that will evaluate central
Government projects. This committee will help address a key constraint on PPPs, as
traditionally no single agency has been responsible for public sector infrastructure
procurement. Line agencies at the central and state levels have been responsible for
their own projects, creating problems with project formulation and implementation.

6.      In 2005, the Government initiated a new framework designed to strengthen the
legal and regulatory environment. The Government intends to provide "viability gap"
funding in the form of grants to private sponsors to cover up to 40% of project costs.
The Government also established the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited,
which has authority to provide loans covering up to 20% of project cost and refinance
loans on a tenor of at least 5 years. The Government's $40 billion road development
program is the main area envisaged for PPPs, although it is also inviting private
investors and contractors to build airports and ports, water systems, and electricity
distribution networks.

       6.     Foreign Direct Investment
7.        The Government has sought to encourage foreign direct investment (FDI) and
foreign portfolio investment in non-strategic sectors, including parts of the
manufacturing sector, telecommunications, finance, and insurance. Portfolio investment
                           has risen dramatically, attracted by high growth rates coupled
  Foreign direct
  investment could play
                           with the liberalization of foreign ownership laws and the
  a critical role in       opening of Indian stock exchanges to foreign capital. FDI has
  financing India's        been rising, although the amount represented less than 1% of
  infrastructure deficit,  gross domestic product (GDP) in 2005. To help streamline FDI
  although reforms in      approval processes, the Government formed the Foreign
  this area have been      Investment Implementation Authority in 1999. An export-import
  only moderately          policy was introduced in 2000 that launched a series of special
  successful to date.
                           economic zones based on the Chinese model, consisting of
                           geographic duty free enclaves. Most FDI has been directed
towards information communication technology and outsourcing. FDI could play a
critical role in financing India's infrastructure deficit, although reforms in this area have
been only moderately successful to date. India's largest FDI project was a power plant
at Dahbol, where the funding facility was withdrawn due to problems with the tariff,
leading to a withdrawal of most foreign companies from power generation projects
sponsored by the Government.
                           India: Case Study on Private Sector Development and Operations   3



       7.     Infrastructure
8.      The quality of infrastructure in India is considered particularly poor, and it is one
of the main constraints on growth. The Committee on Infrastructure has estimated the
investment needed for ports, national highways, and airports are equivalent to 8% of
GDP per year over the next 5­7 years. Traditionally, the Government has financed
about 80% of infrastructure, although it is seeking to increase the level of private sector
participation through PPPs.

9.     Telecommunications. Although the industry continues to lag other countries,
such as the People's Republic of China (PRC), telecommunications infrastructure has
seen the most progress on reform and development. While some disputes over issues
such as interconnection and availability of spectrum rights have arisen, the overall
regulatory framework in the communications sector appears to be working reasonably
well and the sector is expanding rapidly.

10.     Power Generation. This is the most resource-intensive infrastructure sector, and
private sector participation has been very limited to date. Problems with supply include
(i) inefficient production, (ii) theft and technical losses of about 25%, (iii) tariffs set at
levels substantially below cost, (iv) cross-subsidization policies that distort demand, (v)
substantial underinvestment, and (vi) failure to enforce billing. While central and state
governments are involved in the power sector, the 21 state electricity boards and 14
electricity departments traditionally have had monopoly rights for generation,
transmission, and distribution. In 2003, the Government enacted the Electricity Act,
which led to 13 states initiating reform programs by the end of 2005 to unbundle
vertically integrated state boards and establish independent regulators to initiate tariff
reforms. The Government is seeking additional capacity of 100,000 megawatts (MW)
over the next 10 years, and much of this capacity will need to be financed by the private
sector.

11.     Transport. The Government still dominates almost all
aspects of infrastructure provision in this sector, although
PPP schemes are being pursued, especially at the national
level. The National Highways Authority of India is responsible
for developing the national road network. The National
Highways Development Project seeks to expand the 14,000-
kilometer (km) network by 10,000 km under private sector
concession, and increase the width to between four and six lanes. The private sector is
financing many of these roads under PPP arrangements, using a combination of toll
revenue-based concessions and annuities financed by the Government from the Central
Road Fund. The Government recently announced a PPP program in the road sector
with a total value of $40 billion, which is probably the largest such program in the world.
The Government has decided to liberalize airlines and move forward on privately
financing airports in major centers, such as Mumbai, and more that 30 non-metropolitan
airports across the country. The development of seaports has progressed in states such
as Gujarat. The Government continues to own and operate the rail system, although it
4     India: Case Studies on Private Sector Development and Operations


recently permitted private sector participation in non-core functions such as container
services.

12.    Water. In this sector, private sector participation is constrained by the absence of
a national water regulatory body and cost-based tariff system administered by
independent regulators. Private sector participation in the water, sewerage, and
sanitation systems is almost nonexistent, as tariffs in most cities are set at levels
substantially below cost, and revisions are politically difficult. Overstaffing and poor
revenue collection practices accentuate problems with low levels of cost recovery.
Unaccounted for technical water losses generally range from 40% to 50%. In the past,
the predominant sources of finance were state and central government loans and
grants, although they have been declining in importance due to fiscal constraints.
Governments in states such as Tamil Nadu are experimenting with commercial sources
of water.

      8.     Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
13.    The main means of supporting small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) has
been directed credit through the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).
SIDBI uses the concept of industry clusters and small enterprise financial centers to
service SMEs, often in conjunction with commercial banks. In 2005, the Government
announced a comprehensive policy package requiring public sector banks to double the
amount of funding directed to SMEs. The Government also reserves some labor-
intensive industries, such as textile manufacturing, for small enterprises. These
provisions are enforced through the licensing system.

      9.     Financial and Capital Markets
14. The Government owns 27 of the 96 commercial banks, and they hold about 75% of
all bank assets. These state-owned banks typically were established as development
finance institutions, which gradually have been commercialized. Despite these changes,
all state-owned banks must lend 40% of advances to sectors such as agriculture and
small businesses, and an additional 12% to exporting firms. The Government recently
allowed private competition to emerge by issuing a limited number of licenses to new
private banks, while starting to relax restrictions on foreign banks. As a result, deposits
and bank credit have been growing over the past decade at more than 15% per year.
However, the benefits of improved access to finance have been offset by an associated
rapid increase in nonperforming loans (NPL), leading to undercapitalization of banks.
NPLs, which peaked in 1994 at 25% of bank assets, have been declining slowly,
reaching about 13% in 2001 and 5% in 2005. Bankruptcy procedures are ineffective,
and the state banks have been recapitalizing and issuing shares through initial public
offers to access additional equity.

15. The Government has extensive ownership interests in nonbank financial
institutions (NBFI) operating in areas such as housing development and microfinance.
Municipal and state governments are experimenting with local infrastructure funds that
pool finance from different sources and issue rated bonds. The Government is a major
shareholder in venture capital funds (VCF) through its ownership of banks. VCFs
                                     India: Case Study on Private Sector Development and Operations             5


focused on the information communication technology data have expanded rapidly,
especially in the past 6 years. The state is a dominant owner in financial institutions,
such as Life Insurance Corporation, General Insurance Corporation, and Unit Trust of
India. These institutions are an important source of long-term investment funding.
Similar to banking, foreign ownership restrictions in the insurance sector have been
relaxed in recent years.

16.     Capital markets are going through a rapid transformation. A group of large
institutional investors established the National Stock Exchange in 1994 using a
corporate ownership structure. This operation is based on an electronic trading platform
that was used successfully to break the oligopoly of the 22 state stock exchanges
operating across the country. Apart from the Bombay Stock Exchange, the state stock
exchanges are now defunct, although they continue to exist on paper. The size of the
Indian stock market has increased significantly in recent years, fueled in part by foreign
portfolio investors, and corporate bonds have become an increasingly important source
of funding.

II. ADB's Country Strategy and
Development Program
          1.          Overview
17.    India began to borrow from Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 1986. In India,
ADB has traditionally funded public sector infrastructure projects (power, gas, and
roads) and finance reforms (NBFIs and capital markets) identified in country strategies.
Public and private sector financing levels have been volatile (Figure 1).

     Figure 1: Asian Development Bank Financing, Annual Approvals in India
                                  ($ million)

  1,600
  1,400
  1,200
  1,000
                                                                                                      Public
    800
                                                                                                      Private
    600
    400
    200
      0
               1995    1996   1997      1998   1999   2000   2001    2002   2003   2004   2005




Source: Asian Development Bank records.
6         India: Case Studies on Private Sector Development and Operations


18.    Public sector lending fell because of the nuclear testing sanctions in 1998.
Demand for public sector funds to finance national road projects was high during 2000­
2004. In 2005, no lending occurred outside the natural resource sector. Private sector
operations (PSO) have been minor relative to public sector lending, although it has
become more significant since 2002. During the period reviewed, only one project
involved a complementary finance scheme (CFS) for $5 million.1

          2.        Country Strategies
19.      From the mid-1990s through early 2000, ADB changed its strategy in India. It
began decentralizing some assistance from the national to the state level, targeting
Gujarat, Kerala, and Madhya Pradesh. PSD was a major theme of the country strategy
and program (CSP), which identified the following possibilities: (i) providing credit
enhancements to mobilize private resources using ADB's guarantee operations, (ii)
providing Government-guaranteed public sector loans to support private investments in
infrastructure, and (iii) pooling ADB funds with private investors in funds or credit
facilities to finance infrastructure. These instruments were to be used to help pursue
sector strategies. In the power sector, the focus was on creating new generation and
transmission capacity, and privatizing existing power stations. The CSP also envisioned
establishing telecommunications facilities, and developing highways and ports, in part
by mobilizing the private sector.

20.      As envisaged, ADB would support industrial liberalization programs that
increased competition and corporate restructuring programs, and establish financial
facilities to support SMEs in agro-based industries. ADB also would help identify ways
of developing the long-term debt markets. Financial markets would be strengthened by
supporting interest rate liberalization, developing new private sector banks, restructuring
state banks, and strengthening the regulatory framework. In the capital markets, the
focus would be on developing an integrated national market; developing depositories;
reforming stock exchanges; facilitating FDI in financial institutions; freeing up long-term
sources of capital from insurance companies and pension funds; developing credit
enhancement and loan securitization instruments; and strengthening capital market
regulation.

21.    In 2001­2002, ADB prepared a new CSP for 2003­2006 to reflect the new
overarching goal of poverty reduction, and presented a program that was consistent
with the Government's Tenth Five Year Plan (2002­2007). The primary focus of the
revised ADB strategy was on growth, supported by social development and
environmental protection programs. The main sector and thematic priorities of the CSP
included fiscal consolidation, infrastructure development, PSD, agriculture and rural
development, state-level operations, regional cooperation, social development,

1
    While this study only examines private sector operations (PSO) during 1995­2005, six additional PSO projects in
    India, with a total value of $347.6 million, were approved in 2006, bringing the cumulative total approvals to $975.6
    million by September 2006. These recent approvals include three projects in energy and power, two in financial
    institutions focusing on infrastructure financing, and one in a capital markets institution. In addition to these direct
    ADB facilities, Private Sector Operations Department mobilized two loans from third party commercial banks with a
    total value of $225 million under complementary finance scheme.
                                    India: Case Study on Private Sector Development and Operations           7


environmental protection, and good governance. In 2003, ADB commissioned a Private
Sector Assessment2 to help sharpen the PSD emphasis in its economic sector work, as
well as in the overall CSP process. This document did not form part of the CSP process,
and was used primarily as a discussion document. In 2004, ADB issued a local currency
bond that raised Rs5 billion (equivalent at the time to $110 million) to help alleviate
problems with local currency risks for large infrastructure projects. International finance
institutions, such as ADB, increasingly have sought local currency since the Asian
financial crisis, when many foreign sponsors ran into difficulties servicing financial
structures denominated in foreign currency while project receipts were denominated in
local currency. With dramatic depreciations in currency, project sponsors needed to
increase project output prices to maintain their return on investment.

            3. ADB Assistance
22.     As illustrated by the breakdown in public sector lending relevant to PSO in Table
1, infrastructure, especially in transport and power sectors, has been the primary focus
of the regional departments.

               Table 1: Sector Allocation of Public Sector Lending (1995-2005)
                                          ($ million)
    Year             Public             Power and                          Urban
                  Administration         Energy         Transport       Development    Finance       Total
    1995                                   275                               105          250          630
    1996                250                100                                            250          600
    1997                                   150               113                          300          563
    1998                                                                        250                    250
    1999                250                                                     375                    625
    2000                                     600             180                         120           900
    2001                                     350             450                500      200         1,500
    2002                200                  150             814                                     1,164
    2003                                     250             980                200                  1,430
    2004                150                  400             650                                     1,200
    2005                                                                                                 0
    Total               850                2,275          3,187                1,430   1,120         8,862
Source: Asian Development Bank records.

23.     ADB has pursued institutional reforms to strengthen PPP procurement capacity
in the infrastructure by providing technical assistance (TA) to help create PPP units at
the state level, as well as in National Highway Authority of India. Contrary to proposals
in some of the earlier country strategies and the PSA, ADB exited the
telecommunications and ports sectors in the mid-1990s, and has focused on power,
roads, water, and urban infrastructure since then. The public sector side of ADB has
been engaged consistently in the power sector. Successful ADB-supported reforms are
starting to create conditions for private sector investment, and possible increased
Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) deals in the power sector. Public sector
operations in the gas sector contributed to strengthening the framework for the private
sector to enter the industry. Assistance from the public sector side of ADB in the
2
    Prepared by Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited.(CRISIL)
8          India: Case Studies on Private Sector Development and Operations


transport sector has been oriented mostly to roads and, to lesser extent, railways. Some
TA was provided in 2000 and 2001 to support private sector participation for road
maintenance. After pursuing a substantial public sector lending program up to 2004,
PSO-related lending ceased in 2005. PSOD has not been involved in the transport
sector, even in ports3 where it would seem feasible to support private projects.

24.    The finance sector has been the other strategic focus with a PSO orientation.
ADB assistance has been designed to help channel funds to infrastructure in sectors
such as power, roads, and urban facilities. TA in the finance sector was unrelated to the
lending program and appeared to lack focus. TA was targeted at the stock exchange,
dispute resolution, housing finance, pension and insurance reform, and use of
mortgage-backed securities in the capital markets. The public sector loans provided to
the Government were essentially infrastructure and housing credit lines. Two large
sovereign guaranteed private sector infrastructure facility loans ran into difficulties due
to the high cost of funds and denomination in foreign currency, which reduced demand,
and there were problems finding attractive projects.

25.    ADB approved its first PSO investments in India in 1987. Initial PSO investments
in the 1980s were targeted at the manufacturing industries. Throughout the 1990s, the
finance sector was emphasized with many relatively small capital market equity
investments. After the approval of the Private Sector Development Strategy (PSDS) in
2000, the emphasis on infrastructure increased, particularly in energy and power, with
one power plant approved in 2003. By the end of 2005, 394 projects had been approved
for $478 million, making India the largest recipient of ADB's PSO. The average
investment size was $13.7 million. During the period of analysis, only one CFS facility
was issued for $5 million. At the end of 2005, outstanding PSO commitments were
$289.3 million, with most of these funding facilities directed to the finance sector.5

26.    Finance sector interventions have been the main                                      In recent years, Private
source of assistance provided by PSOD, initially by taking                                  Sector Operations
equity interests in banks, then moving to equity funds and                                  Department has had
providing banks with Tier 2 capital funds (secondary bank                                   difficulty obtaining central
capital such as subordinated dent). In recent years, PSOD                                   bank approval for bank-
has had difficulty obtaining central bank approval for bank-                                related transactions due to
related transactions due to concerns about ADB crowding out                                 concerns about ADB
                                                                                            crowding out commercial
commercial operations because of its potential to provide                                   operations because of its
funds at below-market rates. Central bank concerns about                                    potential to provide funds
ADB's involvement in the Indian finance sector also have                                    at below-market rates.
affected infrastructure operations. PSOD has experienced



3
    While the Petronet liquefied natural gas facility had a port that formed part of the overall plant, it could be used only
    for conveying liquefied natural gas to the shore. As such, it falls under the classification of an energy rather than
    transport facility.
4
    Including one line of equity of $5 million, from which 15 small equity sub-investments were made by 1994.
5
    While the study covers 1995­2005, six more projects with a total value of $347.6 million were approved 2006,
    bringing cumulative approvals to $975.6 million by September 2006.
                               India: Case Study on Private Sector Development and Operations          9


 problems obtaining access to competitively priced local currency through mechanisms
 such as the swap market due to perceived risks that ADB's involvement might distort
 that market.

             4.      PSO Transactions in India

 27.     During 1995­2005, 22 PSO transactions were approved for India, totaling
 $459.85 million (Table 2). The dominant focus was on finance sector and capital market
 projects. Possibly due to inadequate due diligence or premature processing, ten of the
 21 approved projects subsequently were canceled for reasons such as regulatory
 restrictions, lack of demand, or uncompetitive pricing. Taking into account these
 cancellations, the portfolio shrunk by $353.2 million, or 58%, to $258.4 million. The
 resulting portfolio had a disproportionately large amount of equity, totaling $126.4 million
 (49%), compared to $132.0 (51%) in senior debt. This is a high-risk portfolio structure.
 Dividing the non-canceled approvals according to sectors, $136.9 million (53%) was
 invested in financial and capital markets interventions, $71.5 million (8%) in two
 infrastructure projects, and $50 million (19%) indirectly target infrastructure through
 local financial institutions.
                  Table 2: PSO Investment Approvals in India (1995­2006)

                                                      ADB Financing ($ million)
Name                               Sector      Loan    CFS    Equity PCG          Total   Date    Status
Equity Management                 Finance       ­        ­         0.1 ­            0.1   1995      ­
Sectoral Equity Fund              Finance       ­        ­       15.0    ­         15.0   1995      ­
Securities                        Finance       ­        ­         4.3 ­            4.3   1995   Canceled
Capital Markets                   Finance       ­        ­       21.2    ­         21.2   1995      ­
Finance Company                   Finance       ­        ­         4.5 ­            4.5   1995      ­
Power Company                     Power        25.0    100.0     15.0    ­        140.0   1996   Canceled
Infrastructure Finance            Finance       ­        ­       15.5    ­         15.5   1997      ­
Mortgage Guarantee                Finance       ­        ­       10.0    ­         10.0   2002   Canceled
Healthcare Institute              Services      20       ­          ­    ­         20.0   2002   Canceled
Infrastructure Fund               Finance       ­        ­       15.0    ­         15.0   2002      ­
Transmission                      Power        62.3      ­          ­    ­         62.3   2003      ­
Bank (supplementary)              Finance       ­        ­         0.7 ­            0.7   2003    Exited
Housing Finance                   Finance      20.0      ­          ­    ­         20.0   2003      ­
Home Finance                      Finance      20.0      ­          ­    ­         20.0   2003   Canceled
LNG                               Energy        ­      65.3         ­    ­         65.3   2004   Canceled
Power Generation                  Power        54.4      ­       20.6    ­         75.0   2004   Canceled
Private Equity                    Finance       ­        ­       20.0    ­         20.0   2004      ­
Asset Reconstruction              Finance       ­        ­         5.6 ­            5.6   2005   Canceled
Infrastructure Finance            Finance      50.0      ­          ­    ­         50.0   2005   Canceled
Bank                              Finance      23.0      ­          ­    ­         23.0   2005   Canceled
Private Equity                    Finance       ­        ­       15.0    ­         15.0   2005      ­
 ­ = not applicable, ADB = Asian Development Bank; CFS = complementary financing scheme; LNG = liquefied
 natural gas; PCG = partial risk guarantee; PSO = private sector operations.
 Source: Operations Evaluation Department staff compilation.
10      India: Case Studies on Private Sector Development and Operations


28.   An OED evaluation of the PSO projects in India, based on a mixture of desk-
based reviews and company visits, derived the indicative project performance results
shown in Table 3.

      Table 3: Summary of Evaluated Project Performance in India (1995­2005)

                                                                     Investment
Project                                            PSD              Performance         Comments/Issues
 Equity Management                              Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Sectoral Equity Fund                            Excellent           Satisfactory                ­
 Securities                                      Canceled                 ­              Lack of demand
 Capital Markets                                Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Finance Company                                Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Power Company                                   Canceled                 ­                      ­
 Infrastructure Finance                          Excellent             Excellent                 ­
 Mortgage Guarantee                             Satisfactory         Satisfactory        Regulatory issue
 Bank(supplementary)                           Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory       Almost bankrupt
 Healthcare Institute                            Canceled                 ­                      ­
 Infrastructure Fund                            Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Transmission Limited                           Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Housing Finance                                Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Home Finance                                    Canceled                 ­            Price not competitive
 LNG                                            Satisfactory           Excellent
 LNG                                             Canceled                 ­            Price not competitive
 Power Generation                                Canceled                 ­            Price not competitive
 Private Equity                                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory                ­
 Asset Reconstruction                            Canceled                 ­              Regulatory issue
 Infrastructure Finance                          Canceled                 ­            Price not competitive
 Bank                                            Canceled                 ­              Regulatory issue
 Private Equity                                  Excellent           Satisfactory                ­
  ­ = not applicable, LNG = liquefied natural gas, PSD = Private Sector Development.
  Source: Operations Evaluation Department staff compilation.



III. PSD Issues in India
29.     India has grown more than 8% per year over the past 3 years, primarily due to
three factors: (i) a robust global economy, (ii) the delayed impact of liberalization
measures initiated in response to economic crisis in 1991, and (iii) a substantial boom in
consumer lending. While interest rates are starting to rise, growth appears to be
sustainable in sectors such as manufacturing, where macroeconomic stability coupled
with increasing competition is improving quality and cost-effectiveness. Nevertheless,
overall progress and balanced growth will depend upon reforms to modernize
infrastructure for power, ports, and roads. The benefits of reforms in the infrastructure
are starting to become apparent only now, and most private sector participation
continues to be limited to PPPs in the road sector and some captive ports and power
generation projects. While the finance sector is liquid and consumer credit growth is
booming, long-term corporate debt and access to foreign credit and FDI continues to be
limited.
                                  India: Case Study on Private Sector Development and Operations   11


30.      Traditionally, India has not had a policy of pursuing PSD. It has been focused on
developing its industrial sector through regulatory protection and directed lending
programs. The economy for the most part has been closed, which helped insulate it
from the effects of the Asian financial crisis. Recently, the Government has started to
liberalize the economy, and it is pursuing investment in infrastructure, particularly in the
power and transport sectors. The Government continues to maintain a highly
centralized approach to economic reform, especially in the infrastructure and finance
sector development where development programs are articulated in five-year plans.
Liberalization is modest, with high trade barriers and regulatory constraints by
international standards, though much improved relative to historical conditions. In critical
infrastructure sectors, such as power and water, tariffs continue to be set at levels
substantially below cost. The Government's lack of control over state governments in
the power sector has meant reform has been extremely slow, although moving in the
right direction. While progress is more apparent in the road and ports sectors, funding
needs are substantial. Infrastructure still needs to be developed to improve access to
water and support more inclusive growth in semi-urban manufacturing and service
initiatives. A key constraint has been the lack of access to long-term finance. The
Government appears to have made good progress in this area, although credit
availability at affordable rates continues to be quite low despite high levels of savings.

                            31.     The Prime Minister recently estimated that $155
    The substantial gap
                            billion6 is required over the next 5 years to support
    between demand for
    resources and the low
                            infrastructure development, and this figure could rise as
    levels of foreign directhigh as $250 billion if infrastructure investment reaches 9­
    investment and modest   10% of GDP. Assuming the public sector provides about
    growth in local sources of
                            80% of this funding, the private sector would have to
    corporate finance indicates
                            provide up to $50 billion over the next 5 years. In practice,
    the Government also     the total financing figure seems optimistic, and only a
    needs to pursue reforms in
                            fraction of this amount is likely to be raised without
    the finance sectors to help
    mobilize the necessary
                            substantive reforms. In the power and water sectors, cost-
    funding.                based tariffs administered by independent regulators are
                            the key issue. For roads and infrastructure, acquisition of
land is the primary constraint. The substantial gap between demand for resources and
the low levels of FDI and modest growth in local sources of corporate finance indicates
the Government also needs to pursue reforms in the finance sectors to help mobilize
the necessary funding. Critical areas of reforms involve strengthening the municipal and
corporate bond markets, removing investment restrictions on local savings vehicles, and
freeing up of the capital account to improve access to long-term foreign sources of
finance.

32.     ADB's CSP issued in 1996 signaled a shift in focus from the national to state
level. Private sector development was a core priority of the country strategy, and ADB
intended to focus on power infrastructure, and government guaranteed private
infrastructure credit lines. In 2003, the CSP shifted emphasis toward poverty reduction
and social and agriculture projects. A draft PSA was issued in 2003 that highlighted the

6
    18 August 2006. Editorial. Financial Times.
12     India: Case Studies on Private Sector Development and Operations


importance of issues such as privatization and resolving NPL problems, although it did
not form part of the country strategy. In line with ADB's country strategic programs,
public sector support for power sector reforms has been reasonably constant
throughout the period of analysis, occurring initially in Gujarat, followed by Madhya
Pradesh, and then Assam. In 1998, PSO-related public sector lending almost stopped
due to India's nuclear testing, and then grew rapidly to peak in 2001 due to substantial
incremental demand to help finance national road projects. Lending for urban
development has been reasonably constant over the review period, with emphasis on
housing and urban water. Financial assistance has occurred primarily in the form of four
private sector infrastructure facilities and seven housing loans.

33.     Despite being the single largest country exposure in PSOD's portfolio, India's
level of PSO over the period of analysis has been surprisingly limited given the size of
the country. The size of the PSO portfolio at $289.3 million, or 17% of the portfolio as of
31 December 2005, is small given the number of transactions and effort expended over
a 10-year period. The private sector development strategy approved in March 2000
does not seem to have had a material impact on the scale and focus of PSOD's
activities. While the public sector provided assistance to help strengthen the enabling
environment in selected states in power infrastructure, reforms have been slow to
materialize. As such, the Board has approved only three significant transactions. This
lack of progress reflected in part the serious constraints present in the energy sector in
the form of insolvent state electricity boards and noncommercial tariffs. PSOD also has
made surprisingly little progress is the transport sector, especially in subsectors such as
ports that can finance operations without having to hedge currency risks. ADB's public
sector operations provided assistance to the National Highway Authority of India as
early as 2000 to help facilitate PPPs in the road sector. However, it was directed mainly
at maintenance contracts, and only a few privately financed concessions have been put
in place successfully.

34.     The weak enabling environment has been reflected in the poor performance of
the Government-guaranteed PSIF provided by ADB's public sector operations. The
PSIF loans were not particularly successful as suitable projects were hard to find. The
Government, which appears to accept the need for fundamental reform to support
private investment, has indicated that it does not consider the infrastructure credit lines
consistent with its policy on PPP. The Government's shift toward viability gap funding,
and general progress on unbundling the power sectors and putting in place independent
regulators, suggests that circumstances are starting to improve for PSO in India. This
change has been reflected in the scale of PSOD's operations, as approvals have
started to accelerate since 2003. Four approvals were recorded in 2005, followed by
five approvals midway through 2006. These transactions are occurring increasingly
frequently in the infrastructure sector in line with the private sector development strategy
priorities.
                        India: Case Study on Private Sector Development and Operations   13


                            35.   Despite these encouraging trends, obtaining central
                            bank approval to access local currency finance in the swap
                            market has been a serious problem. In most cases, sponsors
                            and borrowers praised ADB's commercial processing
                            procedures. However, several complaints were heard about
                            unnecessarily complex legal documentation requirements
that were slow to process compared to those of competing development institutions,
such as International Finance Corporation. Social safeguard project processing
requirements might be another issue, especially in the road sector, although this is
difficult to confirm given the lack of PSOD involvement in this sector. The National
Highway Authority has been negotiating with ADB's public sector operations over
whether squatters should receive compensation, and whether this should be paid at
market rates. The Government has expressed concerns about PSOD's low level of
engagement in infrastructure reforms. The resident mission in Delhi has only one PSOD
staff member who does not have any support staff. This scale of operation appears
seriously inadequate given the scale of opportunities within the country, the complexity
of the environment, and the need to be on the ground establishing relationships with the
Government and the private sector.
