                                                                                                             1
Asian Development Bank. 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City, 1550 Metro
Manila, Philippines
Tel +63 2 632 4444; Fax +63 2 636 2163; evaluation@adb.org;
www.adb.org/evaluation

Evaluation Approach Paper
Project Performance Evaluation Report for the Karnataka Urban
Development and Coastal Environmental Management Program in
India (Loan 1704-IND)
September 2015

Team Leader: Ari Perdana, Evaluation Specialist (email: aperdana@adb.org)
Contact: evaluation@adb.org


A.        Introduction

1.      This evaluation approach paper (EAP) presents the background, issues to be addressed
and the proposed approach and schedule for the evaluation of the Karnataka Urban
Development and Coastal Environmental Management Program (KUDCEMP).1 The resulting
project performance evaluation report (PPER) will provide inputs to the ongoing Corporate
Evaluation Study on the Effectiveness of Safeguards Implementation Phase 2 and Country
Assistance Program Evaluation for India (planned for 2017). This PPER is being prepared
nearly 2 years after the circulation of the project completion report (PCR) in November 2012.2
By this time, all project components would have been completed. This will also provide sufficient
time for the outputs and outcomes to be reassessed and the impacts to become apparent.

2.      This evaluation approach paper sets out the scope and approach of this evaluation, the
requisite data sources, and the tentative resource and schedule requirements.

B.        Country and Project Background

3.       The report and recommendation of the President (RRP) reported that urban growth in
India in the 1990s far exceeded the capacity of existing infrastructure and municipal services in
urban areas. Karnataka was one of the most urbanized states, and its capital, Bangalore was
one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in the country in the 1990s. The economic growth
potential of other principal urban centers particularly in the coastal region could not be realized
partly due to inadequate urban infrastructure in these areas. Thus, the state identified the west
coast as a priority area for urban infrastructure investment. Poor infrastructure conditions in
these urban centers negatively affected the living standards of the population, economic growth,
and the natural environment. The government sought ADB support to address infrastructure
investment needs in these areas. ADB approved a $175.0 million loan for the KUDCEMP on 26
October 1999. At that time, ADB's presence in the India urban sector was limited. ADB had
only previously approved one project in the urban sector ­ the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development Project.3


1
    ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management Project. Manila.
2
    ADB. 2012. Project Completion Report: India: Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environment
    Management Program (Loan 1704-IND). Manila.
3
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management Project. Manila.
2


C.        Project Design and Implementation

4.      The project supported urban infrastructure investments in 10 urban centers along the
west coast of the state of Karnataka to improve the living conditions of about 1.2 million people
and protect the environment and natural resources in these areas.4

5.     The sector and/or area goals of the project, as stated in the project framework are to (i)
improve the quality of life in the urban areas; (ii) improve gross state product; and (iii) improve
guided planning of urban areas. The purpose of the project was to improve urban infrastructure
management and resource mobilization in Project cities.

6.       The project had 34 outputs and comprised six components: (i) capacity building,
community participation, and poverty reduction; (ii) water supply rehabilitation and expansions;
(iii) urban environmental improvement; (iv) street and bridge improvements; (v) coastal
environmental management; and (vi) implementation assistance,

7.     Capacity building, community participation, and poverty reduction. This component
aimed to provide training and technical assistance to municipal personnel involved in the
implementation of the subprojects; and promotes community awareness and participation
through community-based organizations for project activities such as poverty reduction and
slum improvement subprojects.

8.      Water supply rehabilitation and expansion. This component intended to reduce saline
intrusion and exposure of existing consumers to pathogens caused by sewage infiltration into
the water system as a result of low pressure and intermittent flow. Water supply was also to be
expanded to benefit areas and households experiencing the most severe shortages.

9.     Urban environmental improvement. This component aimed to improve wastewater
management, storm water drainage, solid waste management, traffic management, and
municipal services and facilities such as public markets and municipal offices in selected towns.

10.    Street and bridge improvements. This component aimed to rehabilitate and widen
streets and bridges in urban areas to ease traffic flow, improve road safety, and reduce
vehicular emissions. The project also included the associated roadside drainage and culvert
works.

11.     Coastal Environmental Management. This was to support the preparation of a
comprehensive development plan for three coastal districts, industrial pollution control and
environmental management program, urban waterfront rehabilitation plan, and mangrove
afforestation projects

12.  Implementation assistance. This was to be provided through the provision of project
management services, vehicles, and office equipment.

13.     The project cost at appraisal was equivalent to $251.4 million--comprising $93.9 million
in foreign exchange costs (37%), and $157.5 in local currency costs (63%). ADB's $175.0
million loan was equivalent to 70% of the project cost. The State Government funded the
equivalent of $55.3 million (22%); while the local governments contributed $21.1 million (8%).

4
    These 10 urban centers are: Ankola, Bhatkal, Dandali, Karwar, Kundapura, Mangalore, Puttur, Sirsi, Udupi, and
    Ullal.
                                                                                                       3



D.      Major Findings of Previous Evaluations

14.       The PPER will use previous ADB evaluation documents in developing and refining the
evaluation framework such as: (i) project completion report,5 (ii) PCR Validation Report (PVR),6
(iii) India Country Assistance Program Evaluation (CAPE),7 and (iv) Special Evaluation Study on
Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.8 The project was included as one of the case studies In
the last two evaluation studies, although it was not yet finished by then.

15.     Project Completion Report and Project Completion Report Validation Report. The
PCR assessed the project to be relevant, effective, efficient, and likely sustainable. The PVR
concurred with these ratings although the efficiency criterion was viewed as borderline efficient.
The performances of the borrower, executing agency, and ADB were all assessed satisfactory.
The PVR considered the project has generated significant impact. The PCR and PVR key
findings are summarized in Appendix 2.

16.      Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India.9 KUDCEMP was nearing
completion at the time the CAPE was prepared. The CAPE noted that, at least in the earlier
stages, local government of Mangalore City was reluctant to take over some assets created
under the project. KUDCEMP, like other urban projects in India at that time, was complex,
covered several towns across several sectors so it required more time and funds than the local
governments could provide to undertake the necessary financial, socioeconomic, and
institutional analyses of urban local bodies (ULBs), arrive at appropriate designs, build
consensus for all project components and urban reforms, and develop adequate implementation
arrangements and capacity.

17.     However, the CAPE considered some components of KUDCEMP effective. For
example, the Mangalore Water Supply Augmentation Scheme had improved the water supply
and quality of water in the city, and the construction of modern landfill sites with mechanized
waste separators and composting facilities had improved the quality of life in several project
towns. The community awareness and participation program (CAPP) component had also been
quite successful in facilitating the achievements of physical outputs. Property tax, water tariff
reforms, the development of self-help groups, and the establishment of microfinance institutions,
which were introduced by the program, were also considered as good practices in introducing
local reforms. In terms of resettlement and compensation payment, KUDCEMP was among the
ADB urban projects in India that had achieved reasonable levels of community satisfaction.10

18.    The Urban Sector Strategy and Operations evaluation, highlighted experiences with
ongoing multisector projects at that time including KUDCEMP,11 project performance was
assessed satisfactory but the evaluation cited 2-year delay in the Mangalore subcomponent,
mainly due to poor project ownership, lack of agreement on the loan size, inability to channel
the planned community participation, disagreement over project-related reform initiatives, and

5
   ADB. 2012. Project Completion Report: Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management
   Project. Manila.
6
   IED. 2014. Project Completion Report Validation Report: Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal
   Environmental Management Project. Manila: ADB.
7
   IED. 2007. Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India. Manila: ADB.
8
   IED. 2006. Special Evaluation Study: Urban Sector Strategy and Operations. Manila: ADB.
9
   IED. 2006. Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India. Manila: ADB.
10
   IED. 2006. Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India, Appendix 9. Manila: ADB.
11
   IED. 2006. Special Evaluation Study: Urban Sector Strategy and Operations. Manila: ADB.
4


internal problems between the program management unit, project implementation unit, and its
consultants.

E.      Evaluation Scope and Approach

19.     Objective. The PPER will assess the performance and impact of the project using IED's
methodology for evaluating sovereign projects. It will update the project design and monitoring
framework reported in the PCR, taking into account the progress in outcomes and impact
realized after project completion. The PPER expects to generate a series of findings, lessons,
and recommendations for future operations in the urban sector with a focus on two project
components--water supply and sanitation; and solid waste management; and wastewater
treatment (paras. 8­9).

20.     In addition to the general assessment of the project, the PPER will pay special attention
to two issues: resettlement and KUIDFC institutional development. The PPER will assess how
the resettlement plans were implemented, update the current status of compensation
disbursement and examine the latest situation of the affected families.12 With regards to
KUIDFC, the PPER will also examine (i) how the agency has evolved over time from its
experiences implementing ADB projects starting with the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development Project, which preceded KUDCEMP; ongoing multitranche financing facility (North
Karnataka Urban Sector Investment Program13 and Karnataka Integrated Urban Water
Management Investment Program14 and other externally funded projects, and (ii) to what extent
the ADB-KUIDFC cooperation in implementing KUDCEMP can be replicated in other, similar
projects.15

21.    Methodology. The evaluation will follow IED PPER guidelines for assessing public
sector projects using the evaluation criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and
sustainability.16 It will also assess the project's impact, institutional development, the
performance of borrower, executing agency and the ADB. The main evaluation questions are
presented in Appendix 1.

F.      Data Sources

22.     Secondary data (desk review). The PPER will collect information on the projects from
available documents including (i) ADB policies and strategies (such as Country Partnership
Strategy, Country Operations and Business Plans, Strategy 2020, Safeguard Policy, Urban
Operational Plans, Water Operational Plans), (ii) India and Karnataka State policies and

12
   According to the PCR, the project was categorized B for environment safeguard, and overall, it has complied with
   the environment covenants. At the time of approval, there was no categorization for involuntary and indigenous
   people safeguard risks. However, a total of 81.23 ha of private land were acquired during implementation. Some
   1,878 families were affected, 411 of which were vulnerable. The project allocated Rs555.3 million for compensation
   of acquired land and assets. By the time the PCR was prepared, some Rs43.5 million was not disbursed yet for
   reasons that included court cases for land disputes and migration. The project followed the ADB social safeguards
   requirement and prepared 22 short resettlement plans.
13
    ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility India: North Karnataka Urban Sector Investment Program. Manila.
14
    ADB. 2014. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility India: Karnataka Integrated Urban Water Management Investment Program. Manila.
15
   One of the strong features of the project is the executing agency, KUIDFC. When the project started, KUIDFC was
   a new agency with lack of experience and practically no model to follow. The PCR and PVR noted that over time
   the agency improved to become the primary state agency for most externally-aided and centrally-funded urban
   projects.
16
   IED. 2013. Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation Report for Public Sector Operations. Manila: ADB.
                                                                                                  5


strategies (e.g., the 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th five-year plans), (iii) project documentations
including the project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA), RRP, appraisal reports, back-to-
office reports, ADB PCR, Government PCR, environmental assessments, resettlement plans,
(iii) other urban and water sectors projects by the ADB and other partners, (iv) evaluation
documents (e.g., PVR, India CAPE, safeguard implementation studies), and (v) country
statistics and background documents.

23.    Primary data. This will be collected during consultations with concerned staff in South
Asia Regional Department and an independent evaluation mission to India. Interviews will be
conducted with India resident mission staff and key informants in government at the central,
state and city-level, and in KUIDFC. The team will also visit a number of project sites to directly
observe the condition of physical projects. Focus group discussions, interviews, and household
surveys will be conducted to gather first-hand information from the project beneficiaries. The
household survey will be conducted to collect information on beneficiaries' knowledge, attitude,
and practice as well as perceived benefits of the project. The survey will cover a sample of
project beneficiaries and comparison group, so the sampling will be designed to ensure
representativeness. An additional survey is planned to find and interview families affected by
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.

G.     Resource Requirements

24.     The evaluation will be led by an evaluation team comprising Ari Perdana (Evaluation
Specialist, team leader), Patricia Lim, evaluation officer (2 person-months), Myrna Fortu,
associate evaluation analyst, and Jennifer Llaneta, evaluation assistant (1 person-month) will
support the evaluation team in preparing the draft and finalizing the evaluation report. The draft
report is proposed to be peer reviewed by Tomoo Ueda, Principal Evaluation Specialist, and Au
Shion Yee, Evaluation Specialist.

25.    The evaluation will require the inputs of an international consultant (30 working days)
with proven track record in evaluating urban development projects, and a national consultant
(30 working days) for conducting household surveys. The terms of reference of the consultants
are given in Supplementary Appendix A. The estimated cost for the evaluation is $45,000
(Supplementary Appendix B).

H.     Tentative Schedule

26.    The evaluation will be carried out according to the following schedule:

                          Activity                                  Provisional Milestone
Approval of the Evaluation Approach Paper                                    September 2015
Independent Evaluation Mission in India                              October­November 2015
Preparation of Draft PPER                                       II October­II November 2015
Draft PPER for Interdepartmental and Government review                        III January 2016
Draft for Editor Review                                                     III February 2016
Submission to Director, IED1                                                       I March 2016
Director General Approval                                                         II March 2016
Circulation                                                                      III March 2016

27.    Subject to government concurrence, IED will field a team for the Independent Evaluation
Mission (in October/November 2015), comprising (i) IED Team Leader, Evaluation Specialist, (ii)
IED Evaluation Officer, (iii) an international consultant with extensive experience in urban
6


development projects and evaluation methods and process; and (ii) a national consultant with
experience in natural resource management, resettlement, and alternative livelihoods
development with extensive experience in conducting focus group discussions, and household
surveys.

I.     Dissemination of Findings

28.    The report, after approval, will be disseminated through the IED's website and
presentation at appropriate knowledge sharing events within and outside ADB.


Appendixes: 1. Evaluation Matrix: Key Project Performance Evaluation Report Questions
            2. Summary of Project Completion Report and Project Completion Report
               Validation Report Ratings and Key Findings
                  EVALUATION MATRIX: KEY PROJECT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION REPORT QUESTIONS
Criteria                                       Specific Evaluation Questions/Indicators                                Data Sources
I.       Project Performance
Relevance             Policies and strategies                                                                     MRM report
                          1. Is the project aligned with the government's priorities (national and state) and     SRC meeting report
                               development strategies?                                                            RRP
                          2. Was the project consistent with ADB's country and sector strategies? Did the         Loan Agreement
                               project remain aligned with ADB strategies and government priorities at            Grant Agreement
                               completion and at the time of evaluation?                                          BTORs
                      Design and formulation                                                                      Mid-term reviews
                          3. Was the rationale for the project based on a needs assessment and intensive          MOF Mid-term
                               consultation with stakeholders?                                                    evaluation
                          4. Was the project design appropriate to achieve the envisaged project outcome and      PCR and PVR
                               impacts?                                                                           CAPE/CPS
                          5. Was the project design flexible enough to allow adjustments in project design and    Field observation
                               scope during implementation?                                                       Key informant interviews
                          6. Was the Design and Monitoring Framework adequate and used to monitor                 Household survey and
                               progress of outputs and outcomes?                                                  interviews
                          7. Were relevant lessons from similar interventions in the country and/or sector
                               considered in the project design?
                          8. Were there other similar ongoing projects by the government or other
                               development, when the KUDCEMP started and during its implementation?
                          9. Were the project risks identified at appraisal adequately mitigated in the project
                               design?
                      Beneficiaries, stakeholders and ownership
                          10. To what extent were stakeholders (e.g. government, executing agency,
                               beneficiaries) involved during the design phase? What was the extent of their
                               participation during implementation? How was government ownership during
                               various stages of implementation and after completion?
                          11. Did the people in the project areas consider the project to be relevant to their
                               needs?
                          12. Were the beneficiaries appropriately targeted? To what extent did the project
                               reach the poor and vulnerable groups?
Effectiveness         General achievements of objectives                                                          RRP
                          1. To what extent were the project outputs and outcomes achieved as indicated in        Loan Agreement




                                                                                                                                             Appendix 1
                               the DMF?                                                                           Grant Agreement
                          2. What factors have positively and negatively contributed to their achievements?       BTORs
                      Community Awareness and Participation Program (CAPP)                                        Mid-term reviews
                          3. Was the CAPP managed and implemented as planned at appraisal? What                   PCR and PVR




                                                                                                                                             7
                                                                                                                                                8
Criteria                                      Specific Evaluation Questions/Indicators                                     Data Sources




                                                                                                                                                Appendix 1
                              activities were delivered?                                                             Field observation
                          4. To what extent did the CAPP contribute to the achievement of the project                Key informant interviews
                              outputs?                                                                               Household survey and
                      Resettlement and compensation                                                                  interviews
                          5. How was the resettlement conducted, in the absence of a safeguard/resettlement          Focus group discussions
                              specialist?
                          6. What is the current status of disbursement of compensation and assistance?
Efficiency            Project efficiency                                                                             RRP
                          1. How well were the project's resources used in achieving the outcomes? Were              Loan Agreement
                              they cost overrun or underrun and what were the reasons. If any?                       Grant Agreement
                          2. How does the re-calculated EIRR, compare with the EIRR at appraisal?                    BTORs
                      Process efficiency                                                                             PCR and PVR
                          3. In retrospect, what could have been done to avoid or reduce implementation              Mid-term reviews
                              delays? For instance, should short resettlement plans have been prepared at the        PMO and PIU
                              outset?                                                                                documentation
                                                                                                                     Key informant interviews
Sustainability          Benefit sustainability                                                                       Loan Agreement
                            1. What' project outputs and benefits still continue to exist?                           Grant Agreement
                            2. What is the likelihood that the project benefits will be sustained?                   BTORs
                            3. Do local communities continue to show ownership?                                      PCR and PVR
                        Operational sustainability                                                                   Mid-term reviews
                            4. What is the current condition of the project physical outputs, assets and services?   PMO and PIU
                            5. What coordination arrangements have been put in place after project completion?       documentation
                            6. What implementation arrangements have been established after project                  Field observation
                                completion?                                                                          Key informant interviews
                        Financial sustainability                                                                     Household survey and
                            7. How are post-project activities being financed?                                       interviews
                            8. Is the current tariff level adequate to ensure sustainability? Has the tariff level
                                been raised and sewerage surcharges been imposed as proposed in the 2011
                                Government Order?
                            9. Did the government have specific roadmap or strategy to adjust the tariff over
                                time?
II.      Institutional Development
Institutional               1. What institutional changes at the local, state and national level occurred during     PCR and PVR
development                     the project lifetime and how did they impact on the project outcomes?                PMO and PIU
                            2. How has KUIDFC improved and grown in strength over time?                              documentation
                            3. To what extent have the ADB-KUIDFC experience from implementing KUDCEMP               Field observations and
                                provided lessons for future government reforms or become a model for other,          interviews
                                similar projects?                                                                    Key informant interviews
Criteria                                    Specific Evaluation Questions/Indicators                                Data Sources
                        4. Are the CAPP and the related initiatives (such as community self-help groups,        Focus group discussions
                            microfinance groups) still existing?
                        5. Have the local reforms initiated by the project continued?
Impact                  1. To what extent have envisaged project impact as stated in the DMF been               PCR and PVR
                            achieved?                                                                           New project data
                        2. To what extent has the project brought significant changes to the cities and the     New official statistics
                            project beneficiaries?                                                              Field observations and
                        3. Have the beneficiaries perception of the project changed, before and after           interviews
                            completion? What direct contributions do beneficiaries see from the project?        Key informant interviews
                        4. What do the most recent data tell us about the impact indicators as stated in        Household survey and
                            DMF? How do they compare with non-project areas?                                    interviews
                        5. How do beneficiaries' knowledge, attitude, practice and key social indicators in     Focus group discussions
                            the project area compare to those in the non-project area?
                        6. How do the livelihood situation of the affected families now compare to the non-
                            resettled families?
III.    Other assessments
ADB performance     Quality at entry                                                                            PCR and PVR
                        1. Did ADB mobilize sufficient resources (including technical experts) during project   BTORs
                            design?                                                                             PMO and PIU
                        2. Did ADB take into account the concerns and needs of local government and local       documentation
                            communities? Were lessons learned from previous independent evaluations and         Key informant interviews
                            PCRs incorporated into the project design?
                    Supervision:
                        3. Did ADB (and the Government) suitably modify project design (as required)
                            during implementation in response to any changes in circumstance or emerging
                            opportunities?
                        4. Did ADB take prompt action to ensure the timely implementation of
                            recommendations from BTORs, including the mid-term review and resolve any
                            implementation bottlenecks?
                        5. What was the role and performance of the resident mission? How was the
                            relationship between headquarters and the resident mission?
Borrower            Quality of preparation                                                                      PCR and PVR
performance             1. Was the government (national and provincial) actively involved in the design?        BTORs
(quality of             2. Did they initiate any modifications in response to changing circumstances or         PMO and PIU




                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
preparation,                opportunities?                                                                      documentation
implementation          3. Was adequate staffing/resource provided for project management?                      Key informant interviews
and M&E)            Implementation and M&E
                        4. Were the flow of funds and procurement procedures suitable for ensuring timely
                            implementation?




                                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                                                                      10
 Criteria                                      Specific Evaluation Questions/Indicators                                       Data Sources




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 1
                            5. Have counterpart funds been provided adequately and on time?
                            6. Did the Government ensure adequate coordination with the national agencies;
                                and between national and provincial levels?
                            7. Did the government put in place an effective M&E system to generate timely
                                information on project performance and impact that is useful for project
                                management to take decisions?
                            8. Have the loan covenants and the spirit of the loan agreement been followed?
                            9. Did the government contribute to planning an exit strategy?
                            10. Have local governments provided support and resources to continue the services
                                and maintain the assets created by the project
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BTOR = back to office report, CAPE = country assistance program evaluation, CAPP = community awareness and
participation program, CPS = country partnership strategy, KUDCEMP = Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management Program,
M&E = monitoring and evaluation, MRM = management review meeting, PCR = project completion report, PIU = project implementation unit, PMO = project
management office, PVR = project completion report validation report, SRP = short resettlement plan.
Source: Asian Development Bank Independent Evaluation Department.
                                                                                          Appendix 2     11


SUMMARY OF PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT AND PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
             VALIDATION REPORT RATINGS AND KEY FINDINGS
Component            Rating                                    Description
Relevance        Relevant         The project aligned with the government's and ADB's sector strategy
                                  both at appraisal and on completion. Some adjustments were made
                                  during the early stage of implementation to address local needs and
                                  secure greater ownership by the 10 participating municipalities, such
                                  as shift in emphasis from roads to sewerage and provision of house
                                  service connections to property boundaries.

Effectiveness    Effective        The project provided improved water supply to around 212,770
                                  households, wastewater management services and sanitation to
                                  94,000 households, solid waste management system for 172,200
                                  households, and access to urban transport facilities to 1.2 million
                                  people in 10 cities. In addition to the physical outputs, the project has
                                  also introduced capacity building and community awareness and
                                  participation program (CAPP). The program's intended target was to
                                  institutionalize the participatory approach in all aspects in the project,
                                  to promote inclusion of the poor and disadvantaged, and to ensure
                                  sustainability.

Efficiency       Efficient        In the beginning, it suffered from a 12-month delay in project
                                  effectiveness, which subsequently delayed the selection of consultants
                                  and the on-lending renegotiation process. Other causes of delay were
                                  lengthy land acquisition and right of way clearances and high
                                  personnel turnover in the consulting firm. This has led to the extension
                                  of project closing date from 30 June 2005 to 25 November 2009.The
                                  project economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was high, ranging from
                                  15.9% to 41.6% for its water supply components, and 12.4% to 73.7%
                                  for its drainage components.

Sustainability   Likely           The long-term sustainability of the project will depend on how far the
                 sustainable      share of own revenue can be improved and further municipal-level
                                  reforms, including tariff, can be pursued.

Impact           PCR: not rated   The PVR assessed the impact to be significant based on overall
                 PVR:             progress against impact indicators listed in the DMF such as (a)
                 significant      doubling of median monthly per capita consumption level, (b) 14%
                                  average increase in property tax revenues in participating
                                  municipalities from 2000 to 2010, (c) reduction of average time taken
                                  for water collection by 30 minutes, and (d) increased annual gross
                                  state product growth rate from 7.1% (1990­1999) to 7.8% (2000­
                                  2010) although the PVR noted that the project contribution to GSP
                                  growth was uncertain.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, CAPP = community awareness and participation program, DMF = design and
management framework, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, GSP = gross state product, PCR = project
completion report, PVR = project completion report validation report.
Source: Asian development Bank Independent Evaluation Department.
