                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                  Independent Evaluation Department




                      EVALUATION KNOWLEDGE BRIEF


                                           ON


   GREENHOUSE GAS IMPLICATIONS OF ADB'S ENERGY SECTOR
                      OPERATIONS




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response, and the Board of
Directors' Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) Chair's summary of a discussion of the
report by DEC.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: EKB: REG 2009-38
Evaluation Knowledge Brief
October 2009




Greenhouse Gas Implications of ADB's
Energy Sector Operations




Independent Evaluation Department
                              ABBREVIATIONS

ADB      ­   Asian Development Bank
ADTA     ­   advisory technical assistance
APCF     ­   Asia­Pacific Carbon Fund
AR4      ­   Fourth Assessment Report of IPCC
AWG-KP   ­   Ad Hoc Working Group on further commitments for Annex I Parties under
             the Kyoto Protocol
BAP      ­   Bali Action Plan
BAU      ­   business as usual
CAP      ­   country assistance plan
CCS      ­   carbon capture and storage
CDM      ­   clean development mechanism
CDMF     ­   Clean Development Mechanism Facility
CEFPF    ­   clean energy financing partnership facility
CIF      ­   Climate Investment Fund
CMI      ­   carbon market initiative
CO2      ­   carbon dioxide
COP      ­   Conference of Parties
CPS      ­   country partnership strategy
CSP      ­   country strategy and program
CTF      ­   Clean Technology Fund
DMC      ­   developing member country
EEI      ­   energy efficiency initiative
EKB      ­   evaluation knowledge brief
ESP      ­   electrostatic precipitator
G5       ­   Group of Five
G8       ­   Group of Eight
GDP      ­   gross domestic product
GEF      ­   Global Environment Facility
GHG      ­   greenhouse gas
Gt       ­   gigaton
GWh      ­   gigawatt-hour
IEA      ­   International Energy Agency
IFI      ­   international financial institution
IPCC     ­   intergovernmental panel on climate change
kWh      ­   kilowatt-hour
LNG      ­   liquefied natural gas
LTSF     ­   Long-Term Strategic Framework
MDB      ­   multilateral development bank
mmbtu    ­   million British thermal unit
MTS      ­   Medium-Term Strategy
MW       ­   megawatt
OECD     ­   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PM-10    ­   particulate matter with a diameter smaller than 10 m
ppm      ­   part per million
PPTA     ­   project preparatory technical assistance
PRC      ­   People's Republic of China
PREGA    ­   Promotion of Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Greenhouse Gas
             Abatement
PSOD     ­   Private Sector Operations Department
REACH          ­   Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Climate Change
REGA           ­   Renewable energy, Energy efficiency, and GHG Abatement
RETA           ­   regional technical assistance
RRP            ­   report and recommendation of the President
SCF            ­   Strategic Climate Fund
SO2            ­   sulfur dioxide
SPTT           ­   Strategic Program on Technology Transfer
t              ­   ton
T&D            ­   transmission and distribution
TA             ­   technical assistance
tCO2e          ­   ton of CO2 equivalent
UNFCCC         ­   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
US             ­   United States
W              ­   watt


                                             NOTE

                                 In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                          Key Words

adb, asian development bank, greenhouse gas, ghg efficiency, energy security, emission
saving, greenhouse gas accounting, climate change mitigation in developing asia, adb energy
sector operation, ghg indicator, ghg saving


Director General      H. Satish Rao, Independent Evaluation Department (IED)
Directors             R.B. Adhikari, Independent Evaluation Division 1 (IED1), IED
                      H. Hettige, Independent Evaluation Division 2 (IED2), IED

Team leaders          P. Perera, Senior Evaluation Specialist, IED1, IED
                      K. Thukral, Evaluation Specialist, IED2, IED
Team members          I. Garganta, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant, IED1, IED
                      R. Perez, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant, IED2, IED
                      C. Roldan, Assistant Operations Evaluation Analyst, IED2, IED

                         Independent Evaluation Department, EK-1

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the Independent Evaluation Department does not
intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                          CONTENTS

                                                                                           Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                               i

I.     EVALUATION FOCUS                                                                        1
       A.    Rationale                                                                         1
       B.    Evaluation Framework                                                              1
       C.    Evaluation Approach                                                               4
II.    CONTEXTUAL AND STRATEGIC ASSESSMENT                                                     5
       A.    Energy­Economy­Environment Linkages                                               5
       B.    The Climate Change Challenge and the Global Response                              5
       C.    ADB's Strategic Response                                                          7
III.   ADB'S ENERGY SECTOR STRATEGIES AND OPERATIONS                                          10
       A.    Bangladesh                                                                       10
       B.    Peoples Republic of China                                                        11
       C.    India                                                                            12
       D.    Pakistan                                                                         13
       E.    Philippines                                                                      14
       F.    Viet Nam                                                                         15
IV.    GREENHOUSE GAS ACCOUNTING METHODOLOGIES AND EFFICIENCY
       ESTIMATES                                                                              16
       A.    Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Indicators                                             16
       B.    Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Methodologies Adopted or Developed                     17
V.     GREENHOUSE GAS EFFICIENCY ESTIMATES                                                    22
       A.    ADB Energy Sector Portfolio in the Six Countries                                 22
       B.    Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Analysis of ADB Energy Sector Lending
             Approvals of the Six Countries                                                   23
       C.    Country-Wise GHG Efficiency Analysis of Energy Sector Lending
             Operations                                                                       24
       D.    Ranking of Energy Supply Technologies Based on ADB-Supported
             Projects in the Six Countries                                                    27
VI.    EVALUATION OF GREENHOUSE GAS EFFICIENCY OF ADB'S ENERGY
       SECTOR OPERATIONS                                                                      31
       A.    Relevance and Strategic Focus                                                    31
       B.    Responsiveness                                                                   32
       C.    Results                                                                          35
VII.   KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                       36
       A.    The Backdrop                                                                     36
       B.    Key Findings                                                                     37
       C.    Recommendations                                                                  39


The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in preparing this report. Peter
Meier, Marie Gail de Sagon, Kalimuddin Ghauri, Abhijit Lohakarey, and Elizabeth Lat were the
consultants. To the knowledge of the management of IED, the persons preparing, reviewing, or
approving this report had no conflict of interest.
APPENDIXES

1.    Evaluation Approach                                                            41
2.    Economic Growth­Energy­Climate Change Nexus                                    45
3.    Overview of the Context for Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Improvements             58
      Provided by the International Community
4.    ADB Efforts and Initiatives                                                    69
5.    Greenhouse Gas Efficiency and Accounting Methodologies                         74
6.    Methodologies Adopted or Developed for Greenhouse Gas Efficiency               77
      Assessment of Energy Sector Projects and Components

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIXES

A.    Detailed Description of ADB's Energy Sector Strategies and Operations in the
      Six Selected Countries
B.    Methodologies for GHG Assessment of Different Types of Projects
C.    Country-Based Ranking of Energy Supplying Technologies based on
      Economic Cost and GHG Impacts




Attachments: Management Response
             DEC Chair Summary
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background and Context

       Globalization and technological advancements have created immense opportunities for
wealth creation in all parts of the world. Billions in Asia are now able to contribute to the global
economy; and with increased income levels and improved living conditions, millions have risen
above poverty levels. Concurrently, production of new goods and services, as well as rising
household incomes, have started pushing up energy demand growth rates in Asia, and the
developing Asian countries are expected to contribute to more than 58% of incremental global
primary energy consumption until 2030. Developing Asian countries rely largely on coal and
other fossil fuels to support their economic growth, as did other countries that industrialized
previously. Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from the use of such fuels contribute to
climate change impacts.

       It is by now also recognized that (i) the warming of the climate system since the mid-20th
century is unequivocal and is very likely (with greater than 90% confidence level) a
consequence of increased anthropogenic GHG emissions; (ii) developed economies cannot by
themselves achieve the most desirable outcome of stabilizing atmospheric GHG concentrations
to 450 parts per million carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalent by 2030; and (iii) technology and
finance should be made available to developing countries (including Asian Development Bank
[ADB] developing member countries [DMCs]) to move toward a low-carbon growth path.

         At the same time, ensuring energy security to meet the energy demand essential for
sustained economic growth is of vital importance to the DMCs. Hence, the DMCs need to adopt
a low-carbon growth path for their energy sectors to reduce the GHG emissions associated with
increased energy consumption as well as to improve the efficiency of energy usage. As the
leading development financing institution for developing Asia, ADB has a vital role to play in
promoting the deployment of new and efficient low-carbon technologies as they become
commercially available and thereby lower the carbon content of energy supplies. This will
require (among others) the following: (i) policy interventions for an accelerated shift away from
fossil fuels, (ii) financial mechanisms to defer the higher capital costs of new technologies until
they become available on a commercial scale, and (iii) capacity building and knowledge
dissemination on low-carbon technologies and end-user energy efficiency improvements.

        Although most development activities aimed at economic growth result in increased
GHG emissions, energy sector development is conspicuous by its direct contribution to GHG
emissions and the relative ease of measuring the GHG impacts of energy sector interventions.
This evaluation knowledge brief (EKB) examines, from the perspective of GHG emissions,
ADB's energy sector assistance over 2001­2008 in selected DMCs. Based thereon, it proceeds
to make suggestions on improving the GHG efficiency of ADB's future interventions in the
energy sector. As more information and tools become available to reasonably measure the
direct and indirect GHG impacts of ADB operations in various sectors, the methodologies
developed for the purpose of this EKB may be refined and possibly adapted to assess the GHG
efficiency of other sectors of ADB operations.

Assessment Approach

        The selected DMCs--Bangladesh, People's Republic of China (PRC), India, Pakistan,
Philippines, and Viet Nam--accounted for 80% of ADB's total energy assistance lending
approvals during 2001­2008. GHG emissions of energy projects approved during this period
ii


were estimated largely on the basis of information available in ADB's project appraisal
documents. For projects under implementation, updated information from project sponsors or
executing agencies was also incorporated. GHG emission savings were assessed with respect
to a project-specific counterfactual.

        For the purpose of this EKB, suitable methodologies for GHG accounting--which is the
basis for GHG efficiency computations--that were developed or adapted are based on the
following principles: (i) all energy sector ADB projects and project components in the six DMCs
were included; (ii) annual gross emissions were calculated ex-ante for project components
having quantifiable GHG impacts; (iii) GHG emission savings were computed with reference to
a static (project- and country-specific) baseline associated with the counterfactual; and (iv) the
project boundary was defined as per approved clean development mechanism methodologies
(where applicable) or a logical physical or system boundary.

         The GHG efficiency of ADB energy sector operations should be a measure of expected
GHG emission savings or increases in a DMC compared with a business-as-usual case. To
facilitate comparison across the various approved projects and components, a broad set of
indicators were adopted to assess the GHG efficiency of ADB portfolio. For each energy project
or investment approved from 2001 to 2008 and having direct/quantifiable GHG implications,
GHG emission savings were used to compute indicators of GHG efficiency (such as tons of CO2
equivalent [tCO2e] of GHG savings per $ million of capital investment or tCO2e of GHG savings
per unit of energy supplied). Such indicators were aggregated by country and by energy
subsector (type of project) to give a relative measure across countries and subsectors. With the
objective of identifying any strategic shift in ADB's energy sector operations, the GHG efficiency
of ADB's average lending approvals during 2006­2008 was compared with that for 2001­2005.

        Several projects analyzed as part of this study were approved when GHG efficiency and
climate change mitigation issues were not considered as important as now, both within ADB and
in the DMCs. Besides, even after climate change issues came to the forefront, not all energy
sector-related decisions made by DMCs or the various energy lending and nonlending
approvals from ADB have been or would be based on GHG-related considerations alone.
Energy security and energy access would remain the key rationale for many projects.

Relevance and Strategic Focus

       The six selected DMCs included in the EKB consider the ensuring of adequate energy
supplies to maintain the economic growth and improve the living conditions of their people to be
of primary importance. GHG efficiency improvement is relevant to the DMCs to the extent that it
is consistent with the above-mentioned objectives and contributes to improved energy security,
enhanced operational efficiency, and mitigation of local environmental impacts.

        The Medium-Term Strategy 2006­2008 also stated that DMCs would need to steer away
from the high per-capita energy consumption growth path adopted by the developed economies
of today if global climate change impacts were to be maintained at reasonable levels. ADB's
long-term strategy adopted in 2008 (Strategy 2020) recognizes as one of the five core
operational areas the development of clean energy sources to meet the energy security needs
of the DMCs. The recently revised 2009 Energy Policy, which recognizes the enormity of the
twin challenges of energy security and climate change, advocates a catalytic role for ADB in
advancing the clean energy agenda in Asia and the Pacific. It has brought the mitigation of
increasing GHG emissions in the energy sectors of DMCs to the forefront of ADB's energy
sector operations, together with energy security and access to energy.
                                                                                                                       iii



ADB's Institutional Response

        A strategic shift in ADB's operations to increase its assistance to key infrastructure
sectors (including energy infrastructure) began in 2006. At the same time, ADB formally
recognized the need for a focused approach to promote clean energy and energy-efficient
investments through the launch of the energy efficiency initiative with the objective of increasing
its assistance to clean energy projects to $1 billion by 2008. These have resulted in increased
approvals for power generation projects beginning in 2006 to meet the rapidly increasing energy
demand in large DMCs; but it also led to a new beginning for high-efficiency (but still high-GHG-
emitting) coal-fired power projects.

        ADB's energy sector operations are in line with the priorities set in the 2009 Energy
Policy. The energy efficiency initiative launched in 2006 has resulted in enhanced management
focus as well as increased the institutional capacity and awareness of ADB's operational staff
working in the energy sector on the need for a low-carbon approach to energy assistance. The
country strategy and programs and country partnership strategies prepared since 2006 for large
DMCs with significant GHG emissions explicitly mention the shifting of DMC energy sectors to
low-carbon development paths as a primary objective, together with ensuring energy security
and energy access. This is evident in the recently approved country strategies (e.g., for the PRC
and Pakistan) with targeted operations to increase lending support for renewable energy,
energy efficiency, and clean thermal power generation technologies.

          ADB's recent emphasis on clean energy investments1 is reflected in the
          (i)    increase in annual lending for clean energy investments from about $170 million
                 during 2001­2005 to more than $670 million in 2006­2008;
          (ii)   increase in the share of approvals for clean energy investments to total energy
                 sector approvals from 26% in 2001­2005 to 44% in 2006­2008;
          (iii)  increase in the share of advisory technical assistance and project preparatory
                 technical assistance supporting clean energy (to total energy sector advisory
                 technical assistance and project preparatory technical assistance) from 23% and
                 69%, respectively, during 2001­2005 to 43% and 85%, respectively, during
                 2006­2008; and
          (iv)   12-fold increase in annual approvals for nonsovereign energy sector lending and
                 equity investments from 2001­2005 to 2006­2008, most of which are in the
                 clean energy sector. This demonstrates the opportunity for private sector
                 investment in GHG-efficient businesses if the policy framework is appropriate.

        Energy sector approvals at the country level show some significant variations among the
six DMCs. A significant increase in ADB's energy sector operations occurred in India, where
ADB has diversified its energy sector portfolio from the power transmission and distribution
subsector during 2001­2005 to include several power generation projects consisting of
renewable technologies such as wind and small hydropower and large coal power plants,
deploying more efficient technologies compared with the existing conventional coal power
plants. A similar increase of ADB energy sector operations occurred in Pakistan and Viet Nam,
and recent approvals include an increasing share of power generation projects that result in

1
    Clean energy includes energy efficiency (including fuel switch), renewable energy, hydropower, clean coal technology,
    gas-based power generation, and gas infrastructure development projects. Conventional coal-fired power and open-
    cycle gas turbine-based generation projects, transmission, and distribution projects are not considered as clean
    energy project in this EKB.
iv


GHG savings compared with country-specific counterfactuals. However, ADB assistance to the
power sector in the PRC has reduced, and ADB's recent energy sector approvals have focused
on end-user energy efficiency improvement, expansion, and rehabilitation of centralized district
heating systems and fuel (natural gas) supply projects.

Results Achieved in terms of Improving GHG Efficiency of ADB's Energy Sector Portfolio

        For the purpose of assessing GHG efficiency, ADB's energy sector lending portfolio in
the six DMCs is divided into power supply projects, and fuel and thermal energy supply projects.
The annual average GHG emission savings due to power supply projects increased from
1.08 million tCO2e approved during 2001­2005 to 7.3 million tCO2e for the projects approved
during 2006­2008. The annual average GHG savings attributable to ADB (i.e., in proportion to
its investment in the total project cost) in the power supply projects increased from 0.58 million
tCO2e for the projects approved during 2001­2005 to 1.65 million tCO2e for the projects
approved during 2006­2008. The improvement in GHG savings in the power supply projects is
due to increased ADB financing of power generation projects deploying zero or low emission
technologies (renewable energy including hydropower) and to more efficient thermal power
technologies such as supercritical coal power plants and combined-cycle gas turbines.

        The annual average GHG savings of fuel and thermal energy supply projects approved
during 2001­2005 (i.e., 1.53 million tCO2e) dropped marginally (to 1.31 million tCO2e) for
projects approved during 2006­2008. Consequently, there is a corresponding reduction in the
average annual GHG savings attributable to ADB for projects approved during 2001­2005 from
0.44 million tCO2e to 0.38 million tCO2e for projects approved during 2006­2008. This was due
mainly to the absence in the latter period, of methane destruction projects, which have high
GHG savings.

Ranking of Energy Supply Technologies Based on ADB's Energy Sector Portfolio

        The energy supply technologies included in ADB's energy sector portfolios in the six
DMCs were ranked according to the economic cost of supplying a unit of energy for electricity
supply projects. The ranking was done with and without the cost of GHG emissions for a range
of fuel price and carbon price scenarios. However, the analysis is limited to the extent that it was
undertaken for the projects included in ADB's portfolio, without considering site- and country-
specific limitations of deploying different technologies and the fuel and renewable energy
resource endowments of the different countries.

        In the scenario resembling the prevailing fuel costs and with no value attached to carbon
emissions, the following can be inferred: (i) use of coal bed methane for power generation is the
most economically attractive, as methane is a by-product of coal mining without any economic
value or cost in the absence of the project; (ii) conventional pulverized coal-fired power plants
are economically more attractive than the more efficient supercritical steam or fluidized bed
generation options, as the savings in coal usage are not sufficient to offset the incremental
capital cost of advanced technologies; (iii) large hydropower projects entail higher costs than
coal-fired power options, which perhaps reflects the small sample size and specific hydropower
project site conditions; (iv) gas-fired combined cycle projects are more expensive than
hydropower and coal power projects but more economical than gas-fired open-cycle gas turbine
projects; (v) renewable energy options, which normally have a relatively low capacity factor, are
in general more expensive than large hydropower and fossil fuel-fired power plants; and
(vi) rehabilitation of coal- or gas-fired power plants is not economically attractive when fuel
                                                                                                 v


prices are low, as the incremental efficiency gains come with relatively high capital investment
requirements.

         The analysis also shows that when the costs of GHG emissions are introduced at an
assumed GHG price of $20/tCO2e (i) renewable energy and hydropower projects become more
attractive than coal power plants, and (ii) supercritical coal power plants become more attractive
than conventional subcritical power plants. At higher fuel prices and at a higher GHG price of
$60/tCO2e, the relative advantage of renewable and hydropower plants over thermal power
plants becomes even more pronounced. A similar analysis of fuel and thermal energy supply
projects shows that the costs of methane destruction and methane transportation and
distribution systems remain lower than natural gas supply infrastructure costs under all fuel and
carbon price scenarios.

Key Findings

        Most supply-side energy investments will necessarily add to GHG emissions in
absolute terms. To maintain the economic growth required for sustained poverty reduction in
DMCs, the energy supply infrastructure has to keep pace with the increasing demand for
energy. This requires investments in new power plants, power transmission and distribution
networks, and gas pipelines and related infrastructure. Investments supporting fossil fuel usage
directly (e.g., thermal power plants and gas pipelines and related facilities) or indirectly (e.g.,
increasing electricity generated with fossil fuel by expanding the transmission and distribution
network) will result in increased GHG emissions in absolute terms. However, the GHG efficiency
of these investments should not be measured in absolute terms but rather in relative terms (i.e.,
in comparison with the most likely scenario in the absence of ADB intervention).

        GHG-efficient investments have been part of ADB's energy sector portfolio for
many years without explicit recognition. ADB has been financing GHG-efficient energy
sector infrastructure development projects for promoting economic growth in DMCs since well
before the beginning of the study period. Prior to 2005, these investments were justified in ADB
loan documents on the basis of their economic and financial viability and local environmental
impacts, and GHG efficiency improvement was not considered as a reason for ADB support--
which is perhaps a reason for the inadequacies of relevant information and data in report and
recommendation of the President (RRP) documentation for projects approved prior to 2005.

         There has been increased focus on GHG-efficient investments supported by ADB
since 2006. ADB's lending to energy sector investments with direct GHG savings have
increased since 2006, which is consistent with the recently approved country strategies, in
which shifting the energy sector to a low-carbon development trajectory is explicitly identified as
an intended development outcome. Besides, progressive commercialization of new and
increasingly sophisticated renewable energy technologies, and increasingly higher efficiency
fossil fuel-fired power generation, have also increased ADB's maneuverability toward meeting
the DMCs' broader development objectives while ensuring an energy-efficient growth path. The
operations approved for support by ADB since 2006 that merit specific attention in this context
include increasing the share of renewable energy (with the introduction of large wind turbines in
the PRC), advanced combined-cycle gas turbines and cleaner coal combustion technologies for
power generation (especially in India), developing infrastructure for supply of less GHG-
intensive fossil fuels such as natural gas (PRC and India), and industrial energy efficiency
projects (PRC).
vi


       Renewable energy is still a high-cost option for many DMCs. Although the share of
renewable energy in large DMCs such as the PRC and India is increasing in response to fiscal
and other incentives and the targets set by the respective governments, the costs per unit of
energy from renewable energy projects are higher than the fossil fuel-based alternatives. There
is scope for further reducing the cost of energy from renewable sources by developing more
appropriate technologies for the Asian region, promoting regional manufacture of renewable
energy equipment, and exploiting scale economies arising from increased penetration of
renewable energy technologies in the Asian region.

        There is scope for expanding ADB investments in industrial energy efficiency
projects. The heavy industry sector (e.g., cement, steel, petrochemical) consumes a significant
share of energy in rapidly industrializing DMCs, and the industrial energy efficiency of DMCs in
terms of energy consumption per unit of industrial output lags behind that of the more advanced
countries. However, ADB has not had much success in channeling financing to industrial energy
efficiency improvement due to (i) ADB's lack of engagement and expertise in financing industrial
projects, (ii) the relatively small size of investment per industrial unit, (iii) ADB's internal policies
discouraging it from engaging state-owned enterprises involved in heavy industries, and (iv) the
need for financial intermediaries to channel ADB financing to industrial energy efficiency
improvement projects.

         More emphasis is required in encouraging policy reforms to promote GHG
efficiency of energy sector operations. In the six selected DMCs, ADB's policy dialogue has
been generally focused on institutional reforms of energy sector entities and less emphasis in
initiating broader policy reforms supporting GHG efficiency investments. This may be due to
lack of access that ADB has had to policy makers in larger DMCs such as India, where ADB has
focused primarily on state-level issues. Even in countries such as Bangladesh, where ADB was
highly influential, its policy dialogue was focused primarily on institutional reforms and creating
an enabling environment for private sector investments. However, there are exceptions to this
trend. In the PRC, ADB has selectively engaged with the Government through a series of
technical assistance activities to provide high-level inputs for policy reforms to encourage
investments in improved district heating systems and coal-bed methane recovery. In Pakistan,
ADB has supported the policy framework for renewable energy investments.

        Appropriate indicators are needed in the Results Framework (2008) for tracking
implementation of the energy policy. In line with Strategy 2020, ADB's 2009 Energy Policy
recognizes the importance of energy security and climate change and sets targets for approvals
of ADB's financial support on clean energy technologies. The implementation of the Energy
Policy is to be monitored as per the ADB Results Framework, which clearly states that
(i) appropriate indicators for clean energy remain to be identified (and that they would be
incorporated in future versions of the Results Framework), and (ii) ADB's contribution to country
and regional outcomes is to be assessed by aggregating key outputs delivered to DMCs.
Hence, appropriate indicators need to be incorporated into the ADB Results Framework to
monitor the achievement of targets set in the 2009 Energy Policy, for which some of the
indicators and methodologies developed in this EKB could provide a useful basis.

        The quality of information and data for GHG efficiency analysis reported in RRPs
is highly variable. The quality of GHG efficiency reporting in RRPs correlates well with the
quality of economic analysis and the type of project. Many RRPs for energy efficiency,
renewable energy, and hydropower projects provide GHG savings estimates or relevant data for
making reasonable estimates of GHG savings. For other types of projects (e.g., gas
infrastructure development and power transmission and distribution), the inadequacies of data
                                                                                                vii


relevant for GHG savings estimation are most evident. The design and monitoring frameworks
presented in some recent RRPs also include GHG savings-related targets and indicators--
although the methodology for assessing GHG savings is not clearly outlined. The GHG analysis
undertaken in the RRPs and the GHG efficiency indicators used do not follow a consistent
methodology. As a result, the information provided in RRPs is of little use to monitor the
portfolio-wide GHG efficiency of ADB.

       There is a large potential for coal-bed and landfill methane capture projects in
PRC, India, and Indonesia. These projects have high degrees of GHG efficiency, as methane
has a global warming potential 21 times that of CO2, and the captured methane can be used as
a clean fuel source to replace coal in power generation and as a clean residential, commercial,
and industrial fuel. ADB could selectively initiate a policy dialogue with government agencies
and coal mining enterprises with the objective of expanding its investments in methane capture
and use based on its past experience in such projects in the PRC.

        Coal remains as the fuel of choice for many DMCs for power generation. Due to
their large coal reserves, the relatively low cost, the proven reliability of coal power plants for
base-load power generation, and the lack of suitable alternatives to provide the required scale
of power generation capacity at an affordable price, coal remains a preferred fuel in several
DMCs. Hence, if ADB is to remain relevant to the needs of its DMCs, it could consider
supporting coal-based power generation following more advanced and efficient technologies
such as supercritical boilers, integrated gasification combined-cycle power plants, and carbon
capture and sequestration subject to technical feasibility in the country context. If such
advanced technologies are not feasible, conventional coal technologies may have to be
supported to ensure energy security at an affordable price. However, these technologies entail a
significantly higher cost than conventional coal power plants, and the GHG savings arising from
the deployment of such advanced technologies are not eligible for carbon financing at present.
Hence, ADB needs to explore appropriate financing mechanisms to encourage such
technologies.

        ADB's Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) has the potential to play a
significant role in promoting GHG-efficient investments. A review of ADB's lending
operations shows that PSOD operations (especially in the PRC and India) have high potential
for GHG efficiency improvement. This is due mainly to the type of projects supported by PSOD,
which include renewable energy (e.g., wind in India and small hydropower in Pakistan);
supercritical coal power plants and liquefied natural gas terminals in India; district heating
efficiency, industrial and commercial building energy efficiency, and fuel switching investments
in the PRC; and rehabilitation of privatized thermal power plants in Pakistan and Philippines.
Although there has been an increase in public sector lending for hydropower projects (in PRC,
India, and Viet Nam) and energy efficiency projects (notably in the PRC), most public sector
lending continues to be dominated by traditional power transmission and distribution projects.

     This EKB puts forward the following recommendations for consideration by ADB
Management in its energy sector operations.

                                                                            Responsible       Time
Recommendations                                                             Department       Frame
1.   Assess GHG implications of future investments with significant         RSDD, RDs,        2011
     GHG impacts or savings (para. 116). During the planning,                and PSOD
     processing, and implementation of future energy sector investments,
     the following may be considered:
 viii


                                                                                  Responsible    Time
Recommendations                                                                   Department    Frame
     (i)    Prepare a consistent framework for identifying projects with
            significant GHG impacts or savings at the concept clearance
            stage and undertaking GHG assessment at appraisal stage for
            such projects;
     (ii)   Undertake an ex-ante assessment of GHG impacts for
            projects with significant GHG impacts or savings with respect
            to a plausible counterfactual to the project; and
     (iii)  Reconfirm the GHG assessment mentioned in (ii) above at
            project completion for projects with significant GHG impacts or
            savings.

2.      Promote GHG efficient investments (para. 117). In terms of                RDs, PSOD,    2012
        selecting energy sector investments for ADB support--and taking into       and RSDD
        account other objectives related to economic growth, energy security,
        access of affordable energy--the following may be considered:
        (i)     Mechanism to buy down incremental cost of clean coal
                technologies (compared to conventional pulverized coal
                subcritical power plants) in grid systems that are sufficiently
                large. ADB should take the lead in mobilizing funds for
                establishing a financing mechanism that buys down (in part or
                full) the incremental cost of relatively higher cost but more
                GHG-efficient coal power plants.
        (ii)    Scaling up development of appropriate and affordable
                renewable energy technologies for DMCs through (a)
                supporting regional research and development, (b) pilot
                testing new technologies in selected DMCs, (c) scaling up the
                deployment of new renewable energy technologies through
                technology transfer, and (d) supporting regional manufacturing
                of packaged renewable energy products and subassemblies.
        (iii)   Aggressively pursuing methane destruction projects. As a
                first step, ADB should initiate an assessment of opportunities
                for reducing anthropogenic methane emissions (from energy
                sector operations such as coal mining, as well as nonenergy
                sectors such as municipal solid waste management), and
                selectively pursuing investment opportunities arising from
                such an assessment.
        (iv)    Scaling up investments in industrial energy efficiency
                improvement. ADB's standard financial products and lending
                modalities are not appropriate for expanding its lending to
                industrial energy efficiency improvement. Hence, ADB should
                develop a suite of lending modalities to meet the specific
                requirements of industrial energy efficiency projects and pilot
                test these in selected DMCs with sufficiently large industrial
                base.
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, GHG = greenhouse gas, PSOD = Private
 Sector Operations Department, RD = regional department, RSDD = Regional and Sustainable Development
 Department.



                                                          H. Satish Rao
                                                          Director General
                                                          Independent Evaluation Department
                                          I.       EVALUATION FOCUS

A.        Rationale

1.      Globalization and technological advancements have created immense opportunities for
wealth creation in all parts of the world. Billions in Asia are now able to contribute to the global
economy; and with increased income levels and improved living conditions, millions have risen
above poverty levels. Concurrently, production of new goods and services, as well as rising
household incomes, have started pushing up energy demand growth rates in Asia, and the
developing Asian countries are expected to contribute to more than 58% of incremental global
primary energy consumption until 2030. However, the energy technologies deployed widely in
Asia have not changed at the same pace. Asian nations rely largely on coal and other fossil
fuels to support their economic growth, as did other countries that industrialized previously.
Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs)1 from the use of such fuels contribute to climate
change impacts.

2.       At the same time, ensuring energy security to meet the energy demand essential for
sustained economic growth is of vital importance to the developing member countries (DMCs).
Hence, the DMCs need to adopt a low-carbon growth path for their energy sectors to reduce the
GHG emissions associated with increased energy consumption as well as to improve the
efficiency of energy usage. As the leading development financing institution for developing Asia,
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has a vital role to play in promoting the deployment of new
and efficient low-carbon technologies as they become commercially available and thereby lower
the carbon content of energy supplies. This will require (among others) the following: (i) policy
interventions for an accelerated shift away from fossil fuels, (ii) financial mechanisms to defer
the higher capital costs of new technologies until they become available on a commercial scale,
and (iii) capacity building and knowledge dissemination on low-carbon technologies and end-
user energy efficiency improvements.

3.     Although most development activities aimed at economic growth result in increased
GHG emissions, energy sector development is conspicuous by its direct contribution to GHG
emissions and the relative ease of measuring the GHG impacts of energy sector interventions.
This evaluation knowledge brief (EKB) examines, from the perspective of GHG emissions,
ADB's energy sector assistance over 2001­2008 in selected countries. Based thereon, it
proceeds to make suggestions on improving the GHG efficiency of ADB's future interventions in
the energy sector. As more information and tools become available to reasonably accurately
measure the direct and indirect GHG impacts of ADB operations in various sectors, the
methodologies developed for the purposes of this EKB may be refined and adapted to other
sectors of ADB operations.

B.        Evaluation Framework

4.      Against this backdrop, the immediate objectives of this EKB are to (i) gain insights
concerning the GHG efficiency of ADB's energy sector lending operations as well as the
relevant policy dialogue during 2001­2008; and (ii) understand how ADB energy sector
operations could be more strategically focused, effective, and sustainable in improving the GHG
efficiency of the energy sector in the DMCs.

1
    GHGs are gases deemed to cause global warming; they include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane, and several other
    industrial gases. The relative contributions of different gases to global warming are different; for instance, methane
    is known to have a climate change impact 21 times that of CO2.
2



5.      The EKB pertains to the GHG aspects of energy operations alone, and includes the
following key assessment areas:
        (i)    Component 1: Contextual and strategic assessment. The linkages among
               economic growth, energy consumption, and GHG emissions are examined, as is
               the global response to rising climate change concerns. ADB's strategic focus on
               climate change, as articulated in ADB's key strategy and policy statements (such
               as the Long-Term Strategic Framework [LTSF] and Energy Policy), are
               examined.
        (ii)   Component 2: Qualitative assessment of ADB's country level energy sector
               operations with respect to GHG efficiency enhancement. The extent to which
               ADB strategies and policies are reflected in country partnership strategies
               (CPSs),2 as well as in the portfolio of programs and projects of selected
               countries, is examined. The type of policy dialogue and technical assistance (TA)
               programs are examined from the specific perspective of GHG efficiency
               enhancement.
        (iii)  Component 3: GHG accounting methodologies. Methodological aspects
               related to estimation of GHG emission savings (or otherwise) of ADB's lending
               portfolio are addressed. GHG accounting methodologies are developed for the
               various categories of energy projects/components. In so doing, the approaches
               adopted for claiming certified emission reduction credits under the clean
               development mechanism (CDM) are considered (to the extent available and
               relevant), as well as economic analyses presented in project appraisal
               documents.
        (iv)   Component 4: GHG efficiency assessment of ADB's energy sector lending
               operations. The performance of relevant ADB energy sector projects and
               investment programs is examined in terms of GHG efficiency.
               Projects/investment programs approved during 2001­2008 are analyzed by
               applying the relevant GHG accounting methodologies for each project
               component.3 Trends in GHG efficiency of the overall ADB energy sector portfolio
               are assessed with a view to gauging time trends (if any), for instance, since the
               launch of the carbon market and energy efficiency initiatives in 2005/06.

6.     The EKB also examines learning from past and current good practices in the experience
of ADB with the objective of providing guidance for its future energy sector operations to be
more focused and effective in improving the GHG efficiency of energy sectors of the DMCs. The
key assessment issues addressed in the context of the evaluation framework are shown in the
box.




2
    Previously referred to as country strategy programs, country assistance plan (CAP), or country operational
    strategies.
3
    Several project loans include components that fall in various subsectors or categories. Each subsector or category
    is treated separately for purposes of GHG accounting and GHG efficiency analysis.
                                                                                                        3



                                Key Assessment/Evaluation Issues

Component 1: Contextual and Strategic Assessment
(i)   What are the links among economic growth, energy sector development, and GHG emissions
      for selected countries?
(ii)  What is the impetus to GHG emissions abatement that comes from the global community (i.e.,
      the UNFCCC and its agreements, protocols, action plans; the World Bank; bilaterals; country
      groupings; etc.)?
(iii) What is the importance/priority given to GHG efficiency improvements in ADB strategies and
      energy sector policies?

Component 2: Qualitative Assessment of ADB's Country Operations with respect to GHG
Efficiency
(i)     How do ADB strategies and policies encouraging GHG efficiency translate into CPSs?
(ii)    To what extent have CPSs incorporated climate change mitigation-related issues?
(iii)   To what extent has ADB engaged the DMCs in identifying the linkages between economic
        growth and GHG emissions and adopting appropriate measures to prepare for limits on GHG
        emissions of DMCs in the future through international agreements?
(iv)    To what extent did ADB promote GHG efficiency in DMCs through policy dialogue (through
        program loans and nonlending operations)?
(v)     To what extent are GHG implications explicitly acknowledged in approved lending projects and
        investment programs and TA?

Component 3: GHG Accounting Methodologies
(i)  What are the key methodological issues with respect to project and component categories that
     should be considered for GHG emissions accounting and for facilitating aggregation across the
     portfolio?
(ii) What methodologies should be developed and/or adopted to analyze ADB's project portfolio?

Component 4: GHG Efficiency Assessment of ADB's Energy Sector Lending Operations
(i)   What may be relevant and good indicators of GHG efficiency in ADB's portfolio?
(ii)  What are the key lessons from past investments in GHG emission-saving and reduction energy
      supply and end-use projects, and how these can be scaled up?
(iii) What are the portfolio-wide GHG efficiency indicators for different types of projects and their
      trends during the study period?
(iv)  How do the GHG efficiency indicators of ADB energy sector operations vary from country to
      country?

ADB = Asian Development Bank, CPS = country partnership strategy, DMC = developing member country, GHG =
greenhouse gas, TA = technical assistance, UNFCCC = United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Source: Compiled by the study team.

7.     The EKB examines ADB's energy sector operations (in the context of its country policies
and strategies) in a select group of DMCs that have made significant contributions to global
GHG emissions and thus provide more opportunities for accelerated deployment of low-carbon
technologies. The EKB assesses the following:
       (i)     Relevance and strategic coherence of ADB strategies and policies from the
               viewpoint of consistency with national energy sector strategies and climate
               change mitigation plans: relevance of ADB's corporate strategies toward steering
               DMCs to a low-carbon growth path, and strategic focus of ADB's country
               strategies in improving the GHG efficiency of its energy sector interventions.
       (ii)    Responsiveness of ADB's strategies, policies, and operations (lending and
               nonlending), in particular the following: ADB's institutional response toward
               improving the GHG efficiency of energy sector operations, resources allocated by
4


               ADB toward mitigating GHG emissions through its own resources and resources
               mobilized from other aid agencies, ADB's efforts toward mobilizing private sector
               participation, and accounting of GHG emissions of ADB-financed energy sector
               projects.
       (iii)   Results that may be attributed to ADB directly or indirectly for supporting GHG
               efficiency enhancements in DMCs, in particular related to policy reforms
               promoted by ADB that propel DMCs to a low-carbon growth path; and ADB
               contribution to GHG emission savings on the basis of lending approvals.

C.     Evaluation Approach

8.     Modalities. The evaluation approach is described in Appendix 1. The assessment was
undertaken based on a mix of literature review, desk studies, and interviews with concerned
ADB staff and borrower and executing agency personnel. Six DMCs (Bangladesh, People's
Republic of China [PRC], India, Pakistan, Philippines, and Viet Nam) are given a detailed
evaluation. These six DMCs accounted for 80% of ADB's total energy sector (lending plus
nonlending) assistance approvals during 2001­2008. Although Indonesia is one of the largest
GHG emitters in the world, mainly due to land use pattern changes, the EKB did not include
Indonesia, as ADB did not have significant energy sector interventions during 2001­2008.

9.      Limitations. The GHG analysis and GHG efficiency estimation is undertaken for over
80 distinct project components with quantifiable GHG impacts belonging to over 50 energy
sector investment projects approved by ADB during 2001­2008 in the six DMCs. The
quantitative analysis was undertaken only for the investment projects with quantifiable GHG
emissions. The GHG impacts of policy reforms supported through program loans, TA, and
policy dialogue has not been quantified and is assessed on qualitative terms. The study does
not include ADB investments in transport, urban, agriculture, and other sectors, which have
implications on the overall energy consumption of the country concerned and GHG emissions.
The study is focused on GHG emissions of energy sector operations; hence, the broader
climate change-related issues including environmental issues and ADB's effort to prepare the
DMCs for adapting to climate change are not addressed in the study.

10.     It is recognized that precise GHG emission estimates can be made only when the
projects have reached commercial operation. This necessarily implies that loans approved
5 years or more ago must be analyzed. However, such a sampling of projects would clearly
miss any changes affected in recent years when climate change mitigation concerns have
become increasingly important and ADB's carbon market and energy efficiency initiatives have
been launched. The project appraisal documents also do not always provide relevant
information on a plausible counterfactual scenario to the project.

11.     It is appreciated that most of the projects and components analyzed as part of this study
were approved with the objective of ensuring the energy security of the country concerned at
least cost. Even after climate change issues came to the forefront, not all energy sector-related
decisions made by DMCs or the various energy lending and nonlending approvals from ADB
would be based on GHG-related considerations alone, and energy security and energy access
remains the key rationale for most of the projects. It is also noted that the cost of GHG
emissions is not considered as an economic cost during the economic analysis of ADB-financed
projects undertaken at the project appraisal stage. As a result, there is limited information on
GHG impacts in ADB's project appraisal documents, principally the report and recommendation
of the President (RRP).
                                                                                                               5


                       II.      CONTEXTUAL AND STRATEGIC ASSESSMENT

A.        Energy­Economy­Environment Linkages

12.     More than 600 million people in the Asia and Pacific region still live in absolute poverty
(with incomes of less than $1 per day), and over 1.7 billion are poor (as measured against a
benchmark of less than $2 per day). Although growth rates in ADB DMCs over the last decade
have been impressive, even if these continue into the future, by 2020 only the PRC (among the
ADB DMCs) will reach a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) that is above the world
average. However, increased energy consumption in DMCs, an essential input to sustained
economic development, would result in environmental impacts including GHG emissions.

13.     Increasing concern over global climate change is not the first time that the trade-off
between economic development and environment has come to the forefront of the development
agenda. By the 1980s, it was recognized that the unmitigated local environmental
consequences of infrastructure development (notably power generation and transportation)
impose significant costs on DMC economies.4 Governments in Asia (as elsewhere) had enacted
environmental quality regulations and set emission standards. Recent experience shows that
local environmental benefits outweighed compliance costs, and environmental mitigation costs
represented a small percentage of project costs in most of the infrastructure projects. However,
the situation is very different with GHG. Benefits of GHG emission mitigation are evident mainly
at the global level, while the cost of GHG mitigation is to be borne by the DMCs. However, there
are significant cost advantages of addressing GHG mitigation, together with the mitigation of
local environment impacts if appropriate financial incentives can be provided to the DMCs.
Another factor that complicates the allocation of costs and benefits of GHG mitigation is time, as
global warming is due to accumulated GHGs in the atmosphere since industrialization began.
Hence, today's pollutants are not the sole contributors to global warming, and allocation of
differential responsibility for global warming based on the historical contribution of GHG
emissions further complicates the ongoing debate on limiting GHG emissions.

14.     An increase in carbon emissions in the DMCs in both absolute terms and on per capita
terms is unavoidable in the foreseeable future as DMCs' economies are expected to maintain
their current growth trajectories. However, the emphasis on economic development and
economic efficiency does not necessarily lead to higher GHG emissions, as there are many win-
win strategies that offer low carbon development pathways, especially in the larger developing
economies in Asia. The magnitude of these increases will be dependent upon the interplay of
policies and opportunities in three main areas: (i) technology improvements directed to
increased efficiency in energy supply and energy consumption, (ii) energy pricing policy and the
reduction of fuel subsidies, and (iii) choice of technologies adopted for energy security
enhancements. A detailed discussion on such issues is presented in Appendix 2.

B.        The Climate Change Challenge and the Global Response

15.    The need for accelerating the global response for managing the adverse climate change
impacts of business-as-usual (BAU) growth strategies is becoming increasingly clear, and
several initiatives have been taken by the global community to address this. The
intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) and various international forums and
organizations that have included climate change in their agendas in recent years have

4
    Local environmental consequences include health costs and damage costs to agriculture, forests, and displaced
    project-affected families.
6


recognized the primacy of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) as the forum for international dialogue on climate change. The details are presented
in Appendix 3 and are summarized below. The UNFCCC now has 192 parties (country
governments) that review the findings and progress of various initiatives and take decisions on
further actions through annual meetings of the Conference of Parties. The UNFCCC has moved
gradually from its role of encouraging action to that of seeking commitments to manage the
adverse impacts of climate change. It began with somewhat small commitments set in the Kyoto
Protocol and is now poised to seek larger commitments from the global community.

16.      The IPCC in its Fourth Assessment Report of 2007 has stated that, on the basis of
scientific evidence, warming of the climate system since the mid-20th century is unequivocal and
that it is very likely (greater than 90% confidence level) a consequence of increased
anthropogenic GHG emissions. Substantive reductions in GHG emissions and concentrations
are required to keep the average global temperature rise to within 2oC from pre-industrial
levels.5 Containing GHG concentrations at 450 parts per million (ppm) is considered the most
desired level to achieve this objective.

17.      The International Energy Agency presented multiple GHG emission scenarios at the
Group of Eight (G8) countries Hokkaido summit, some of which build on the work of the IPCC.
The key findings of the International Energy Agency include the following: (i) as energy-related
carbon dioxide (CO2) accounting for more than 60% of global GHG emissions, the energy sector
will be central to the discussions on the level of GHG concentrations to aim for, and how to
achieve them; (ii) the target that is set for long-term stabilization of GHG concentrations will
determine the pace of the required transformation of the global energy systems; (iii) any major
agreement will need to take into account the importance and perspectives of the five largest
emitters (United States of America, PRC, European Union, India, and Russia), which together
account for nearly two-thirds of global CO2 emissions; and (iv) the achievement of the most
desirable GHG concentration scenario (450 ppm CO2 equivalent) by 2030 also poses a very
difficult challenge--neither can the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
countries achieve it by themselves, nor is it quite clear as to whether the scale of transformation
required for achieving this target is even technically achievable and whether a more feasible
target (550 ppm CO2 equivalent) should be adopted.

18.     Along with other multilateral development banks (MDBs), the World Bank reported on
the Clean Energy Investment Framework to the G86 in 2008. It defined a forward path for
addressing climate change issues, its key elements being (i) MDBs to scale up current activities
and develop new activities with respect to the three pillars (access to energy, climate change
mitigation, and adaptation to climate change); and (ii) MDBs to increasingly assist their DMCs
(including economies in transition) to integrate climate change issues into their development
programs.

19.    At the 13th meeting of Conference of Parties to UNFCCC in 2007, an agreement was
reached on the Bali Action Plan (BAP) for climate change mitigation and adaptation. The key
decisions of the BAP vis-à-vis climate change mitigation are (i) launching a comprehensive
process to enable the full, effective, and sustained implementation of the UNFCCC through

5
    As per the Fourth Assessment Report of IPCC, to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of GHGs to 450 ppm of CO2
    equivalent, the Annex I countries (i.e., 37 industrialized countries and the European Union, which have emission
    reduction commitments under Kyoto Protocol) are required to reduce emissions (compared with 1990 levels) by 25­
    40% by 2020 and 80­95% by 2050.
6
    Joint MDB Report to the G8 on the Implementation of the Clean Energy Investment Framework and Their Climate
    Change Agenda--Going Forward, June 2008.
                                                                                                            7


long-term cooperative action to reach an agreement beyond the Kyoto Protocol for the post-
2012 period; (ii) a shared vision for long-term cooperative action that incorporates the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities; (iii) enhanced national and international action on
mitigation of climate change; (iv) enhanced action on technology development and transfer to
support action on mitigation; and (v) enhanced action on the provision of financial resources and
investment to support action on mitigation and technology cooperation.

20.     In support of the BAP, the World Bank Board of Directors approved the establishment of
climate investment funds at the World Bank with the participation of other MDBs (African
Development Bank, ADB, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and Inter-
American Development Bank) in July 2008. The climate investment funds build on the
experience gained from the Clean Energy Investment Framework and comprise the (i) Clean
Technology Fund, which will support demonstration of clean technologies with potential for
scale up, as well as transfer of low-carbon technologies in the power, transport, industry, and
agriculture sectors; and (ii) Strategic Climate Fund, which will provide financing to pilot new
development approaches or to scale up activities aimed at a specific climate change challenge
through targeted programs.

C.        ADB's Strategic Response

          1.      Strategic Policy Framework of ADB Related to Climate Change and GHG
                  Emissions

21.    ADB strategies, policies, and initiatives are assessed in terms of their role in influencing
ADB's lending and nonlending programs with respect to addressing and mitigating GHG
emissions of energy sectors of the DMCs during the evaluation period, 2001­2008. These are
explained in detail in Appendix 4. The LTSF 2001­20157 recognizes ADB's mission as the
reduction of poverty through sustainable and equitable economic growth. It places
environmental considerations as an important factor in development decision making and
planning of ADB initiatives and operations. However, it does not recognize the linkage among
rapid economic growth, increased GHG emissions, and climate change as a significant issue.

22.      There was a strategic shift in ADB's operations starting 2005 to increase the relevance
of its assistance in the context of the changing priorities and needs of ADB DMCs, especially as
a result of the rapid economic growth of some of the large middle-income countries. The
Medium-Term Strategy 2006­2008 (MTS II)8 was prepared in 2005 in response to this; it
identified priority sectors for ADB assistance on the basis of ADB's comparative advantage, and
identified promotion of sustainable energy sector development as one of the priority areas. The
MTS II clearly stated that the Asian countries would have to steer away from the growth path of
high per-capita energy consumption adopted by the developed economies of today if the global
climate change impacts are to be maintained at a reasonable level. The MTS II recommended
ADB to help DMCs to adopt low-carbon technologies including energy efficiency improvement
and deployment of renewable energy.

23.    In recognition of the strategic shift of the development challenges and priorities of DMCs
since the adoption of the LTSF 2001­2015, ADB adopted the LTSF 2008­2020 (Strategy


7
    ADB. 2001. Moving the Poverty Agenda Forward in Asia and the Pacific. The Long-Term Strategic Framework of
    the Asian Development Bank (2001­2015). Manila.
8
    ADB. 2006. Medium-Term Strategy II 2006­2008. Manila.
8


2020).9 Environmental degradation including climate change due to rapid economic growth is
identified as one of the major challenges to be addressed in Strategy 2020. In this context, the
increasing share of GHG emissions of the energy sectors of developing Asia (from 8% of global
GHG emissions in 1980 to 28% in 2005 and 42% in 2030) is mentioned as a major contributory
factor to global warming. Strategy 2020 identifies five core areas of specialization to effectively
promote the three development agendas promoted in it. These five core areas of specialization
explicitly include (i) supporting infrastructure development including expansion of energy supply
through clean energy sources; and (ii) promoting sound environment management including
shifting of DMCs to low-carbon growth paths through more efficient and clean use of energy, as
well as reducing GHG emissions in nonenergy sectors.

        2.       Energy Sector Policy Framework of ADB (2001­2008)

24.     The Energy Policy 200010 referred to the possible link between climate change and GHG
emissions mitigation due to the possible opportunities for the DMCs to access financing for clean
energy projects through carbon markets under the Kyoto Protocol. It must be noted that the Kyoto
Protocol was not ratified, and there were no functioning carbon markets in 2000. The Energy
Policy 2000 mentioned that ADB would support interventions to increase the use of cleaner forms
of energy and initiatives for GHG abatement within the overall framework of the UNFCCC.
However, this was not considered as a major policy thrust in the Energy Policy 2000 and was
given the same level of importance as addressing localized environmental problems such as acid
rain and other impacts related to energy sector development. Nonetheless, it included several
other policy recommendations focused on improving overall efficiency and environmental
performance of the energy sector that also contribute to improving GHG efficiency.

25.      ADB has revised its energy policy with the objective of aligning energy sector operations
with Strategy 2020. The 2009 Energy Policy11 has brought the mitigation of increasing GHG
emissions in the DMCs' energy sectors to the forefront of ADB's energy sector operations
together with energy security and access to energy. The 2009 Energy Policy thus recommends
several operational measures to guide ADB's energy sector operations that include
(i) promoting access to carbon markets for clean energy and energy efficiency improvement
through the carbon market initiative (CMI) of ADB; (ii) promoting new investment projects in
clean energy and energy efficiency through TA, credit enhancement, and grant financing of
investment costs through the Clean Energy Financing Partnership Facility (CEFPF); and
(iii) proactively promoting new and more efficient coal technologies such as supercritical coal
power plants and carbon sequestration.

26.     ADB's Safeguard Policy12 adopted in June 2009 has explicitly recognized the importance
of addressing the environmental impacts including GHG emissions of ADB-financed projects.
The safeguard policy requires the quantification of direct and indirect13 GHG emissions for
projects resulting in significant GHG emissions defined as over 100,000 tons of CO2 equivalent
(tCO2e) per year. The safeguard policy also requires ADB borrowers/clients to consider
technically and financially feasible options to reduce or offset project-related GHG emissions.


9
   ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank 2008­2020.
   Manila.
10
   ADB. 2000. Energy 2000: Review of the Energy Policy. Manila.
11
   ADB. 2009. Energy Policy. Manila.
12
   ADB. 2009. Safeguard Policy Statement. Manila.
13
   Emissions associated with the energy consumed in the manufacture, transportation, and installation of equipment,
   as well as project testing and commissioning; as also energy consumed at decommissioning.
                                                                                                           9


           3.      ADB's Operational Initiatives (2001­2008) to Address GHG Emissions of the
                   Energy Sector

                   a.      Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Climate Change Program
                           (2001­2006)

27.    ADB had established the Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Climate Change
(REACH) program as an umbrella program covering several clean energy­environment focused
donor trust funds supported by the governments of Canada, Denmark, Finland, and
Netherlands. Regional technical assistance (RETA) 5972: Promotion of Renewable Energy,
Energy Efficiency, and Greenhouse Gas Abatement (PREGA),14 which was implemented in
2001­2006, was the flagship initiative under the REACH program. PREGA was aimed at
capacity building of domestic stakeholders in 18 DMCs to promote investments in renewable
energy, energy efficiency, and GHG abatement technologies. It provided a forum for ADB staff
to share information about problems in promoting clean energy technologies in different DMCs
and created the initial impetus within ADB to mainstream clean energy technologies in energy
sector operations.

                   b.      Energy Efficiency Initiative 2006

28.     In recognition of increasing global concerns about rapid growth in GHG emissions from
developing Asian countries, their contribution to climate change and increasing emphasis on
addressing the GHG emissions in MTS II and Strategy 2020, ADB launched the energy
efficiency initiative (EEI) in 2006 with the objective of increasing its assistance to clean energy
projects to $1 billion by 2008. The EEI identifies several priority energy subsectors for promoting
clean energy investments, including (i) demand-side energy efficiency improvement, (ii) supply-
side energy efficiency, and (iii) renewable energy.

29.      The CEFPF was established in 2007 under the EEI to mobilize and channel financial
resources from bilateral donors for clean energy projects in DMCs. CEFPF resources have
been used for (i) grant financing of the incremental costs of more efficient technologies, and
(ii) TA for preparing clean energy projects and policy and institutional advice to remove barriers
to clean energy deployment. In 2008, ADB also approved the $40 million Climate Change Fund
to provide additional resources to the CEFPF.

                   c.      Carbon Market Initiative

30.     In anticipation of the emerging opportunities under the CDM, ADB initiated the Credit
Marketing Facility (CMF) in 2003 with the objectives of (i) initiating CDM-eligible projects
through ADB's existing relationships in DMCs; and (ii) helping project sponsors to prepare
documents required for registration at the UNFCCC. The CMF was established as a pilot facility
from 2003 to 2006 and was intended to support approximately 16 ADB-financed projects in
accessing carbon markets. The experience with the CMF demonstrated that there was a latent
demand for an enhanced role for ADB in the rapidly developing carbon markets. In response,
ADB launched the CMI in 2006. The CMI was set up with the objectives of addressing several
key barriers to CDM-eligible projects in DMCs such as (i) lack of access to long-term project
financing and difficulty of finding up-front funding for carbon credits to be generated by
investment projects, and (ii) lack of technical capacity and expertise on carbon markets and the

14
     ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance for Promotion of Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Greenhouse Gas
     Abatement Projects. Manila (TA 5972-REG, for $5 million, approved on 4 January).
10


CDM registration process among the executing agencies and project sponsors. The CMI
originally consisted of three components: (i) the Asia­Pacific Carbon Fund, which provides the
option of monetizing a portion of the expected future revenues during the first commitment
period (2008­2012) by buying projected certified emission reductions; (ii) the Technical Support
Facility, which provides assistance to project sponsors during project preparation to undertake
CDM eligibility assessment, CDM documentation, validation, and registration; and (iii) the
Carbon Marketing Facility, which offers to project developers the requisite marketing support in
continuation of the assistance provided under the Clean Development Mechanism Facility.
Further on, in 2008, the Future Carbon Fund was launched with a mandate to purchase carbon
credits expected to be generated after 2012.

                 III.    ADB'S ENERGY SECTOR STRATEGIES AND OPERATIONS

31.     ADB's energy sector operations in the six selected DMCs (Bangladesh, PRC, India,
Pakistan, Philippines, and Viet Nam) that were allocated over 80% of ADB's energy sector
lending during 2001­2008 are analyzed from the point of view of promoting GHG efficiency. The
strategic focus of ADB regarding the encouragement of moving to a low-carbon growth path is
reviewed in the context of TA and policy dialogue as well as lending operations. Further details
on ADB's energy sector strategies and operations in the six DMCs are provided in
Supplementary Appendix A.

A.         Bangladesh

32.     Strategic Focus. The Bangladesh government's energy sector strategy may be
summarized into three key focus areas: (i) ensuring energy security for the country through
adequate investments in natural gas production (being the main source of primary energy) and
power generation, (ii) expanding the gas and power transmission and distribution systems to
reduce supply bottlenecks and improve access to energy sources, and (iii) improving
operational and managerial efficiencies and cost recovery in energy sector utilities. In the recent
times, the Bangladesh government has adopted strategies to improve both the supply side and
end user energy efficiency and penetration of renewable energy in the total energy supply and
set targets for increasing the utilization of renewable energy.

33.      The ADB strategy (in Country Strategy and Program [CSP] 2006­2010)15 for
Bangladesh is closely aligned to the government strategy and heavily focused on supporting
institutional reforms, promoting private sector investments to ensure energy security, and
improving operational efficiencies of the energy sector. Improving GHG efficiency is not
identified as an objective to be pursued in its own right in the ADB energy sector strategies for
Bangladesh. This may be because Bangladesh is not a large GHG emitter but one of the
countries likely to be severely affected by the adverse impacts of climate change. Hence, from a
sustainable development point of view, it is important for ADB in its future operations to promote
energy efficiency and energy security in Bangladesh.

34.     TA and Policy Dialogue. Although ADB has played a significant role in formulating the
Government's energy policy in Bangladesh, it has not provided policy advice with the explicit
objective of improving the GHG efficiency of the energy sector. ADB's policy dialogue in
Bangladesh has been focused primarily on promoting institutional reforms to improve the
operational and financial performance of energy sector utilities and creating an enabling
environment for private sector investments in the energy sector. ADB has also provided policy

15
     ADB. 2005. Country Strategy and Program 2006­2010: Bangladesh. Manila.
                                                                                                                11


advice to reduce distribution losses in both the electricity and gas sectors, which should have
contributed to GHG efficiency improvements. ADB has not engaged in policy dialogue with the
Government with regards to (i) subsidies and distortions in the pricing of natural gas and the
resultant inefficient use of gas, (ii) efficiency improvements in the power generation sector,
(iii) enhancing end-user energy efficiency, and (iv) promoting renewable energy development.

35.     Lending Operations. ADB approved five energy sector projects amounting to
$1.25 billion for the Bangladesh energy sector during 2001­2008. Power transmission, power
distribution, thermal power generation, and gas infrastructure development projects together
with program loans promoting institutional reforms received approximately equal shares of ADB
funding. Although GHG efficiency was not an explicit objective of these projects, they
contributed to GHG savings through efficiency improvement. There was no major change in the
composition of ADB's lending portfolio to the Bangladesh energy sector between 2001­2005
and 2006­2008 except for the absence of lending to gas infrastructure sector during the latter
period. It is noted that ADB did not finance any renewable energy or hydropower projects in
Bangladesh during 2001­2008, which may have been due to the lack of technical and economic
potential for such projects in the country.

B.      Peoples Republic of China

36.    Strategic Focus. Although environmental protection had been emphasized in the PRC's
10th Five-Year Plan and in the ADB Country Operational Strategy 1997,16 the Country
Assistance Plan (CAP) for 2001­2003,17 and the ADB CSP for 2004­2006 did not have a
focused program to reduce GHG emissions from energy sector operations. The emphasis on
reducing GHG emissions appeared for the first time in the PRC's National Climate Change
Program, and was recognized in the ADB CPS for 2008­2010.18 Further changes in ADB's
energy sector assistance to the PRC in the coming years are expected to be in line with the
CPS (2008­2010), in particular (i) increasing recognition of the need to act expeditiously toward
slowing down the GHG emissions of energy sector in the PRC, (ii) the PRC's recognition of the
importance of the role of the energy sector in shifting its overall economy to a low-carbon growth
path; and (iii) ADB's increased efforts toward addressing climate change concerns since the
launch of its clean energy and carbon market initiatives.

37.       TA and Policy Dialogue. For specific energy sector technologies or systems that the
PRC has selected to deploy, it has sought ADB's support on specific aspects of policy making to
gain a thorough understanding of deployment and scale-up issues in the context of the PRC.
ADB has provided technical advice for (among others) centralized district heating, coal bed
methane recovery, waste coal utilization, and carbon capture and storage. The policy dialogue,
supported by TA, included the following: (i) scientific/technical aspects of a specific technology;
(ii) its technical/economic/market potential in the PRC; (iii) social, environmental, institutional,
and financial implications associated with its large-scale deployment; and/or (iv) types of issues
that need to be addressed at the policy level to facilitate penetration and replication. Based on
the inputs obtained through TA and pilot studies, often through more than one TA--the PRC
framed its policies and regulations. Long-term TA support, therefore, appears to have
contributed to policy formulation.



16
   As quoted in ADB. 2003. People's Republic of China: Country Strategy and Program (2004­2006). Manila (page 18).
17
   ADB. 2000. People's Republic of China Country Assistance Plan (2001­2003). Manila.
18
   ADB. 2008. People's Republic of China Country Partnership Strategy (2008­2010). Manila.
12


38.      Lending Operations. ADB's lending operations to the energy sector account for less
than 1% of total energy sector investments in the PRC. Nonetheless, ADB-financed projects can
have a demonstrative or catalytic effect in introducing new technologies or industrial practices.
SIx lending projects were approved during 2001­2005, of which three were in the power sector
(viz., run-of-river hydro, pumped storage hydro, and a power transmission project). ADB also
approved two methane destruction projects to prevent atmospheric release of methane from
coal-mining operations and to use captured methane for power generation and municipal gas
supply. In addition to contributing significantly to GHG emission reduction (methane has a global
warming potential 21 times that of CO2),19 the projects have also reduced the use of high GHG-
emitting coal, which offers a huge potential for replication, as the PRC is the world's largest
consumer and producer of coal.

39.      During 2006­2008, ADB increased its lending to projects having direct GHG efficiency
improvement with a high degree of replicability, given the overall market size in the PRC. Most
ADB-financed projects in the PRC during this period aimed at expanding and improving the
energy efficiency of district heating systems, city gas supply systems, and industrial energy
efficiency improvement. The private sector investments and commercial bank lending was
mobilized through ADB participation in such projects. In addition, ADB also financed
hydropower and wind energy projects during the 3-year period. The mix of ADB's energy
lending approvals during 2006­2008 in the PRC was unique among the ADB portfolio in terms
of its high concentration of energy efficiency improvement projects and relative lack of projects
in some of the traditional sectors such as power transmission and distribution.

C.      India

40.      Strategic Focus During 2000­2003, ADB strongly supported the Government's priority
of institutional and regulatory reforms to improve the financial viability, operational efficiency,
and cost recovery of the power sector at the state level. The efficiency improvements supported
by ADB at the state level contributed to the improvement of GHG efficiency improvement
through the reduction of power distribution losses. ADB's power sector strategy for India during
2004­2006 was based primarily on supporting the energy sector objectives of the 10th National
Plan and the implementation of power sector reforms facilitated under the Electricity Act of
2003. While continuing the state-level reforms aimed at improving financial and operational
performance including reduction of power distribution losses and pilferage of electricity,
increasing emphasis was placed on augmenting power generation capacity to meet the chronic
power shortages using cleaner sources such as hydropower as well as renewable energy. The
CSP Update 2005­200720 emphasized the importance of supporting large-scale low-carbon
power generation and supporting the transmission network to facilitate power evacuation from
such sources as well as to enhance connectivity of different regions of India with adequate
transmission capacity. The CPS 2009­201221 explicitly identifies the importance of GHG
efficiency improvement and, together with ensuring energy security, GHG efficiency
improvement forms the basis for ADB's proposed assistance to the Indian energy sector.



19
   For analytical purposes in this EKB, methane's global warming potential is assumed as 21 (as for various projects
   approved by the CDM Executive Board). It may be noted that methane's global warming potentials have been
   considered as being 23 or 25 also. Refer to (i) Global Environment Facility. 2008. Manual for Calculating GHG
   Benefits of GEF Projects: Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Projects. Washington, DC, April; (ii) IPCC.
   2007. Fourth Assessment Report. Spain, November.
20
   ADB. 2004. Country Strategy and Program Update 2005­2007: India. Manila.
21
   ADB. 2009. India Country Partnership Strategy 2009­2012: Abridged Version. Manila.
                                                                                                  13


41.      TA and Policy Dialogue. The policy reforms supported by ADB have pertained mainly
to institutional reforms to improve the operating efficiencies of power sector utilities at the state
level. Although these reforms have not been explicitly linked to GHG efficiency improvement,
the resultant supply-side efficiency improvements such as reduction in technical losses in power
distribution have improved the GHG efficiency of the concerned states. ADB has not provided
significant policy advice at the national level for energy sector policy formulation or for improving
GHG efficiency. Hence, it may be inferred that ADB has not engaged the Indian government in
high-level policy dialogue to improve the institutional policy framework for enhancing GHG
efficiency.

42.     Lending Operations. During 2001­2005, ADB focused its lending operations on
supporting power sector reforms in selected states such as Assam and Madhya Pradesh. The
loans linked to power sector reforms had several components supporting investments in power
transmission and expansion and rehabilitation of power distribution network. ADB also financed
the strengthening of a high-voltage (400 kilovolts) transmission grid in southern India to remove
transmission bottlenecks and a private sector project to evacuate power from the Tala
hydropower project in Bhutan. While the former contributed to a reduction in transmission losses
and resultant GHG efficiency, the latter increased the share of hydropower in the energy mix of
northern India, contributing to significant increase in GHG efficiency of the power system. ADB
also financed a liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal in western India to facilitate the import of
LNG, resulting in GHG emission savings due to switching of fuel consumption from more GHG-
intensive fuels such as naphtha and furnace oil to regasified LNG.

43.      There was a marked increase in projects with potential for GHG efficiency improvement
during 2006­2008. Four renewable energy projects financed by ADB consisted of wind and run-
of-river hydropower plants, and a large hydropower project. ADB also supported several thermal
power projects employing more efficient coal-burning technologies such as supercritical boilers
(i.e., a new and more efficient technology in the Indian context). Although these projects have
increased gross GHG emissions, they are essential to ensure India's energy security at an
affordable price and have shifted India's power sector toward a low-carbon growth path by
deploying more efficient coal combustion technologies.

D.         Pakistan

44.     Strategic Focus. The ADB strategy for Pakistan as outlined in the CAP 2001­200322 is to
address institutional and financial issues in the power sector through sector reforms. In addition to
these sector reform initiatives, ADB has supported the renewable energy and oil and gas sector
through TA. The Government's Medium-Term Development Framework (2005­2010) focuses on
energy security and ensuring the long-term viability of the sector. Although renewable energy and
energy efficiency improvement have been mentioned as focus areas in the context of improving
energy security, these technologies have the added benefit of limiting the GHG emissions of
Pakistan's energy sector. The ADB CPS 2009­201323 identifies energy efficiency and renewable
energy development sector, together with support for establishing a competitive electricity market,
as the key areas for ADB assistance to Pakistan's energy sector in the future.

45.    TA and Policy Dialogue. As in India and Bangladesh, ADB's main focus of its policy
dialogue has been institutional reforms to improve the overall efficiency and viability of the
energy sector. However, ADB has undertaken several initiatives in Pakistan to create an

22
     ADB. 2000. Country Assistance Plan (2001­2003): Pakistan. Manila.
23
     ADB. 2009. Country Partnership Strategy: Pakistan 2009­2013. Manila.
14


enabling environment for renewable energy development, and ADB support was instrumental in
setting up of the Alternative Energy Development Board. ADB is also supporting the setting up
of an integrated energy sector planning model to enable decision makers to evaluate different
development scenarios for Pakistan's energy sector. This model would enable the decision
makers to evaluate the costs and benefits of a low-carbon energy sector development scenario
vs. a BAU case. Recently, ADB has focused its policy dialogue toward energy efficiency
improvement through both supply-side and demand-side interventions, but it is too early to say
whether these initiatives would result in policy reforms.

46.      Lending Operations. Lending operations to the Pakistan energy sector during 2001­
2008 included (i) the renewable energy development project to promote small- and medium-size
hydropower plants as well as a large hydropower project implemented by the private sector, and
(ii) rehabilitation and efficiency improvement of gas-fired thermal power plants in Karachi. These
projects contributed to GHG efficiency improvement. In addition, several other investments
financed by ADB have included (i) a power transmission project to expand the network capacity,
(ii) several new thermal power plants using combined-cycle gas turbine technology, and
(iii) power distribution rehabilitation and expansion. All these projects are essential to meet the
energy sector needs of Pakistan, and would contribute to GHG efficiency improvement.24

E.       Philippines

47.    Strategic Focus. In the energy sector, ADB has been the lead development partner in
support of power reform, making investments in distribution, privatization of power generation
and distribution entities, and capacity building in energy sector regulation.25 ADB's CAP 2001­
200326 and CSP Update 2004­200627 also supported specific measures to address
environmental protection, sustainability, and rehabilitation. The CSP 2005­200728
recommended setting priorities for attaining environmental sustainability, without any explicit
mention of support related directly to GHG abatement--although it did explicitly acknowledge
that GHG emissions were rising. However, with the updated Philippine Energy Plan (2004­
2013) and the launch of the Energy Conservation Program in 2005 (which aims to mitigate the
impact of high oil prices and protect the environment), the GHG emission reduction objective
has been placed on the national agenda.

48.     TA and Policy Dialogue. Given the need to restore the financial health of the power
sector, ADB's policy support to the Philippines has been directed toward meeting that objective.
The TA 3820 approved in December 200129 supported policy reforms to encourage competition
in the power sector with the objective of encouraging efficiency in power generation and supply.
The TA 4557 supported strengthening the power sector regulatory framework and privatization
of the National Power Corporation's eligible assets. The GHG-reduction benefits of such policy
support are essentially indirect; privatization and competition encourage efficient operations with
reduced fuel inputs and GHG emissions. ADB also engaged in policy dialogue on initiating
several measures to promote energy efficiency as part of the preparation of the energy
efficiency loan approved in 2009.

24
   An alternative to gas-based power generation is coal-based power generation, as there are political and other
   barriers to the development of Pakistan's hydropower potential.
25
   ADB. 2008. Philippines Country Assistance Program Evaluation: Increasing Strategic Focus for Better Results. Mania.
26
   ADB. 2000. Philippines Country Assistance Plan (2001­2003). Manila.
27
   ADB. 2003. Philippines Country Strategy and Program Update (2004­2006). Manila.
28
   ADB. 2005. Philippines Country Strategy and Program (2005­2007). Manila.
29
   ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance to the Republic of the Philippines for a Competition Policy for the Electricity
   Sector. Manila (TA 3820-PHI, for $990,000, approved on 19 December).
                                                                                                           15



49.     Lending Operations. During 2001­2008, two public sector program loans to support
power sector reforms (including one with a small power transmission component), two
nonsovereign loans (one of them was cancelled without being disbursed) to support the
privatization of existing thermal power plants, and one grant were approved. Although the
nonsovereign loan has resulted in a net increase of GHG emissions (as a coal-fired power plant
has been refurbished to enable substantially higher generation with resultant increase in GHG
emissions), in general ADB intervention is expected to catalyze private sector participation in
the Philippine power sector (perhaps for new generation projects as well) and eventually lead to
reduction in the GHG emissions per unit of generation.

F.      Viet Nam

50.    Strategic Focus. Government policy in Viet Nam is to ensure the energy security of the
country by increasing power generation capacity and the production capacity of the fossil fuel
resources and to improve the commercial performance of energy sector entities through the
introduction of competitive energy markets. At the same time, end-user energy efficiency
improvement and renewable energy development are promoted as complementary initiatives by
the government. The ADB country operational strategy of 1995 and its various updates
promoted environmental protection and more rational use of energy resources.30 As per the
CSP 2007­2010,31 ADB envisages an enhanced role for the private sector and supports private
sector operations in clean energy, power generation, and transmission. ADB has provided TA to
improve the policy framework for renewable energy development, energy efficiency
investments, and access to the emerging CDM market. However, there has been little focus on
GHG mitigation or other climate change-related issues in ADB strategies for the Viet Nam
energy sector, especially in ADB's lending operations during 2001­2008.

51.     TA and Policy Dialogue. Policy dialogue with Viet Nam has focused largely on power
sector reform-related issues as well as improving the mitigation of local environmental and
social impacts, and such efforts have had only an indirect influence on the GHG efficiency of the
energy sector. TA 702432 is exploring financial mechanisms through a local financial
intermediary as a means to channeling external funds for energy efficiency investment in
industry. ADB has also assisted the Government in drafting an energy efficiency law, and plans
to assist the Government in the formulation of a renewable energy law.

52.     Lending Operations. ADB lending to Viet Nam has consisted of six projects or
investment programs supporting significant additions to power generation capacity (approximately
2,650 megawatts [MW] of 13,000 MW), including two high efficiency gas-fired combined-cycle
projects, a 1,000 MW coal power plant using circulating fluidized bed technology, and a 156 MW
hydropower plant. These projects are in the least-cost generation expansion plan and are
essential investments to meet the country's energy demand. ADB also financed a significant
proportion of investment undertaken during 2001­2008 to expand the capacity of the high-voltage
transmission system. Although the thermal power generation projects supported by ADB have
increased gross emissions, they have deployed advanced and more efficient--and relatively less
GHG-emitting--technologies compared with the existing practice in Viet Nam.

30
   ADB. 1995. Viet Nam Country Operational Strategy Study. Manila; ADB. 1998. Viet Nam Country Assistance Plan
   (1999­2001). Manila; ADB. 2001. Viet Nam Country Strategy and Program Update (2002­2004). Manila; and ADB.
   2004. Viet Nam Country Strategy and Program Update (2005­2006). Manila.
31
   ADB. 2006. Viet Nam Country Strategy and Program (2007­2010). Manila.
32
   ADB. 2007. Technical Assistance to Viet Nam for Supporting Implementation of the National Energy Efficiency
   Program Project. Manila (TA 7024-VIE, for $925,000, approved on 12 December).
16



         IV.     GREENHOUSE GAS ACCOUNTING METHODOLOGIES AND EFFICIENCY
                                    ESTIMATES

A.         Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Indicators

53.     In the foreseeable future, even if the rate of economic growth in DMCs continues at the
same pace as during the last decade, GHG emissions per capita in most DMCs will remain
substantially below the global average, with the possible exception of the PRC. ADB's principal
mission as per Strategy 2020 is to assist its DMCs to promote inclusive and sustainable growth,
which include supporting the sustainable development of infrastructure facilities. In this context,
energy security and access to energy using cleaner, environmentally sustainable, and climate
friendly technologies is included as a core area of ADB's operations. Therefore, ADB's loan
portfolio may be analyzed from the perspective of assessing ADB's success in facilitating the
adoption of more GHG-efficient approaches by DMCs in their energy sectors compared with a
BAU scenario.

54.      As per its Results Framework (level 2),33 ADB is required to report its contribution to
country and regional development outcomes by aggregating the key outputs delivered in five
priority areas (energy, transport, water, finance, and education) to assess the progress in
implementing Strategy 2020. Therefore, GHG efficiency of ADB energy sector operations
should be measured by the change in GHG emissions of the energy sector in a DMC compared
with a BAU case. Because many such interventions involve other donors and financial
institutions, the GHG savings that can be attributed to ADB can be apportioned corresponding
to its share of investment in a project or component.34 Furthermore, to facilitate a comparison
across the various approved projects and component categories, a broad set of indicators are
adopted (Table 1) to assess the GHG efficiency of the ADB portfolio.

55.     Given the need to increase energy consumption for economic development and poverty
reduction, the gross GHG emissions and the other indicators based on gross GHG emissions
do not provide an appropriate basis for reporting ADB's GHG efficiency. This is because most of
the energy supply projects result in an increase in GHG emissions. Hence, the approach taken
in this EKB is to use indicators that report GHG emissions savings (increases) with respect to a
plausible counterfactual to the project. The counterfactual could either be the BAU scenario or
the most likely alternative source of energy in the absence of the project. The GHG emissions
associated with a counterfactual are assumed to remain static during the operational period of
the project. The GHG emissions are quantified on an annual basis during the commercial
operation of energy supply projects; indirect emissions associated with equipment
manufacturing and construction phases of energy supply projects are not included as they are
not significant compared with GHG impacts during operational phase.




33
     ADB. 2008. ADB Results Framework. Manila.
34
     However, the ADB results framework refers to ADB's contribution to country outcomes through key outputs,
     thereby referring to completed projects. We refer to "ADB's (intended) effectiveness" as loans approved during
     2001­2008 are analyzed, and the data provided in RRPs pertains to planned, projected, or intended (rather than
     actual or measured) levels of key outputs.
                                                                                                            17


                             Table 1: Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Indicators

Indicator                                Units                             Remarks
Annual gross GHG emissions        Tons of CO2-          GHG emissions due to the project or component
                                  equivalent (tCO2e)    supported by ADB
Annual GHG emissions              tCO2e                 The difference between gross emissions and the
savings                                                 emissions for producing the same amount of energy
                                                        under an appropriately defined counterfactual to the
                                                        project activity supported by ADB.
Annual GHG emissions              tCO2e                 Pro rata share of emission savings in proportion to
savings attributable to ADB                             ADB's share of total project and component cost
Annual gross GHG emissions        tCO2e per $ million   Ratio between gross emissions and the total
per unit of investment                                  investment in project activity
Annual GHG emission               tCO2e per $ million   Ratio between GHG emission savings and the total
savings per unit of investment                          investment in project activity
Annual gross GHG emissions        tCO2e per gigawatt-   Ratio between gross emissions and the amount of
per unit of energy                hour (GWh)            energy generated, saved, or delivered as a result of
                                                        the project activity. For thermal energy supply or
                                                        savings projects, the energy in calorific or joule units
                                                        is converted to GWh.
Annual GHG emission               tCO2e per GWh         Ratio between emission saving and the amount of
savings per unit of energy                              energy generated, saved, or delivered as a result of
                                                        the project activity. For thermal energy supply or
                                                        savings projects, the energy in calorific or joule units
                                                        is converted to GWh.
 ADB = Asian Development bank, CO2 = carbon dioxide, GHG = greenhouse gas, tCO2e = ton of CO2 equivalent.
 Source: Compiled by the study team.

 B.      Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Methodologies Adopted or Developed

 56.     Clean Development Mechanism Methodologies and Their Limitations.
 Methodologies established by the UNFCCC for GHG accounting for CDM projects are well
 documented and provide a logical starting point. However, several difficulties arise in applying
 these methodologies to the GHG assessment of the entire ADB energy portfolio: (i) the
 approved methodologies cover only subset of ADB-financed energy sector project categories;
 for instance, transmission projects may well result in GHG emission savings through reduction
 in transmission losses, but they are unlikely to be additional--consequently, there is no
 UNFCCC-approved methodology for this transmission project in the ADB portfolio; and (ii) much
 of the emphasis in the CDM methodologies is on transparency and simplicity to reduce
 transaction cost. These methodologies are unlikely to be acceptable for large projects, for which
 project-specific calculation of emissions are required.

 57.     Therefore, where appropriate, the approach adopted in this EKB is to identify a plausible
 counterfactual appropriate to the project in question, rather than to use a sector-wide grid
 emission factor as calculated for CDM purposes. In many instances, the economic analysis
 presented in the RRP provides a good idea of a plausible counterfactual, for instance where
 least-cost analysis shows that an ADB-supported pumped-storage hydropower project is more
 cost-efficient vis-à-vis a gas turbine unit of the same capacity; or where coal-mine methane
 replaces coal as a fuel in industrial and commercial establishments as well as for residential
 cooking and water heating.
18



58.     In the interest of assessing GHG emissions and GHG efficiency for the entire energy
sector portfolio relating to the six DMCs, no minimum thresholds are applied on the level of ADB
assistance ($ million) or quantum of GHG emissions per project or component. For the purpose
of GHG efficiency analysis, ADB-financed energy sector projects can be divided into two broad
categories: (i) electricity-generating and supply-side or demand-side efficiency improvements
resulting in avoided electricity generation, and (ii) fuel supply and efficiency improvements in
fuel supply and fuel usage. The specific methodological issues for different types of projects are
described below and summarized in Table 2. The broad methodological issues are further
explained in Appendix 5, the methodologies developed or adapted for analytical purposes are
listed in Appendix 6, and a detailed description of the methodologies is provided in the
Supplementary Appendix B.

       Table 2: GHG Emission Savings of Various Project or Component Categories

Project or                         Gross               Emissions as per the                Emission
Component Category              Emissions          Counterfactual to the Project            Savings
Electricity generation, transmission, distribution, and electricity conservation projects
Renewable energya         Zero                    GHG emissions for generating    Positive
                                                  same amount of energy using
                                                  the existing plant mix
                                                  connected to the grid
Hydropower (without       Zero                    Same as above                   Positive
reservoir emissions)
Hydropower (with          Reservoir emissions     Same as above                   Most likely positive
reservoir emissions)
Pumped storage (PS)       Emissions associated Same as above                      Negative, as more energy
hydropower                with generating                                         is required for pumping
                          electricity required to                                 than the energy
                          pump water                                              generated for a PS power
                                                                                  plant
Gas or coal-fired         Emissions from the      Average GHG emissions for       Positive or negative;
thermal power             plant                   generating the same amount of situation specific
                                                  energy using the existing plant
                                                  mix and using the most widely
                                                  used generation technology in
                                                  the country for the same fuel
                                                  type
Captured methane-         Emissions associated Release of methane to the          Positive, as methane
fired thermal power       with use of methane     atmosphere; plus average GHG emissions have a higher
(methane destruction)     in a power plant        emissions for generating the    GHG impact than CO2
                                                  same amount of energy using
                                                  the existing plant mix
Renovation of thermal     Emissions associated Emissions associated with          Positive or negative,
power plants              with incremental        generating same amount of       depending on whether
                          generation after        electricity as the incremental  the emissions per unit of
                          renovation              generation. For the sake of     energy in the rehabilitated
                                                  simplicity, this was assumed to plant are higher or lower
                                                  be equal to the average         than the average
                                                  emissions per unit of energy in emissions per unit of
                                                  the grid.                       energy in the grid
Power transmission for Emissions from             Emissions as per average        As per respective power
power evacuation from respective power            emissions for generating the    plants connected to the
an identifiable power     plants connected to     same amount of energy using     transmission line,
                                                                                                                 19


Project or                           Gross                   Emissions as per the                     Emission
Component Category                Emissions             Counterfactual to the Project                  Savings
plant                       the transmission line,     the existing plant mix; prorated       prorated in proportion to
                            prorated in proportion     in proportion to the investment        the investment in
                            to the investment in       in transmission line                   transmission line
                            transmission line
Power transmission          Zero                       Emissions associated with              Positive
(grid strengthening)                                   generating the amount of
                                                       energy saved due to loss
                                                       reduction using the existing
                                                       plant mix in the grid
Power distribution          Zero                       Same as above                          Positive
improvement
Industrial power use        Zero              Emissions associated with                       Positive
efficiency improvement                        producing the energy saved as
                                              a result of the energy efficiency
                                              project
Fuel supply and fuel efficiency improvement projects
Centralized district     Emissions associated Emissions associated with                       Positive
heating                  with producing the   providing the same amount of
                         required amount of   space heating in the absence of
                         heat                 the project
Gas infrastructure       Emissions associated Emissions associated with                       Positive, as natural gas
development              with the use of      alternative fuel replaced by                    has lower emissions
                         natural gas provided natural gas                                     compared with most other
                         under the project                                                    types of fossil fuel
Captured methane for     Emissions associated Release of methane to the                       Positive
city gas supply          with use of methane  atmosphere plus the emissions
                         for city gas supply  associated with alternative fuels
                                              replaced by methane
CO2 = carbon dioxide, GHG = greenhouse gas, PS = pumped storage.
a
  Refers to wind and mini-hydro projects, as found in the Asian Development Bank portfolio.
Source: Compiled by the study team.

59.     Renewable Energy and Hydropower. Energy generated from renewable energy and
hydropower projects is assumed to replace an equal amount of energy from the power grid to
which the project is to be connected. Other than methane emissions from hydropower reservoirs,
no GHG emissions are considered from renewable and hydropower projects. Although it is difficult
to quantify with any degree of certainty the methane emissions from hydropower reservoirs under
different climatic and geographical conditions, the UNFCCC (CDM Executive Board) has set
simple and transparent criteria for the eligibility of hydropower projects for CDM on the basis of
"power density,"35 expressed as watt of installed capacity per square meter of flooded surface
area.36 Although this may be criticized as being overly simplistic, in the interest of conservative
calculations, the CDM protocol for hydropower projects is adopted in this EKB.

60.    Coal Mine Methane Capture and Use. Where atmospheric release of methane during
coal mining operations is avoided, and the captured methane is used for power generation, two
aspects are considered for GHG savings computations: (i) the global warming potential of the
methane that has been captured as a result of the project (and would have been otherwise
35
   UNFCCC. 2006. Threshold and Criteria for the Eligibility of Hydroelectric Power Plants with Reservoirs as CDM
   Project Activities. EB 23 Report, Annex 5. Bonn, 22­24 February.
36
   The choice of watts (capacity) as the numerator is contestable, since energy generation (as methane-rich water
   from lower levels of the reservoir gets degassed when it flows through turbines) rather than capacity determines
   the methane (GHG) emissions of a hydropower project. However, capacity has the merit of ease of verification.
20


released to the atmosphere), and (ii) emissions from a methane-based power plant vis-à-vis the
emissions for generating the same amount of electricity using the existing plant mix in the grid.
The former takes into account the fact that methane has a global warming potential of 21; and the
latter is as per the approved UNFCCC­CDM methodology. Where the captured methane is
transmitted and distributed by pipeline to serve industrial, commercial, and residential consumers,
which results in switching from a relatively high-emitting fuel (such as coal in the PRC) to a low
GHG-emitting fuel (viz., methane),37 the emission savings are calculated by using the fuel
emission factors, end-use efficiencies, and quantity of methane use vs. the displaced fuel.

61.     Energy Efficiency. Two types of energy efficiency projects were supported by ADB
during the study period:
        (i)    central district heating systems using large and efficient boilers and/or combined-
               heat-and-power plants with well configured and optimized pipeline networks
               replacing existing space heating using small, decentralized, and old or inefficient
               boilers; fuel use "with" and "without" such projects, boiler and system efficiencies,
               and fuel emission factors are used to estimate GHG emission changes in such
               cases; and
        (ii)   inefficient and old electrical equipment in industrial enterprises being replaced by
               modern and energy-efficient electrical equipment for the same application. In this
               case, the electricity savings on the end-use side is translated into electricity
               savings at the dispatch end (with appropriate estimates for transmission and
               distribution losses), and the grid emission factors as per the UNFCCC­CDM
               methodologies are applied to estimate the GHG emission changes.

62.      Thermal Power Generation. In most cases, these plants use domestic fuel supplies,
and it is not technically and economically feasible to generate the same amount of energy using
renewable sources. The GHG efficiency of ADB-financed thermal power projects is assessed on
the basis of whether or not the project supports a more efficient technology to meet the
electricity needs of the DMC using available fuel sources. For instance, if ADB supports less
efficient technologies such as open-cycle gas turbines when the most obvious and common
technology is combined-cycle gas turbines, the project is normally considered GHG inefficient.

63.     Rehabilitation of Thermal Power Plants. This results in GHG savings due to efficiency
improvements, although increased dependable capacity and increased energy generation due
to rehabilitation result in additional GHG emissions overall. The change in GHG emissions due
to rehabilitation is assessed by comparing the GHG emissions of the incremental generation
with the emissions associated with the electricity replaced in the grid. This depends on
        (i)     whether the system is supply constrained, in which case gross emissions
                increase because total thermal power generation increases, although it is offset
                in part by decrease in emissions from standby generators; and
        (ii)    if the system is not supply constrained, then the change in emissions is a
                function of the extent of change in the merit order (i.e., the emissions from the
                displacing plant compared with the displaced plant).

64.     Power Distribution Rehabilitation or Expansion. Most ADB-financed power
distribution projects have resulted in the following outcomes:


37
     Although methane has a high global warming potential 21 times of CO2 when released to the atmosphere in its
     original form, when used as a fuel it is converted to CO2. The CO2 emissions intensity of methane combustion is
     less compared with that for coal and liquid fuels.
                                                                                                  21


       (i)     reduction in technical losses, which results in savings of GHG emissions due to
               avoided power generation to supply power to customers serviced prior to the
               project;
       (ii)    additional electricity sales in newly electrified areas and resultant GHG emissions
               due to additional power generation required; and
       (iii)   reduction in commercial losses, which does not result in savings of GHG
               emissions if electricity pilferers become paying customers as a result of the project.

65.     The GHG efficiency of such projects is difficult to assess, as (i) a breakdown of electricity
sales between the original area of supply and the expanded area of supply may not always be
available, and (ii) splits between technical and nontechnical losses are not recorded by the
executing agencies. It also raises a methodological issue with regard to whether GHG
emissions due to additional sales should be included in the GHG efficiency assessment. As
improving access to electricity is an important objective of ADB as well as of DMC governments,
GHG efficiency computations in this EKB are based on GHG savings due to loss reduction in
the original area supplied with electricity before the project. The GHG impacts of providing
electricity to new areas depends on the alternative forms of energy usage in the absence of
electricity and the grid emission factor for providing grid-connected electricity. However, due to
lack of data on electricity consumption in the absence of electricity as well as in recognition of
the societal benefits of electrification, this was not considered in the EKB.

66.    Power Transmission. Transmission projects fall into two broad categories:
       (i)   Power evacuation projects from identifiable sources. Where transmission
             lines are dedicated to the evacuation of power from a new generation project, the
             approach is to treat the generation and transmission projects as a single project,
             and to allocate the gross emissions and GHG emission savings to the
             transmission component as per its share of the total project cost.
       (ii)  Transmission projects for grid strengthening. While increasing the capacity
             and reliability of a transmission system, these projects also reduce transmission
             losses. The resultant transmission loss reduction is assessed from load flow
             studies, and the resultant avoided generation is used to assess the GHG efficiency
             of the project. A variant of this is when a transmission project that forms part of a
             power system expansion plan is analyzed by evaluating the GHG impact of the
             entire power sector investment program and attributing the GHG impact to ADB-
             financed transmission lines in proportion to the cost.

67.     Gas Infrastructure Development. These projects involve the provision of natural gas
through pipeline extensions or terminals for importing LNG. GHG efficiency is estimated by
considering the effect of fuel switching (i.e., replacement of a different type of fuel with natural
gas). The methodological issues in computing the GHG efficiency of this type of project are as
follows:
        (i)    natural gas provided under the project results in fuel switching as well as
               incremental energy consumption, and the degree of incremental consumption vs.
               fuel switching is not usually available;
        (ii)   the quantity of fuel replaced by natural gas is computed based on the calorific
               value of different types of fuel and natural gas assuming 100% combustion
               efficiency for each type of fuel; and
        (iii)  natural gas is used as a fuel as well as feedstock in industries such as oil
               refineries and fertilizer plants.
22



                    V.      GREENHOUSE GAS EFFICIENCY ESTIMATES

A.     ADB Energy Sector Portfolio in the Six Countries

68.     The energy sector lending portfolio based on the approvals during 2001­2008 for
Bangladesh, PRC, India, Pakistan, Philippines, and Viet Nam is considered as a good proxy for
assessing the GHG efficiency of ADB's energy sector portfolio, as these six countries absorbed
over 80% of ADB's lending to the sector. The composition of energy sector projects that ADB
supported during 2001­2008 underwent some change in terms of subsectors that ADB
supported due to (i) ADB's own strategies and initiatives to encourage DMCs to move to a low-
carbon growth path; and (ii) DMCs' requirements and priorities for economic development, in
relation to energy security, power system stability, and reliability. The aspect that merits specific
attention in this context is the increase in approvals for power generation capacity additions. In
particular, ADB financing of coal-fired power stations increased in countries such as India,
Philippines, and Viet Nam. ADB supported the introduction of cleaner and more efficient coal
combustion technologies such as supercritical boilers in India, circulating fluidized bed boilers in
Viet Nam, and postprivatization and rehabilitation of existing coal power plants in the
Philippines. However, ADB also supported relatively inefficient open-cycle gas turbines in
Bangladesh as a short-term measure to reduce crippling power shortages.

69.     ADB's support for hydropower and renewable energy, consisting mainly of wind power
and small hydropower projects, more than tripled during 2006­2008 to $750 million mainly in
India, Pakistan, and Viet Nam, compared with $215 million in 2001­2005. Methane capture
projects, which were present in 2001­2005 in ADB's lending portfolio in the PRC, are
conspicuous by their absence during 2006­2008. Such projects entail high GHG efficiency, as
they prevent atmospheric release of methane and use the captured methane for power
generation and/or as fuel in households and in industrial and commercial applications. ADB's
support for methane destruction projects in the PRC catalyzed domestic financing, and a large
number of such projects were promoted in recent years without ADB involvement. Also, the
share of traditional power transmission and distribution projects reduced from 55% of lending
approvals in 2001­2005 to 39% during the last 3 years, and a significant share of power
transmission projects supported by ADB in recent times have been dedicated to evacuating
electricity from cleaner energy sources such as large-scale hydropower.

70.     Fuel (mainly natural gas) and thermal energy supply projects, as well as end-user
energy efficiency improvement projects, also form an important subcategory of ADB's energy
sector portfolio distinct from the electricity supply projects mentioned above. There is no marked
increase in ADB support for such projects, and their share in total energy sector lending remains
around 20%. Furthermore, the basic characteristics of fuel supply projects are very different
from that of power generation projects in terms of internal fuel processing, storage, and dispatch
systems. This explains the large differences in investment requirements per unit of energy
output across such technologies; for instance, a $2 billion coal-fired power plant generates
about 14,000 gigawatt-hour (GWh) of electricity, while an LNG import facility with a cost of
$800 million provides regasified LNG having an energy content of over 80,000 GWh. However,
there are additional investment requirement at the end-user level to use the regasified LNG (i.e.,
for power generation or as an industrial and commercial fuel) supplied from an ADB-financed
LNG terminal and energy losses in converting LNG to electricity. Therefore, GHG efficiency
indicators for electricity supply projects and fuel or thermal energy supply projects are
separately recorded in this EKB.
                                                                                                      23


B.         Greenhouse Gas Efficiency Analysis of ADB Energy Sector Lending Approvals of
           the Six Countries

71.     During 2001­2005, ADB energy sector lending approvals for investments with
quantifiable GHG impacts in the six countries averaged about $460 million per year, with power
supply projects absorbing over 83% of ADB lending; this increased over 2.75 times during the
next 3 years to about $1.26 billion per year, with the share in power supply projects increasing
to 89%. The portfolio-wide trends of ADB's energy sector portfolio are summarized in Table 3.
The leveraging of ADB funding for mobilizing capital investments in the energy sector also
increased from 3 to more than 6, with the capital mobilization increasing from $1.4 billion per
year in 2001­2005 to $7.8 billion per year in 2006­2008. The increased ADB lending and
capital mobilization by ADB to the energy sector resulted in the annual energy output of ADB-
financed power supply and fuel or thermal energy supply projects increasing from 4,284 GWh
and 13,177 GWh, respectively, during 2001­2005 period to 37,746 GWh and 19,493 GWh,
respectively, during 2006­2008.38 The increase in energy output of power supply projects is due
mainly to the recent shift in ADB's energy sector portfolio toward power generation projects
(renewable or hydropower as well as thermal power plants) from a high concentration of power
transmission and distribution projects during 2001­2005.

72.     The GHG savings of ADB-financed projects are estimated using the methodologies
described in Chapter IV and shown in Table 3. The GHG emission savings39 due to ADB-
financed power supply projects increased from 1.08 million tCO2e during 2001­2005 to
7.3 million tCO2e during 2006­2008. The GHG savings attributable to ADB (i.e., in proportion to
its investment in the total project cost) in the power supply projects increased from 0.58 million
tCO2e in 2001­2005 to 1.65 million tCO2e during 2006­2008. There is a marginal drop in the
GHG savings of fuel supply projects to 1.31 million tCO2e in 2006­2008 from 1.53 million tCO2e
in 2001­2005 and a corresponding reduction in the GHG savings attributable to ADB from
0.44 million tCO2e to 0.38 million tCO2e. The trends in the GHG emissions of ADB's energy
sector portfolio in each country are further detailed in the Supplementary Appendix C.

73.     The increase in GHG savings in the power supply projects was due to increasing ADB
financing of power generation projects deploying zero or low emission (renewable energy
including hydropower, transmission, and distribution loss reduction) technologies and more
efficient thermal power technologies such as supercritical coal power plants and combined-cycle
gas turbines. However, there was a reduction in GHG savings per unit of electricity supplied
(from 252 tCO2e/GWh to 193 tCO2/GWh) in the recent times. This was due mainly to the
increase in thermal power plants in ADB's portfolio in recent times. Thermal power plants have
lower GHG savings per unit of energy supplied compared with renewable and hydropower
plants.




38
     The energy outputs are normalized by dividing by the number of years in the two periods.
39
     The GHG emission savings are normalized by dividing by the number of years in the two periods.
24



         Table 3: ADB Energy Lending Portfolio Indicators for Investment Projects in Six
                           Countries with Quantifiable GHG Impacts
Item                                                                     2001­2005         2006­2008         2001­2008
Power Generation and Supply-Side Projects
ADB's annual average lending ($ million)                                       383             1,124               661
Annual average capital investment mobilized by ADB ($ million)               1,118             6,888             3,154
Annual average energy supplied from ADB projects (GWh)                       4,284            37,746            16,832
Annual average GHG emissions of ADB projects (tCO2e)                    1,499,919         18,461,660         7,860,572
Annual average GHG emission savings (tCO2e)                             1,078,787          7,274,554         3,402,200
Annual average GHG savings attributable to ADB (tCO2e)                    576,702          1,646,556           977,897

Annual energy supplied per unit of investment (GWh/$million)                   3.8               5.5                5.3
Annual GHG emission savings per unit of investment (tCO2e/$                    965             1,056              1,079
million)

Annual GHG emissions per unit of energy (tCO2e/GWh)                            350               489                467
Annual GHG emissions savings per unit of energy (tCO2e/GWh)                    252               193                202

Fuel and Thermal Energy Supply Projects
ADB's annual average lending ($ million)                                        78               133                99
Annual average capital investment mobilized by ADB ($ million)                 266               891               501
Annual average energy supplied (GWh)                                        13,177            19,493            15,545

Annual average GHG emissions of ADB projects (tCO2e)                    2,826,598          3,692,813         3,151,429
Annual average GHG emission saving (tCO2e)                              1,531,480          1.311,119         1,448,845
Annual average GHG savings attributable to ADB (tCO2e)                    442,575            380,524           419,306

Annual energy supplied per unit of investment (GWh/$million)                  49.5              21.9               31.1
Net annual GHG emission savings per unit of investment (tCO2e/$              5,757             1,471              2,895
million)

Annual GHG emissions per unit of energy (tCO2e/GWh)                    214.5              189.4      202.7
Annual GHG emissions savings per energy unit (tCO2e/GWh)                 116                 67        93
ADB = Asian Development bank, GHG = greenhouse gas, GWh = gigawatt-hour, tCO2e = ton of carbon dioxide
equivalent.
Note: Annual energy supplied, ADB lending approvals, capital cost mobilized, GHG emissions, and GHG emission
      savings are normalized to an annual basis by dividing by the number of years in each period.
Source: Computed by the study team.

C.         Country-Wise GHG Efficiency Analysis of Energy Sector Lending Operations

74.     The GHG savings resulting from ADB-financed projects in the energy sector indicate that
ADB-financed projects are shifting these countries toward a low-carbon growth path, as these
projects are contributing to overall economic growth by providing additional energy supply and
at the same time contributing to GHG emission savings. This can be further illustrated by
comparing the GHG emissions per unit of energy of projects approved for ADB support to the
overall GHG emission factor per unit of energy consumed in the country concerned. The
emissions of ADB-financed power supply projects are shown in comparison to the operating
margin40 of the power grid in each country in Table 4. For the power supply projects, the
emissions per unit of electricity for ADB-financed projects are substantially lower than the
operating margin of the power grid of the country concerned except in Philippines and Viet Nam.
This implies that ADB-financed projects have contributed to shifting the concerned countries to
a low-carbon growth path as incremental emissions are less than the average emissions.


40
     The average emissions (weighted by the energy output of each plant) per unit of electricity sent into the power grid.
                                                                                                              25


                           Table 4: Country-Wise GHG Efficiency Analysis

                                        Average Grid         Power Supply Projects        Fuel Supply Projects
                                       Emission Factor
Item                                    (tCO2e/GWh)         2001­2005      2006­2008     2001­2005    2006­2008

Bangladesh
Net energy supplied (GWh)                                         257            718        2,527
Approved ADB financing ($ million)                                 98             70           55
GHG savings (tCO2e)                                             7,780         86,391      201,238
Emissions per unit of energy                    634               521            439          202
(tCO2e/GWh)

People's Republic of China
Net energy supplied (GWh)                                       1,203            288          603        9,132
Approved ADB financing ($ million)                                 65             36           21           83
GHG savings (tCO2e)                                           515,560        259,590      670,493      631,024
Emissions per unit of energy              894­1,278               430                         475          175
(tCO2e/GWh)

India
Net energy supplied (GWh)                                         406         29,880       10,047       10,360
Approved ADB financing ($ million)                                 88            636            2           50
GHG savings (tCO2e)                                           318,840      6,080,434      659,750      680,094
Emissions per unit of energy                   1,000                0            498          202          202
(tCO2e/GWh)

Pakistan
Net energy supplied (GWh)                                          85          3,965
Approved ADB financing ($ million)                                  3            247
GHG savings (tCO2e)                                            39,695      1,100,238
Emissions per unit of energy                    628                 0            213
(tCO2e/GWh)

Philippines
Net energy supplied (GWh)                                          14            850
Approved ADB financing ($ million)                                  6             62
GHG savings (tCO2e)                                             7,713      (386,067)
Emissions per unit of energy                    657                            1,011
(tCO2e/GWh)

Viet Nam
Net energy supplied (GWh)                                    2,318           2,044
Approved ADB financing ($ million)                             123               73
GHG savings (tCO2e)                                        189,199         133,968
Emissions per unit of energy                    567            366              766
(tCO2e/GWh)
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, GHG = greenhouse gas, GWh = gigawatt-hour, tCO2e = ton of carbon dioxide
 equivalent.
 Note: Net energy supplied, ADB financing approvals and GHG savings are normalized to an annual basis by dividing
       by the number of years in each period.
 Source: Computed by the study team.

75.     Bangladesh. Although the power transmission and distribution projects in Bangladesh
resulted in GHG savings due to reduction in power distribution losses, the open-cycle gas
turbine projects that ADB financed as a short-term measure for reducing power shortages had
negative GHG savings. This resulted in reduced GHG savings for ADB's power supply portfolio.
However, the GHG emissions per unit of ADB-financed projects were lower than the grid
emission factor of Bangladesh. The two gas supply projects that ADB financed during 2001­
26


2005 resulted in significant GHG savings due to replacement of high-emitting fossil fuel and
biomass with cleaner natural gas.

76.     People's Republic of China. A significant reduction in ADB financing of power supply
projects in the PRC occurred during 2006­2008 compared with 2001­2005, and a
corresponding reduction of GHG savings attributable to ADB-financed power supply projects.
However, the GHG savings per unit of energy in the power supply projects increased from about
430 tCO2e/GWh to 900 tCO2e/GWh, as ADB's recent investments in the power sector in the
PRC were in zero or low-carbon technologies such as renewable energy and hydropower. A
significant increase occurred in energy supplied through fuel and thermal energy supply projects
in the PRC due to large natural gas infrastructure and centralized district heating projects
included in ADB's portfolio in recent times. However, overall, there was a significant reduction in
the GHG savings per unit of energy supplied from over 650 tCO2e/GWh in 2001­2005 to less
than 100 tCO2e/GWh in 2006­2008. This was due mainly to the absence of methane capture
projects in the latter period. The emissions per unit of energy for ADB-financed power supply
projects was significantly lower than the grid emission factors of all the PRC's major grids.

77.     India. There was a significant increase in ADB lending approvals to the power supply
sector in India ($88 million per year in 2001­2005 to $636 million per year in 2006­2008), and
there was even higher capital mobilization due to increased leveraging of ADB financing. The
total energy output of ADB-financed power sector projects increased from 406 GWh to
29,880 GWh due to increased ADB lending to large thermal power plants and hydropower
plants. As ADB-financed projects including thermal power plants on average emit less than the
grid emission factor of India (498 tCO2e/GWh compared with 1,000 tCO2e/GWh), a significant
amount of GHG savings amounting to 6,080,434 tCO2e is attributable to ADB projects.
However, annual GHG savings per unit of capital investment required for approved projects
actually decreased by 33%, from an average of over 2,600 tCO2e/$ million in 2001­2005 to less
than 1,800 tCO2e/$ million in 2006­2008. This reflects largely the approvals for assistance to
setting up (mostly clean coal) thermal power projects during 2006­2008, which resulted in large
GHG savings compared with the counterfactual, but the GHG savings per unit of investment
were less for such projects compared with renewable and hydropower projects. The large LNG
terminal project that ADB financed through two lending operations during the two periods
dominated the fuel supply projects in India, and this project's energy content and GHG savings
were comparable to several large power plants.
78.     Pakistan. There was a significant increase in ADB lending to the power sector in
Pakistan during 2006­2008 compared with 2001­2005, when only a single hydropower project
was financed by ADB. The projects financed by ADB during 2006­2008 consisted of thermal
(gas-fired) power plants and hydropower plants, power transmission, and distribution expansion
projects. These projects resulted in significant GHG savings compared with the counterfactual,
as the GHG emissions of the ADB portfolio (213 tCO2e/GWh) were significantly less than the
grid emission factor for Pakistan.

79.      Philippines. The GHG efficiency of only two project or components belonging to 2001­
2005 and 2006­2008, respectively, could be analyzed for GHG efficiency.41 The results clearly
reflect the fact that a transmission loss reduction project (approved during the first time period)
was associated with low GHG emission reductions. The rehabilitation of coal-fired power plant
(approved during the second time period) led to an increase of GHG emissions, even if its

41
     Other loans or components were essentially focused on sector reforms or capacity building, which have only
     indirect implications for GHG efficiency.
                                                                                                                   27


conversion efficiency was enhanced as it is increasing the share of coal power generation in the
overall generation mix. This also led to ADB-financed projects resulting in higher GHG
emissions, as the emissions of the ADB portfolio (766 tCO2/GWh) were higher than the grid
emission factor for the Philippines.

80.     Viet Nam. The amount of energy supplied by ADB-financed projects and the ADB
financing of energy sector projects in Viet Nam remained roughly the same in the two periods.
The ADB projects approved during 2001­2005 consisted of combined-cycle gas turbine projects
and power transmission projects, while in 2006­2008 ADB approved financing for a large
hydropower project and a large coal power plant. Although the emissions per unit of energy of
ADB projects during 2006­2008 exceeded the average grid emission factor due to the presence
of the coal power plant, the coal power plant also resulted in emission savings with respect to
the project-specific counterfactual.

D.         Ranking of Energy Supply Technologies Based on ADB-Supported Projects in the
           Six Countries

81.    With the objective of assessing the effect of including GHG emission costs to the least-
cost planning process of selecting power supply technologies, the power supply projects
included in the ADB's portfolio are ranked as follows:42
       (i)     the traditional economic cost per unit of energy ($/kilowatt-hour [kWh]), where the
               cost comprises the annualized capital cost plus annual fixed operating cost plus
               fuel costs per unit of energy; and
       (ii)    the traditional economic cost per unit of energy ($/kWh) plus global environment-
               related cost, which is computed as the cost associated with gross GHG
               emissions on a per kWh basis.

82.     The rationale for adding the GHG emission cost to the economic cost is based on the
findings of the IPCC that indicate GHG concentrations have already exceeded the atmospheric
capacity to hold GHGs without adversely impacting the global climate.43 Hence, gross emissions
have an economic cost at a global level. It is recognized, however, that such an aggregation of
economic and GHG emission-related costs is not used for the purposes of making investment
decisions. The technology ranking based on ADB's energy sector portfolio is subject to the
following limitations:
        (i)     site-specific constraints in deploying certain technologies and site-specific costs
                are not considered;
        (ii)    technology penetration limitations (i.e., the share of total energy supply that can
                be based on renewable energy such as wind without affecting the stability or
                reliability of the entire power supply system) are not considered;
        (iii)   the peculiar characteristics of different power generation technologies are not
                considered, for instance, coal or gas-fired power generation is dispatchable,
                while renewable energy-based generation is not;
        (iv)    the ranking does not consider the fuel availability situation within the country or
                the country's fuel import options; and
        (v)     cost incurred by energy users to switch fuels (say from coal to gas) is not
                considered.

42
     It is recognized that the ranking may change if the abatement costs of local pollutants are also added.
43
     Therefore, any additional GHG emission sources (such as several types of new energy projects in DMCs including
     those supported by ADB) would contribute to global climate change. It may, therefore, be worthwhile to attribute a
     cost to the equivalent CO2 emissions from such energy projects in line with carbon market prices.
28



83.    For the purpose of ranking, two main energy price scenarios are considered; and for
each energy price scenario, two sets of carbon price levels are considered. The six resulting
scenarios may be described as follows:
       (i)    two BAU scenarios in which no value is placed on carbon emissions even though
              the impact of any incremental GHG emissions leads to further climate change; in
              the low-fuel price BAU scenario, coal and gas prices are assumed at $60/t and
              $5/million British thermal units (mmbtu), respectively; in the high-fuel price BAU
              scenario, coal and gas prices are assumed at $90/t and $7/mmbtu, respectively.
       (ii)   a low-carbon price scenario in which the carbon price reflects present day levels
              of about $20/tCO2e; costs are thus analyzed for a combination of low-fuel/low-
              carbon price and high-fuel/low-carbon price scenarios; and
       (iii)  a high-carbon price scenario in which the carbon price reflects an expected
              future price level (most likely post-2012) of about $60/tCO2e; energy project costs
              are thus estimated for low-fuel/high-carbon price and high-fuel/high-carbon price
              scenarios.

84.     Figures 1­6 provide the costs per unit of energy for the power generation/savings
options supported by ADB since 2001. Although the results are based on a relatively small
sample of projects and components approved for ADB support,44 some broadly indicative
insights are possible. For the low-fuel price scenario without considering the GHG costs, the
following can be deduced:
        (i)    methane destruction projects are the most economical; methane destruction is
               economically attractive because the methane resource cost reflects only the cost
               of methane capture, storage, and pipelines;45
        (ii)   conventional pulverized coal-fired power plants are more attractive than the more
               efficient supercritical steam or fluidized bed generation options as the low-fuel
               price is not sufficient to offset the incremental capital cost of advanced
               technologies;
        (iii)  large hydropower projects entail higher costs than coal-fired power options,
               which perhaps reflects the sample size and the site specific conditions for hydro
               plants in the sample;
        (iv)   gas-fired combined cycle-turbine projects are more expensive than hydropower
               projects but more economical than gas-fired open-cycle turbine projects;
        (v)    renewable energy options, which normally have a relatively low capacity factor,
               are in general more expensive than large hydropower and fossil fuel-fired power
               plants;
        (vi)   rehabilitation of coal- or gas-fired power plants is not economically efficient when
               fuel prices are low, as the incremental efficiency gains come with relatively high
               capital investment requirements;
        (vii)  pumped storage hydropower projects are the least attractive power generation
               options, reflecting the high energy input required to pump up water on a daily
               basis;




44
   The small sample of projects and components of certain categories may not be sufficiently representative of the
   population of projects that can be developed in ADB DMCs. Moreover, costs and energy outputs of certain project
   and component categories are more site or location specific than others.
45
   Methane resource costs do not include the cost of coal mining operations.
                                                                                                                  29


           (viii)   investment in transmission and distribution system46 improvements is the least
                    attractive as an alternative to power generation through avoided generation
                    resulting from loss reduction.

85.     The comparison of the high-fuel price scenario with the low-fuel price scenario, as well
as the introduction of carbon prices under the high-carbon price and low-carbon price scenarios
shows that the higher the fuel price and the carbon price ;
        (i)    the higher capital cost supercritical or fluidized bed-based power plants become
               more attractive vis-à-vis conventional pulverized coal-fired power plants;
        (ii)   large hydropower and renewable energy options become more attractive; in fact,
               at a carbon price of $60/t, hydropower projects may even be more attractive than
               some of the methane destruction-cum-power generation projects; and
        (iii)  win-win energy supply options that results in increased economic benefits and
               GHG savings (such as end-user efficiency) become even more attractive
               opportunities.

86.   In view of the anticipated rise in carbon market prices (especially after 2012), it may be
worthwhile for ADB to consider the following:
      (i)      supporting power projects based on clean coal technologies (rather than
               conventional pulverized coal subcritical power plants) in grid systems that are
               sufficiently large;
      (ii)     continuing and perhaps accelerating support for large hydropower, renewable,
               and transmission grid-strengthening projects;
      (iii)    not supporting financing of open-cycle gas turbine projects (unless they are
               considered as a first phase of planned combined cycle power plants);
      (iv)     selectively supporting pumped storage hydropower projects (if they can be
               shown to result in reduction in overall system operating cost); and
      (v)      aggressively pursuing end-user efficiency and methane destruction projects.




46
     Pumped storage projects and power transmission projects are undertaken mainly for improving the operational
     performance of power systems. The loss reduction or otherwise is a minor consideration in the investment
     decision-making process. It can be also shown if a system-wide study is undertaken for pump storage project when
     they are operated with large nuclear power plants, the overall cost is reduced as a result of the pump storage
     projects.
30


RANKING OF POWER SUPPLY PROJECTS FOR FUEL AND CARBON PRICE SCENARIOS

                                                                      Figure 1: Cost Comparison of Power Generation (LF Scenario)                                                                                                                          Figure 2: Cost Comparison of Power Generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (LF-LC Scenario)
                                                                              A

                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                   Power Generation/Savings Options




                                                                                                                                                                         Power Generation/Saving Options
                                                                              C                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                              D                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                              E                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                              F                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F
                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                               I                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                              J                                                                                                                                                              J
                                                                              K                                                                                                                                                              K

                                                                                   0.0      2.0            4.0     6.0          8.0       10.0      12.0   14.0                                                                                      0.0              5.0                10.0                15.0             20.0
                                                                                                                    cent/kWh                                                                                                                                                          cent/kWh

                                                                                            LF: Coal Price of $10/ton, and gas price of $5/mmbtu                                                                                                                LF-LC: $60/ton coal, $5/mmbtu gas, $20/tCO2e




                                                                                         Figure 3: Cost Comparison of Power Generation                                                                                                                Figure 4: Cost Comparison of Power Generation (HF Scenario)
                                                                                                         (LF-HC Scenario)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                      A
                         Power Generation/Saving Options




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Power Generation/Saving Options
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                      B
                                                                      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                      D                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                      E                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                      F                                                                                                                                                                      F
                                                                      G                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                      J
                                                                      K                                                                                                                                                                      J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             K
                                                                          0.0                  5.0               10.0              15.0            20.0           25.0
                                                                                                                        cent/kWh                                                                                                                     0.0      2.0     4.0       6.0       8.0      10.0      12.0      14.0    16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cent/kWh
                                                                                             LF-HC: $60/ton coal, $5/mmbtu gas, $60/tCO2e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HF: Coal price of $90/ton, and gas price of $7/mmbtu




                                                                      Figure 5: Cost Comparison of Power Generation (HF-LC Scenario)                                                                                                                          Figure 6: Cost Comparison of Power Generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (HF-HC Scenario)

                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                      A
 Power Generation/Saving Options




                                                                                                                                                                                             Power Generation/Saving Options




                                                                      B                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                      C                                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                      D                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                      E                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                      F                                                                                                                                                                      F
                                                                      G                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                      H                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                          I                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                      J                                                                                                                                                                      J
                                                                      K                                                                                                                                                                      K

                                                                              0.0                    5.0                 10.0               15.0            20.0                                                                                 0.0            5.0         10.0         15.0         20.0          25.0       30.0
                                                                                                                    cent/kWh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cent/kWh
                                                                                               HF-LC: $90/ton coal, $7/mmbtu gas; $20/tCO2e                                                                                                                     HF-HC: $90/ton coal, 47/mmbtu gas; $60/tCO2e



       Note:
       A = Pumped storage hydro                                                                                                                                                                                                              G = Gas-fired combined cycle
       B = Transmission loss reduction                                                                                                                                                                                                       H = Large hydropower
       C = Rehabilitation of coal-fired power plant                                                                                                                                                                                           I = Coal-fired power generation (efficient)
       D = Gas-fired turbine in open cycle mode                                                                                                                                                                                              J = Coal-fired power generation (conventional)
       E = Rehabilitation of gas-fired power plant                                                                                                                                                                                           K = Methane destruction (captured methane-fired)
       F = Renewable energy
       Source: Prepared by the study team.
                                                                                               31


 VI.    EVALUATION OF GREENHOUSE GAS EFFICIENCY OF ADB'S ENERGY SECTOR
                                 OPERATIONS

A.     Relevance and Strategic Focus

       1.      Relevance of ADB's Energy Sector Operations to Climate Change
               Mitigation

87.     It is by now recognized that (i) the warming of the climate system since the mid-20th
century is unequivocal and is very likely (with more than 90% confidence level) a consequence
of increased anthropogenic GHG emissions; (ii) developed economies cannot by themselves
achieve the most desirable outcome of stabilizing atmospheric GHG concentrations at 450 ppm
CO2 equivalent by 2030; (iii) technology and finance should be made available to developing
countries (including ADB DMCs) to move toward a low-carbon growth path; and (iv) developing
Asian countries are expected to contribute to more than half of incremental global primary
energy consumption to 2030 as well as a significant share of incremental global GHG emissions
to 2030. This backdrop provides the rationale for increasing attention in recent years within ADB
to climate change-related issues, including GHG emission savings of energy sector operations.

       2.      Strategic Focus of National Energy Sector Strategies with respect to
               Greenhouse Gas Efficiency

88.     All six selected DMCs consider the ensuring of adequate energy supplies to maintain
economic growth and improve the living conditions of their people to be of primary importance.
GHG efficiency is encouraged to the extent that it is consistent with the above-mentioned
objectives and when GHG efficiency improvement contributes to improved energy security,
enhanced operational efficiency, and mitigation of local environmental impacts. Although GHG
mitigation is an objective in its own right, the primary objective of these measures is to improve
the energy security and sustainability of the energy sector. In the longer term, wide deployment
of clean energy technologies would result in significant scale economies as well as substantial
GHG savings.

89.     Although it is not explicitly recognized as such, all the selected DMCs have adopted
strategies to improve the GHG efficiency of their energy sectors. The PRC and India have taken
specific actions to improve the thermal efficiency of power generation by deploying more
efficient technologies and in the PRC's case by shutting down old and inefficient coal power
plants. All six countries have taken measures to increase the share of renewable energy in their
energy mix and to improve end-user energy efficiency. The efficacy of these measures varies
from country to country, but there is a general trend toward increased renewable energy
generation in PRC, India, and Pakistan.

90.     Even in countries such as PRC, India, and Viet Nam, where climate change is viewed in
a comprehensive manner, the main focus is on preparing for the adverse impacts of climate
change, and the leading DMCs (PRC and India) have encouraged the deployment of more
efficient and advanced technologies in their energy sectors as long as these technologies are
economically and financially viable. The developed economies are expected to facilitate
technology transfer as well as extend financial support as per the UNFCCC BAP to facilitate
GHG mitigation.
32


           3.      Strategic Focus of ADB Strategies on Greenhouse Gas Efficiency of Energy
                   Sector Operations

91.     ADB's long-term strategy adopted in 2008 (Strategy 2020) recognizes as one of the five
core operational areas the development of clean energy sources to meet the energy security
needs of the DMCs. The 2009 Energy Policy recognizes the enormity of the twin challenges of
energy security and climate change, advocates a catalytic role for ADB in advancing the clean
energy agenda in Asia and Pacific. It has brought the mitigation of increasing GHG emissions in
the energy sectors of DMCs to the forefront of ADB's energy sector operations together with
energy security and access to energy. Implementation of the Energy Policy is to be monitored
as per the ADB Results Framework, which explicitly states that appropriate indicators of clean
energy and energy efficiency are to be identified and incorporated in the results framework. In
recent years, therefore, ADB has adopted forward-looking strategies and policies that are
intended to guide its energy sector operations in keeping with DMCs' development priorities
such as energy security, energy access to all at affordable prices, as well as global interest in
shifting developing Asia to a low-carbon development path.

           4.      Strategic Focus of ADB Country Strategies with Respect to Greenhouse
                   Gas Efficiency Improvement of Energy Sector Operations

92.     ADB has taken a conscious decision to focus on encouraging the deployment of clean
energy technologies in its energy sector operations since 2006. The ADB country strategies
approved prior to 2006 for Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan were focused mainly on institutional
reforms in energy sector utilities and improving energy access. Likewise, prior to 2006, the
Philippines country strategies focused essentially on sector reform. In the PRC and Viet Nam,
the CSPs prior to 2006 gave emphasis to addressing of local environmental impacts of energy
sector projects. In the PRC, in particular, supply- and demand-side energy efficiency
improvement and renewable energy sector development were encouraged as a means for
improving the overall efficiency of the sector and to ensure the development of the sector in an
environmentally sustainable manner, but not necessarily to reduce GHG emissions.

93.     However, the CSPs/CPSs prepared since 2006 have explicitly mentioned the shifting of
the DMC energy sectors to a low-carbon development path as a primary objective together with
ensuring energy security and energy access. This is evident in the recently approved country
strategies for the PRC and Pakistan with targeted operations to increase lending to support
renewable energy, energy efficiency, and cleaner thermal power generation technologies.

B.         Responsiveness

           1.      ADB's Institutional Response to Improve Greenhouse Gas Efficiency of
                   Energy Sector Operations

94.     ADB's response to climate change concerns have evolved in four phases: (i) analysis
phase, when the Asia Least-Cost Greenhouse Gas Abatement Strategy study47 was carried out
with inputs from national technical experts from 12 DMCs to formulate key strategic priorities for
the national GHG abatement strategies during the late 1990s; (ii) capacity-building phase, when
the REACH program's PREGA RETA was conducted from 2001 to 2006 for capacity building of
in-country stakeholders in 18 DMCs in renewable energy, energy efficiency, and other GHG
abatement technologies; (iii) operationalization phase, which followed from the initial impetus
provided by PREGA to mainstream GHG abatement technologies in energy sector operations,
47
     ADB. 1998. Asia Least-Cost Greenhouse Gas Abatement Strategy. Manila.
                                                                                                                   33


the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol, and the launch of the Climate Change Program in
2006 consisting of EEI (to promote renewable energy and energy efficiency investments, policy
reforms, and institutional capacity building for creating an enabling environment for clean energy
investment) and CMI (to provide access to carbon markets to eligible clean energy projects from
DMCs); and (iv) operations sustaining phase, with the introduction of climate change
implementation plans on a regional basis, their (ongoing) integration with CPSs, the launch of
the Future Carbon Fund (which at this time is the only carbon fund that encourages projects
with GHG savings beyond 2012), as well as the CEFPF, which provides additional resources to
prepare GHG efficient investments. Most of the initiatives taken since 2006 are coordinated by
the Regional and Sustainable Development Department. These initiatives have resulted in
enhanced management focus, increased institutional capacity, and awareness of ADB's staff
working in the energy sector on operations promoting GHG efficiency.

           2.       Resource Allocation for Greenhouse Gas Efficient Operations

95.     ADB's lending to the energy sector in the six countries increased recently, with
cumulative lending increasing from $3,113 million to $4,679 million and annualized lending
increasing from $623 million in 2001­2005 to $1,560 million in 2006­2008. Together with the
overall increase in the lending volume, the allocation to clean energy projects48 increased in
absolute terms (viz., $171 million on annualized basis in 2001­2005 to $693 million during
2006­2008). As a share of total energy sector lending approvals, clean energy lending
approvals increased from 26% in 2001­2005 to 44% in 2006­2008. There was a significant
increase in ADB financing of renewable energy, hydropower, and advanced (i.e., supercritical)
thermal power plants and a reduction in traditional power transmission and distribution projects
during 2006­2008 compared with the earlier period. There was also a significant increase in
nonlending interventions supporting GHG-efficient policy reforms, capacity building, and project
preparation during 2006­2008 compared with 2001­2005 as illustrated in Table 5. Increasing
number of TAs approved during 2006­2008 with GHG efficiency improvement objectives was
supported by the CEFPF.

     Table 5: Resource Allocation for GHG Emission Reduction for Six Selected Countries
Item                                                          Unit       2001­2005      2006­2008        2001­2008
Cum. energy loan approvals                                   $ million        3,113            4,679          7,792
Cum. clean energy loan approvals                             $ million         853             2,078          2,931
Annualized energy loan approvals                             $ million         623             1,560           974
Annualized clean energy loan approvals                       $ million         171              693            366
Share of clean energy in total energy lending approvalsa        %             26%               44%           38%
Clean energy ADTA approvals                                  $ million         5.7               7.6           13.2
Clean energy PPTA approvals                                  $ million         5.9              10.9          16.8
Share of clean energy in total energy sector ADTA               %             23%               43%           32%
approvals
Share of clean energy tin total energy sector PPTA              %             69%               85%           78%
approvals
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
a
  Clean energy includes energy efficiency (including fuel switch), renewable energy, hydropower, clean coal technology,
  gas-based power generation, and gas infrastructure development projects. Conventional coal-fired power and open-
  cycle gas turbine-based generation projects, transmission, and distribution projects are not included.
Source: Study team.




48
     This refers only to clean energy investments included in the energy sector projects. The clean energy investments
     embedded in other sectors such as transport or water supply are not included here.
34



         3.        Mobilization of Private Sector Investments to Promote Greenhouse Gas
                   Efficiency

96.      The roles of the private sector and nonsovereign operations are increasingly recognized
in ADB's energy sector operations, although ADB has not financed private sector energy
projects have not been financed by ADB in Bangladesh and Viet Nam since 2002. Most
nonsovereign energy sector projects that ADB approved from 2001 to 2008 were for clean
energy investments.49 With the recognition that ADB is playing a role in catalyzing private
participation through introduction of new technologies, financial mechanisms, and business
models, the following merit specific attention: (i) supporting high-efficiency supercritical coal-
fired power generation projects in India through private sector or nonsovereign operations
involving state-owned enterprises; (ii) supporting private sector investments and public-private
partnerships in renewable energy (e.g., small hydropower, wind) in PRC, India, and Pakistan;
(iii) supported the post privatization rehabilitation of existing thermal power plants in Pakistan
and Philippines as well as new investments in thermal power generation by a privatized entity in
Pakistan; and (iv) guarantee support to partly cover market risk of commercial banks that
finance building energy efficiency projects in the PRC.

97.     There was a substantial increase in nonsovereign operations in the energy sector during
2006­2008 compared with 2001­2005, with annualized approvals increasing by 13-fold. More
than 95% of nonsovereign energy approvals were for clean energy projects. There was a
corresponding increase in total private sector investments mobilized by ADB in the clean energy
sector, with ADB's nonsovereign operations mobilizing over $3.4 billion of investments for the
clean energy sector. This is illustrated in Table 6.

                   Table 6: Private Sector Participation in Six Selected Countries
Item                                                                 Unit       2001­2005        2006­2008        2001­2008
Annualized lending approvals for energy projects                    $ million        623             1,560             974
Annualized nonsovereign lending approvals to energy sector          $ million         38              494              214
Annualized clean energy lending approvals in                        $ million         25              469              192
nonsovereign energy sector lending
Annualized investments mobilized due to ADB's                       $ million        316             3,431            1,484
nonsovereign operations for clean energy investments
Share of nonsovereign loans in total loans to energy sector            %             6%               32%              22%
Share of clean energy loans in nonsovereign loans to                   %            66%               95%              90%
energy sector
Leveraging of investments to clean energy                            times          12.6              7.3               7.7
Source: Compiled by the study team.

         4.        Accounting of Greenhouse Gas Emissions of ADB-Financed Energy Sector
                   Projects

98.    Since 2006, ADB has taken several measures to account for the GHG emissions of its
energy sector projects. ADB's Results Framework has included the GHG emissions of energy
sector operations as one of the level 2 indicators.50 The indicator for the Results Framework is

49
   It may be argued that the following are clean energy projects: (i) acquisition and rehabilitation of a subcritical coal-fired
   power plant in the Philippines--the rehabilitation resulted in significant increases in plant efficiency; (ii) a transmission
   line for power evacuation from a hydropower project (borrower in India); and (iii) rehabilitation, upgradation, and
   expansion of transmission system plus capacity-building support to a privatized power utility in Pakistan.
50
   At the same time, ADB has set a target for its investments in clean energy ($1 billion by 2008 and $2 billion by
   2013). Both the 2008 and 2013 targets are set in terms of loan approvals rather than actual disbursements within
   the year.
                                                                                              35


the annual GHG savings realized as a result of an ADB-financed project once the project
reaches full commercial operation based on the estimates made at project appraisal and project
completion. At present, ADB does not have a consistent set of guidelines to assess the GHG
savings attributable to ADB-supported investments in the energy sector. Therefore, it would be
useful to develop guidelines on data collection during project preparation and processing that
would estimate GHG emission reduction, keeping in view the type of methodological issues
discussed in Chapter 4 for arriving at portfolio-wide estimates of GHG savings.

99.     Nonetheless, there is a substantial increase in the recognition of climate change and the
GHG implications of energy projects and investment programs since 2006. The coverage and
quality of data required for GHG efficiency analysis that are available from RRPs (and other
documents prepared during loan processing) have improved. GHG impact assessment in RRPs
increased from 22% during 2001­2005 to more than 45% during 2006­2008 (Table 7).
However, the indicators used in GHG impact assessment in the RRPs do not use consistent set
of methodologies and assumptions. The data and assumptions used are also not always
provided in the RRPs. However, there is a relatively high prevalence in reporting GHG savings
for energy efficiency, renewable energy, and large hydropower projects compared with other
types of projects. The degree of GHG assessment undertaken in RRPs for various categories of
energy sector projects is shown in Table 7.

        Table 7: GHG Implications Reported at RRPs (% of components by category)
        Item                                    2001­2005        2006­2008       2001­2008
        Energy efficiency improvement               83               60              73
        Renewable energy                            --              100             100
        Hydropower                                  67               75              71
        Gas infrastructure development               0               20               9
        Thermal power generation                    25               10              14
        Transmission                                10               50              21
        Distribution                                10               40              20
           Total                                    22               45              33
       GHG = greenhouse gas, RRP = report and recommendation of the President.
       Source: Compiled by the study team.

C.     Results

       1.      Policy Reforms Promoted by ADB that Propel Developing Member
               Countries to a Low-Carbon Growth Path

100. The policy and institutional reforms supported by ADB toward GHG efficiency through
advisory technical assistance and policy dialogue in the six countries are assessed in terms of
the adequacy, efficacy, and overall impact of ADB intervention. The assessments of policy
interventions supported by ADB for each of the countries studied are provided in Chapter 3. It
can be inferred that ADB has not engaged national-level policy makers to initiate broad policy
reforms to improve the GHG efficiency of the energy sector in the concerned DMCs. However,
ADB has selectively supported policy reforms to achieve GHG efficiency improvement in the
PRC and Pakistan. In the PRC, ADB has provided a series of TA grants to improve the overall
energy efficiency of district heating, coal-bed methane recovery, industrial energy efficiency,
and waste coal utilization. ADB has also provided TA to assess the feasibility of new
technologies such as integrated gasification combined cycle power plants and shallow ground
geo-energy. In Pakistan, ADB was instrumental in setting up institutional arrangements for
promoting renewable energy. ADB has recently engaged the governments of Philippines and
36


Viet Nam to promote policy reforms to improve end-user energy efficiencies. In Bangladesh and
India, the policy reforms initiated by ADB are focused primarily on improving the operational
efficiencies of power sector utilities, which should have indirect impact on the overall GHG
efficiency of the energy sector through reduction of power distribution losses.

       2.      ADB Contribution to Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction

101. From a high concentration of transmission and distribution projects approved for support,
especially in South Asia during 2001­2005, ADB's energy portfolio has diversified since 2006.
Although no methane destruction projects have been approved for ADB support since 2006, the
clean energy portfolio has included several other inherently relatively cleaner energy options
such as (i) renewable energy and hydropower projects approved for support in PRC, India, and
Pakistan; (ii) an industrial energy efficiency project in the PRC to reduce electricity consumption
per unit of industrial output; (iii) improved district heating services with higher efficiency heat
generation and heat distribution systems in the PRC; and (iv) gas infrastructure development
projects in the PRC and India, intended to substitute gas for higher GHG-emitting coal and
petroleum products in residential, commercial, transport, and industrial applications. However,
ADB has also expanded its lending to large thermal power generation including coal-fired power
plants, which result in significant GHG emissions. These projects were essential for ensuring
the energy security of the countries concerned and energy access to all at an affordable price.
Most of ADB-financed thermal power projects deployed advanced efficient technologies subject
to technical constraints present in a specific country and have contributed to GHG savings
compared with the BAU scenario in the absence of ADB intervention.

102. The trends in GHG emissions of ADB-financed energy sector projects including GHG
emission savings and attribution of GHG emission savings to ADB in proportion to ADB
financing are explained in Chapter V. In summary, ADB financing of the energy sector has
increased significantly during recent years, and some of these investments have resulted in
increased gross GHG emissions. However, GHG emission savings have also increased as a
result of ADB-financed projects resulting in fewer emissions compared with the BAU scenario.
Hence, it can be inferred that ADB has shifted its energy assistance to a low-carbon growth
path.

                      VII.   KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     The Backdrop

103. This EKB includes a review of ADB policies, country strategies, national development
priorities and strategies, as well as ADB lending and nonlending interventions, some of which
were in place before (i) the Kyoto Protocol had entered into force (February 2005); (ii) the
Fourth Assessment Report of IPCC (2007) had been released, which stated that global warming
is very likely (more than 90% confidence level) a consequence of increased anthropogenic
emissions; (iii) ADB had launched initiatives (2005 and 2006) to support the development of
GHG abatement projects; and/or (iv) the DMCs' environment management policies and
programs had come to recognize climate change issues. Yet, this does not mean that no
projects or investment programs that lead to GHG emission reductions were supported by ADB
in the early years of the study period. Rather, as evident from chapters 3, 4, and 5, ADB did
approve the financing of many such projects right from the beginning of the study period (and
even earlier), but without necessarily recognizing the associated GHG benefits. The stated
objectives were often improvement of the local environment, cost reduction, and/or energy
                                                                                               37


security (or in some cases, even better safety in coal mining operations). The key findings
discussed below recognize this fact.

B.     Key Findings

104. Most supply-side energy investments will necessarily add to GHG emissions in
absolute terms. To maintain the economic growth required for sustained poverty reduction in
DMCs, the energy supply infrastructure has to keep pace with the increasing demand for
energy. This requires investments in new power plants, power transmission and distribution
networks, and gas pipelines and related infrastructure. Investments supporting fossil fuel usage
directly (e.g., thermal power plants, gas pipelines, and related facilities) or indirectly (e.g.,
increasing electricity generated with fossil fuel by expanding the transmission and distribution
network) will result in increased GHG emissions in absolute terms. However, the GHG efficiency
of these investments should not be measured in absolute terms but rather in relative terms (i.e.,
in comparison to the most likely scenario in the absence of the intervention).

105. GHG-efficient investments have been part of ADB's energy sector portfolio for
many years without explicitly recognizing them as such. ADB has been financing GHG-
efficient energy sector infrastructure development projects for promoting economic growth in
DMCs since well before the beginning of the study period. Prior to 2005, these investments
were justified in ADB loan documents on the basis of their economic and financial viability, and
local environmental impacts and GHG efficiency improvement were not considered as a reason
for ADB support--which is perhaps a reason for the inadequacies of relevant information and
data in RRPs for projects approved prior to 2005.

106. There has been increased focus on GHG-efficient investments supported by ADB
since 2006. ADB's lending to energy sector investments with direct GHG savings have
increased since 2006, which is consistent with the recently approved country strategies, where
shifting the energy sector to a low-carbon development trajectory is explicitly identified as an
intended development outcome. Besides, progressive commercialization of new and
increasingly sophisticated renewable energy technologies, and increasingly higher efficiency
fossil fuel-fired power generation have also increased ADB's maneuverability toward meeting
the DMCs' broader development objectives while ensuring an energy-efficient growth path. The
operations approved for support by ADB since 2006 that merit specific attention in this context
include an increasing share of renewable energy (with introduction of large wind turbines in the
PRC), advanced combined-cycle gas turbines and cleaner coal combustion technologies for
power generation (especially in India), developing infrastructure for supply of less GHG-
intensive fossil fuels such as natural gas (PRC and India), and deployment of efficient electrical
equipment in industry (PRC).

107. ADB's Private Sector Operations Department has the potential to play a significant
role in promoting GHG-efficient investments in the six selected countries. A review of ADB's
lending operations shows that the Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) operations
(especially in the PRC and India) have high potential for GHG efficiency improvement. This is
due mainly to the type of projects supported by PSOD, which include renewable energy (e.g.,
wind in India and small hydropower in Pakistan); supercritical coal power plants and LNG
terminals in India; district heating efficiency, industrial and commercial building energy
efficiency, and fuel switching investments in the PRC; and rehabilitation of privatized thermal
power plants in Pakistan and Philippines. Although there has been an increase in public sector
lending for hydropower projects (in PRC, India, and Viet Nam) and energy efficiency projects
38


(notably in the PRC), most of public sector lending continues to be dominated by traditional
power transmission and distribution projects.

108. Renewable energy is still a high-cost option for many DMCs. Although the share of
renewable energy in large DMCs such as the PRC and India is increasing in response to fiscal
and other incentives and the targets set by respective governments, the costs per unit of energy
from renewable energy projects are higher than the fossil fuel-based alternatives. There is
scope for further reducing the cost of energy from renewable energy by developing more
appropriate technologies for the Asian region, promoting regional manufacturing of renewable
energy equipment, and exploiting scale economies arising from increased penetration of
renewable energy technologies in the Asian region.

109. There is scope for expanding ADB investments in industrial energy efficiency
projects. The heavy industry sector (cement, steel, petrochemicals, etc.) consumes a
significant share of energy in the rapidly industrializing DMCs, and the industrial energy
efficiency of DMCs in terms of energy consumption per unit of industrial output lags behind that
of more advanced countries. However, ADB has not had much success in channeling financing
to industrial energy efficiency improvement due to (i) ADB's lack of engagement and expertise
in financing industrial projects, (ii) the relatively small size of investment per industrial unit,
(iii) ADB's internal policies discouraging it from assisting state-owned enterprises engaged in
heavy industries, and (iv) the need for financial intermediaries to channel ADB financing to
industrial energy efficiency improvement projects.

110. More emphasis is required in encouraging policy reforms to promote GHG
efficiency. In the six selected countries, ADB's policy dialogues have been generally focused
on institutional reforms of energy sector entities and less emphasis in initiating broader policy
reforms supporting GHG efficiency investments. This may be due to lack of access that ADB
has had to policy makers in larger DMCs such as India, where ADB has focused primarily on
state-level issues. Even in countries such as Bangladesh, where ADB was highly influential, its
policy dialogue was focused primarily on institutional reforms and creating an enabling
environment for private sector investments. However, there are exceptions to this trend. In the
PRC, ADB has selectively engaged with the government through a series of TA activities to
provide high-level inputs for policy reforms to encourage investments in improved district
heating systems and coal-bed methane recovery. In Pakistan, ADB has supported the policy
framework for renewable energy investments.

111. Appropriate indicators are needed in the Results Framework (2008) for tracking
implementation of the energy policy. In line with Strategy 2020, ADB's 2009 Energy Policy
recognizes the importance of energy security and climate change and sets targets for approvals
of ADB's financial support on clean energy technologies. The implementation of the Energy
Policy is to be monitored as per the ADB Results Framework, which clearly states that
(i) appropriate indicators for clean energy remain to be identified (and that they would be
incorporated in future versions of the Results Framework), and (ii) ADB's contribution to country
and regional outcomes is to be assessed by aggregating key outputs delivered to DMCs.
Hence, appropriate indicators need to be incorporated into ADB's Results Framework to monitor
the achievement of targets set in the 2009 Energy Policy, for which some of the indicators and
methodologies developed in this EKB could provide a useful basis.

112. The quality of information and data for GHG efficiency analysis reported in RRPs
is highly variable. The quality of GHG efficiency reporting in RRPs correlates well with the
quality of economic analysis and the type of project. Many RRPs for energy efficiency,
                                                                                                39


renewable energy, and hydropower projects provide GHG savings estimates or relevant data for
making reasonable estimates of GHG savings. For other types of projects (e.g., gas supply and
infrastructure development), the inadequacies of data relevant to GHG savings estimation are
most evident. The design and monitoring frameworks presented in some of the recent RRPs
also include GHG savings-related targets and indicators--although the baseline indicators or
the methodology for assessing GHG savings are not clearly outlined. However, the GHG
analysis undertaken in the RRPs and the GHG efficiency indicators used do not follow a
consistent methodology. As a result, the information provided in RRPs is of little use to monitor
ADB's portfolio-wide GHG efficiency.

113. ADB has not actively promoted methane capturing and utilization projects in
recent times. There is large potential for coal-bed and land-fill methane capturing projects in
PRC, India, and Indonesia. These projects have a high degree of GHG efficiency, as methane
has a global warming potential 21 times of that of CO2, and the captured methane can be used
as a clean fuel source to replace coal usage in power generation and as a clean residential,
commercial, and industrial fuel. ADB should selectively initiate policy dialogue with government
agencies and coal mining enterprises with the objective of expanding its investments in
methane capture and use based on its past experience in such projects in the PRC.

114. Coal remains the fuel of choice for many DMCs for power generation due to the
presence of large coal reserves in many DMCs, the relatively low cost, the proven reliability of
coal power plants for base load power generation, and lack of suitable alternatives to provide
the required scale of power generation capacity at an affordable price. Hence, if ADB is to
remain relevant to the needs of the DMCs, it should consider supporting coal-based power
generation based on more advanced and efficient coal-based power generation technologies
such as supercritical boilers, integrated gasification combined-cycle power plants, and carbon
capture and sequestration subject to technical feasibility. If such advanced technologies are not
feasible, conventional coal technologies may have to be supported to ensure energy security at
an affordable price. However, these technologies entail a significantly higher cost than
conventional coal power plants, and the GHG savings arising from the deployment of such
advanced technologies are not eligible for carbon financing at present. Hence, there exists a
need for ADB to explore appropriate financing mechanisms to encourage such technologies.

C.     Recommendations

115. Based on the key findings of the study, the EKB proposes recommendations for
Management consideration to improve ADB's internal reporting requirements of GHG impacts of
its energy sector operations and to scale up ADB investments in cleaner energy supply
technologies that contribute to shifting the DMCs to a low-carbon growth path.

116. Assess GHG implications of future investments. To better record and account for
GHG implications of future energy sector interventions (paras. 111­112) in a consistent manner
and taking into account the progress made on post-Kyoto negotiations under UNFCCC, ADB
should consider the following:
       (i)     preparing a consistent framework to identify proposed energy sector
               interventions with significant GHG impacts or savings at the concept clearing
               stage and to undertake a GHG assessment at appraisal stage, giving due
               consideration to country-specific and location-specific issues and options;
       (ii)    assessing ex-ante the GHG implications of projects with significant GHG impacts
               or savings with respect to a plausible counterfactual (in the context of the country
40


               concerned) to the project, which is most likely to happen in the absence of ADB-
               financed project; and
       (iii)   reconfirming the GHG assessment at project completion on an ex-post basis for
               such projects by incorporating changes in technical design (if any) as well as
               performance data (if available). The net GHG savings of the project with respect
               to the counterfactual could be incorporated to ADB's Results Framework.

117. Promote GHG efficient investments. ADB may consider the following for promoting
GHG efficient investments where technically and commercially feasible and relevant:
      (i)      given that coal is likely to continue to be a preferred fuel for several DMCs (para.
               114), ADB should take the lead in mobilizing funds for establishing a financing
               mechanism that buys down (in part or full) the incremental cost of relatively
               higher cost but more GHG-efficient coal power plants;
      (ii)     as a means to bring down the cost of renewable energy options (para. 108) and
               facilitating scale up of appropriate and affordable renewable energy technologies
               increase support for research and development of selected technologies within
               the region, pilot testing of promising new designs or technologies in certain
               DMCs, technology transfer (through technology licensing, technical
               collaborations, etc.) as well as manufacturing of renewable energy products or
               subassemblies within the Asian region;
      (iii)    toward exploiting the large GHG saving potential of methane capturing projects
               (para. 113) undertake an assessment of opportunities for reducing anthropogenic
               methane emissions--both from coal fields (where methane recovery and capture
               is economically viable), as well as from nonenergy sectors (such as municipal
               waste management)--for both power generation and city gas supply and scaling
               up ADB financing of such projects; and
      (iv)     scale-up of industrial energy efficiency improvement projects (para. 109) by
               developing a suite of lending modalities to meet the specific requirements of
               energy efficiency projects (which may entail small investments in any one
               enterprise, but are scaleable and replicable); such modalities should be pilot
               tested in selected DMCs. For such emphasis on GHG efficient interventions,
               technical and financial expertise required within ADB would need to be assessed
               and (to the extent required) suitably enhanced.
                                                                                          Appendix 1      41


                                       EVALUATION APPROACH

1.     Modalities. The evaluation approach includes a mix of literature review, desk studies, as
well as interviews with concerned Asian Development Bank (ADB) staff and borrower and
executing agency personnel for data gathering purposes. More specifically:
       (i)     Contextual and qualitative assessment of ADB energy sector strategies and
               operations, the literature review encompassed, agreements, protocols, action
               plans, and findings of various international organizations and country groupings, as
               well as ADB's strategic frameworks, relevant sector policies, country strategies,
               and recently launched relevant initiatives. Particularly pertaining to activities related
               to ADB initiatives such as the carbon market initiative and the energy efficiency
               initiative, discussions with concerned ADB personnel were also held.
       (ii)    Greenhouse gas (GHG) accounting methodologies were developed, with the
               limited objective of firming up methodologies for various categories of energy
               projects and components, the literature review covered available information on
               methodological issues, the methodologies approved by the clean development
               mechanism Executive Board, and technical literature that reports the findings
               regarding specific methodological issues pertaining to energy projects.
       (iii)   GHG efficiency assessment of energy sector operations, the broad approach
               was to apply the methodologies developed or adapted (for purposes of this
               evaluation knowledge brief) in (ii) above by using relevant (preferably) project-
               specific data or, where such data were not available, then suitable generic and
               default data from quotable and reliable sources.

2.      The GHG efficiency of a large number of energy projects was analyzed to (i) understand
the overall GHG efficiency for the entire portfolio, and (ii) discern time trends of GHG efficiency
(if any). Given that several approved projects included project components that covered more
than one category or type of energy sector investment (for instance, fossil fuel-fired power
capacity, renewable energy generation, and energy efficiency), the GHG efficiency was in fact
analyzed project component-wise. The approach was to base the analysis on (i) a review of the
reports and recommendations of the President, as well as supplementary appendixes, feasibility
reports, and/or other reports prepared through project preparation technical assistance, where
available; (ii) updates (since approval) on project design or other relevant parameters obtained
from relevant ADB staff; and (iii) data obtained from the concerned executing agency (public
sector projects) or borrower (nonsovereign and private sector projects), but only if information
from ADB's internal sources was lacking. In all cases, however, the preference was to use
project-specific technical performance data1 for estimating GHG efficiency; only in the absence
of such project-specific data were generic data from local or in-country sources or global
defaults from recognized and reliable sources considered.

3.      However, the underlying approach for GHG analysis (no matter how sophisticated and
detailed the GHG accounting methodologies may have been) could not yield precise GHG
efficiency estimates for the concerned projects and components. Precision could be achieved
only when actual project performance data were available--for which, of course, a necessary
precondition was that the project must be completed and in operation. This necessarily implies
that projects approved some 5 years or more ago had to be analyzed. However, such a sample
of projects would clearly miss any changes affected in recent years, when climate change


1
    For instance, regarding fuel calorific values, power plant auxiliary consumption, power plant heat rates,
    transmission losses, distribution losses, pipeline losses, capacity factors, etc.
42         Appendix 1



mitigation concerns have become increasingly important and ADB initiatives such as the carbon
market initiative and energy efficiency initiative have been launched.

4.     Scope of GHG Efficiency Analysis. For analytical purposes, the portfolio considered
comprised the energy sector projects and investment programs approved from 2001 through
2008 in six countries--Bangladesh, People's Republic of China, India, Pakistan, Philippines,
and Viet Nam. The six countries accounted for 80% of total ADB assistance approved for
energy sector development during the 8-year period (Table A1.1).2

    Table A1.1: Approvals for ADB's Energy Sector Operations from 2001 to 2008 ($ million)
    Country(ies)             Financial Assistancea         Technical Assistance            Total Assistance
    Bangladesh                    1,257.5                          6.1                         1,263.7
    PRC                           1,353.3                         16.4                         1,369.7
    India                         3,347.9                         14.7                         3,362.5
    Pakistan                      1,057.1                          8.4                         1,065.4
    Philippines                     691.5                          5.0                           696.5
    Viet Nam                        853.9                         13.2                           867.1
    Subtotal (6 DMCs)             8,561.1                         63.7                         8,724.8
    Total (All DMCs)             10,666.5                       113.1                         10,779.6
    Share of 6 DMCs                  80%                          56%                             80%
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, PRC = People's Republic of China.
a
  Includes financial assistance from ordinary capital resources; Asian Development Fund; grant-financed projects; as
  well as nonsovereign loans, equity, and regional activities.
Sources: ADB Intranet and listing of loan, technical assistance, grant, and equity approvals accessed on 26 June
           2009.

5.      Energy sector assistance spans a large variety of projects in various energy subsectors
(e.g., power, oil and gas, renewables, efficiency improvement) for supply-side expansion and
growth (e.g., power generation, transmission) as well as demand-side interventions (e.g.,
industrial energy efficiency improvements, conversion of gasoline using motor vehicles to using
compressed natural gas, etc.). Several approved projects include distinct components that are
classified under different categories. Table A1.2 shows the distribution of ADB lending support
for various categories of project components.




2
    The same six developing member countries also accounted for over 71% of ADB's total approvals during 2001­
    2008 for lending and nonlending support in all sectors for all developing member countries.
                                                                                                       Appendix 1       43


       Table A1.2: ADB Portfolio Approved for Energy Sector Lending from 2001 to 2008
                                                                Number of Project                       ADB
                                                                  Components                  Financial Assistance
    Item                                                        Number          %              $ million        %
    Energy efficiency improvement               EEI               13            10                 519             7
    Renewable energy                            REN                7             6                 355             5
    Large hydropower generation                 HYD                7             6                 611             8
    Thermal power generation                    TPG               14            11               1,237           16
    Gas infrastructure development              GID               12             9                 498             6
    Power transmission                          TRANS             31            24               2,810           36
    Power distribution                          DIST              19            15                 759           10
    Power sector reform                         PSR                7             6                 926           12
    Capacity building                           CB                17            13                  78             1
                                                                                                       a
              Total                                              127           100              7,792           100
    ADB = Asian Development Bank.
    a
       The difference of $769 million from the total ADB financial assistance figure Table A1.1 ($8,561.1 million) is
       because the following are excluded: (i) equity investment of $9.67 million for IND-7192, $2.6 million for IND-
       7227, $25 million for PRC-7244, and $2.75 million for PAK-7265; (ii) loans through complementary financing
       scheme of $225 million for IND-7242, $75 million for PRC-7244, and $200 million for PRC-7279; (iii) loan
       guarantee of $44 million for PAK-7265 and partial credit guarantee of $107 million for PRC-7271; (iv) political risk
       guarantee of $25 million for VIE-7176 and $35 million for VIE-7178; (v) $11 million in nonenergy components of
       PRC-1922; and (vi) grant-financed projects of $7.3 million.
    Source: Compiled by the study team.

6.       The GHG efficiency of the entire set of energy efficiency, renewable energy,
hydropower, thermal power, power transmission and distribution, and gas infrastructure
development projects was assessed. However, as ADB's assistance for power sector reforms
and capacity building impacts GHG emissions (or emission reductions) only indirectly,3 it is
difficult (if at all possible) to assess the contribution of such interventions to GHG efficiency
improvements. Therefore, the 24 project components in these two categories that accounted for
13% of the energy sector portfolio were not analyzed from the GHG efficiency perspective.

7.      Overview of Country-Wise Energy Lending Portfolio. India was by far the largest
borrower in the energy sector, followed by Bangladesh and Pakistan. Combined, the three
South Asian countries comprised nearly two thirds of the 127 project components (Figure A1.1)
in projects and investment programs approved from 2001 to 2008, and nearly 60% of the
approved financial assistance support (Figure A1.2).




3
    For instance, as a result of reforms, the power utility may introduce modern management methods, which over a
    period of time lead to operational efficiency improvements, and/or its ability to raise finances may improve.
    Similarly, through capacity-building efforts, the utility's ability to manage large investment programs (with lower time
    and cost overruns) may increase, and/or its ability to absorb newer and inherently more efficient technologies
    improves, etc. The causal linkage between ADB intervention and utility performance improvement is difficult to
    ascertain (particularly so if the utility is also undertaking some performance improvement measures on its own,
    and/or with support from another development partner). Likewise, the extent to which ADB support actually
    contributes to replication of certain activities (such as commercial agreements between unbundled entities and
    private players, or upgrading skills of technical personnel utility-wide) over a period of time is also difficult to
    ascertain.
44       Appendix 1




                           Figure A1.1: Project Components by Country




BAN = Bangladesh, PRC = People's Republic of China, IND = India, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, VIE = Viet
Nam.
Source: Compiled by the study team.



                            Figure A1.2: Lending Approvals by Country




BAN = Bangladesh, PRC = People's Republic of China, IND = India, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, VIE = Viet
Nam.
Source: Compiled by the study team.
                                                                                                  Appendix 2          45


                     ECONOMIC GROWTH­ENERGY­CLIMATE CHANGE NEXUS

1.     More than 600 million people in the Asia and Pacific region still live in absolute poverty
defined as less than $1 a day. Almost half of the world's absolute poor live in South Asia alone.
One of every two individuals in the region--or 1.7 billion people--remains poor, as measured
against the $2-a-day benchmark.1 This is one and a half times the combined population of the
developed nations of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). In
the People's Republic of China (PRC), 452 million people live under this $2-a-day poverty
marker, while in India the figure is 868 million.

2.      Poverty reduction has been an important feature of the planning and operations of the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) since its establishment and its overarching goal since 1999.
The extraordinary economic expansion of recent years has made the eradication of income
poverty (i.e., those living on less than $1 a day) a possibility by 2020. All of ADB's
shareholders--borrowers and nonborrowers alike--and its development partners agree that the
elimination of poverty is the paramount development objective, and that economic growth and
development are the principal route to its achievement. Indeed, most of ADB's developing
member countries (DMCs) are poor, and their gross national incomes per capita remain far
below those of the developed countries (less than $6,000/capita in the DMCs, but $45,840 per
capita in the United States and $34,750 per capita in Japan) (Table A2.1).

          Table A2.1: Gross National Income per Capita in Purchasing Power Parity ($)
                                                                                            % Growth     2020
    Country                                     1980       1990        2000       2007     (1990­2007) Forecast
    Bangladesh                                 290        510            830      1,330         5.8           2,616
    Cambodia                                                             860      1,720        10.4           5,644
    People's Republic of China                 250        800          2,330      5,420        11.9          20,918
    India                                      420        860          1,500      2,740         7.1           6,209
    Indonesia                                  620      1,430          2,240      3,570         5.5           6,810
    Lao People's Democratic Republic                      730          1,230      2,080         6.4           4,356
    Malaysia                                 2,250      4,590          8,350     13,230         6.4          27,931
    Pakistan                                   610      1,260          1,690      2,540         4.2           4,166
    Philippines                              1,240      1,750          2,480      3,710         4.5           6,306
    Sri Lanka                                  740      1,450          2,660      4,200         6.5           8,898
    Thailand                                 1,070      2,950          4,990      7,880         5.9          15,766
    Viet Nam                                              610          1,390      2,530         8.7           6,906
    Euro area                                8,985     16,695         24,659     32,560         4.0          52,175
    Japan                                    8,920     18,870         25,910     34,750         3.7          53,474
    United States                           12,150     22,940         35,190     45,840         4.2          74,726
    Singapore                                6,720     17,620         32,740     47,950         6.1          97,206
    World                                    2,762      4,817          6,887      9,947         4.4          16,595
     Source: World Bank World Development Indicators database.

A.        Economic Growth Agenda

3.     Although growth rates in the DMCs over the last decade have been impressive, even if
these continue into the future, by 2020 among ADB's DMCs only the PRC will have a per capita
gross domestic product (GDP) above the world average.2 But increased energy consumption is

1
    ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank (2008­2020).
    Manila.
2
    A recent ADB study of four countries in Southeast Asia (Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Viet Nam) (ADB.
    2009. The Economics of Climate Change in Southeast Asia: A Regional Review. Manila) highlights both the
    progress and the remaining challenges of poverty reduction in the region. Rapid economic growth and structural
    transformation have helped lift millions of Southeast Asians out of extreme poverty: during 1990­2005, poverty
    incidence in Indonesia declined by 32.8, Philippines by 7.0, Thailand by 9.0, and Viet Nam by 11.4 percentage
    points. But as of 2005, about 93 million (18.8%) Southeast Asians still lived below the $1.25-a-day poverty line, and
    221 million (44.6%) below the $2-a-day poverty line.
46      Appendix 2



the unavoidable companion of economic development: both total energy (Figure A2.1) and
electricity consumption (Figure A2.2) are highly correlated with GDP growth--and with
increased energy consumption comes increased greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.

                Figure A2.1: Gross Domestic Product and Energy Consumption




CO2 = carbon dioxide, GDP = gross domestic product.
Note: Size of bubble indicates CO2 emissions. Data shown for 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, and 2005.
Source: Asian Development Bank. 2009. The Economics of Climate Change in Southeast Asia: A Regional Review.
         Manila.

                     Figure A2.2: Electricity Consumption and Per Capita GDP

                KW h/capita
                 3500
                                  China                India
                                                                                                     1.3kWh/$
                 3000             Indonesia            Malaysia
                                  Philippines          Thailand
                 2500             Vietnam
                 2000
                                                                            1.1kWh/$
                 1500
                             1.9kWh/$                    1.6kWh/$
                 1000

                  500
                                                         0.7kWh/$
                     0
                         0         500          1000       1500     2000   2500        3000   3500       4000   4500

                                                           U S$ PER CAPIT A GD P
GDP = gross domestic product, kWh = kilowatt-hour, PRC = People's Republic of China, US = United States.
Source: Japan International Cooperation Agency. 2007. Viet Nam: A Study on National Energy Master Plan.

4.       The energy intensity of economic development will vary across countries for many reasons
(a relationship captured by the slope of the development paths shown in Figure A2.2--ranging from
0.7 kilowatt-hour [kWh] for each additional dollar of GDP in Indonesia to 1.9 kWh/$ of GDP in Viet
Nam), including their respective resource endowments (particularly the mix of low-carbon resources
such as hydropower and gas as against high-carbon resources such as coal), and their
development strategies (the PRC has become the world's manufacturing workshop, so the
emissions associated with consumer goods once made in the United States and Europe now occur
                                                                                                    Appendix 2         47


in the PRC rather than in the consuming countries).3 Indeed, when one examines the relationship
between emissions per capita and GDP/capita, while there is obviously a strong relationship
between the two (Figure A2.3). The energy/GDP ratio depends upon the mix of services,
agriculture, and industry; on local resource endowments; and on climate.4

                    Figure A2.3: GHG Emissions/Capita v. GDP/Capita (Log Scale)




CO2 = carbon dioxide, GDP = gross domestic product, GHG = greenhouse gas, PPP = purchasing power parity.
Source: World Bank Independent Evaluation Group, Climate Change and the World Bank Group: Phase I - An
         Evaluation of World Bank Win-Win Energy Policy Reforms, August 2008, Figure 3. The warmest countries
         are shown as triangles; temperate countries are circles, and the coldest ones are pluses.

5.      Economic growth in the poorest countries will generate little pressure on global
emissions. According to the World Bank, the 50 least developed countries with a population of
725 million emitted 121 metric tons (t) carbon dioxide (CO2), e.g., in 2004, against the OECD's
12,949 t CO2. One hundred percent growth in the poorest countries would generate about the
same increase in GHG emissions as a 1% growth in OECD. Thus, with the notable exceptions
of the PRC and India, economic development and GHG emissions growth in ADB's DMCs will
play only a small role in the global emissions picture, though of course the impacts of climate
change will disproportionately affect the poorest countries, and many of the countries most
immediately threatened by sea level rise--the small island nations of the Pacific and Indian
oceans, and the countries with large populations in low-lying coastal deltas like the Ganges­
Brahmaputra­Meghna estuaries in Bangladesh and the Mekong delta in Viet Nam--are among
ADB's DMCs.

B.        Energy and Environment

6.     The current increasing concern over global climate change is not the first time that the
trade-off between economic development and environment has come to the forefront of the
development agenda. By the 1980s, it was recognized that the unmitigated local environmental
consequences of infrastructure development (notably power generation and transportation)
3
    Some estimates suggest that as much as 25% of the PRC's GHG emissions are embedded in its exports, which
    some argue should be charged to the consuming countries rather than to the PRC: see Leggett, J. 2008. China's
    Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Mitigation Policies. Congressional Research Service; and Weber, Christopher L.,
    Glen P. Peters, Dabo Guan, and Klaus Hubacek. The Contribution of Chinese Exports to Climate Change. Energy
    Policy. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2008.06.009.
4
    All other things equal, the colder the climate, the greater the energy intensity. However, as the air-conditioning load
    in tropical and subtropical developing countries increases, this differential will narrow.
48        Appendix 2



imposed significant costs on the economies of the DMCs, including health costs and damage to
agriculture, forests, and cost of displacement of people due to adverse climate events: the Asian
region also has some of the world's most polluted cities. Throughout Asia (as elsewhere in the
world), governments enacted environmental quality regulations and emission standards in the
recognition that the compliance costs were outweighed by the environmental benefits.
Moreover, the environmental mitigation costs represented just a small percentage of most
infrastructure project costs, and there is no evidence that the introduction of local environmental
standards and the requirement for pollution control reduced GDP growth rates in the region.

7.      However, the avoidance of GHG emissions has a very different impact on the economic
calculus from that of avoided local environmental damage costs. Installation of electrostatic
precipitators (ESPs) at a coal-burning power plant results in direct benefits (avoidance of health
damage costs) to the local population, and passing the incremental costs of ESPs to local
consumers should not therefore be opposed by a rational DMC decision maker. But the benefits
of adopting expensive carbon capture and storage technology, or foregoing coal for significantly
more expensive liquefied natural gas (LNG) power generation, accrue not to the consumers in
the DMC, but to the global community. Particularly in the case of small developing countries, the
extent to which they mitigate GHG emissions has no measurable effect on the damage costs
they will experience from sea level rise or reduced rainfall--which are largely a function of the
extent to which the large emitters that dominate the global emissions picture abate their
emissions. More importantly, the costs of foregoing coal as the power generation fuel of
choice--in favor of renewable energy or natural gas--or of carbon capture and storage (the
analogous pollution control technology to flue gas desulfurization and ESPs) have much higher
cost consequences than the mitigation of the local environmental impacts, or of adherence to
the established environmental safeguards policies of the international financial institutions.5

8.     Estimates of the damage costs of GHG vary widely, but may reasonably be assumed to
lie somewhere between $15/t CO2 (the average of the 2008 primary clean development
mechanism market) and $85/t CO2 (the estimate of the social cost of carbon in the Stern
Review)--though the carbon transaction price in the current global carbon markets cannot be
taken as evidence of actual damage costs.6

C.        GHG Emissions

9.     With the exception of the PRC, whose 2005 emissions per capita were close to the world
average (and whose absolute emissions now exceed those of the United States), the majority of
ADB DMCs have per capita emissions an order of magnitude smaller than the world average
(Table A2.2). Per capita emissions in India, Indonesia, and Viet Nam are about 25% of the world
average. The global community recognizes that there would be very little logic or equity in
imposing GHG emission cuts on the poorest countries of the world, and the clean development


5
    The costs of carbon capture and storage (CCS) at coal-burning power plants still have high uncertainty, but the
    latest estimates suggest the cost of power at a supercritical coal project fitted with CCS would be about 70% higher
    than the same plant without CCS (equivalent to a carbon price of around $70 t CO2). The proposition that poor
    DMCs should absorb such increases in the cost of electricity is neither reasonable nor equitable. This compares to
    a roughly 5% increase in the cost of power generation when fitted with flue gas desulfurization for sulfur dioxide
    removal. For a recent review of CCS technology and its prospects and costs, see e.g., Rubin, E. Global Outlook for
    Coal-Based Power Generation: Implications for Developing Countries. Presentation at the 2009 World Bank
    Energy      Week,      April.    Available:     http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTENERGY/Resources/335544-
    1232567547944/5755469-1239633250635/Ed_Rubin.pdf).
6
    World Bank. 2009. State and Trends of the Carbon Market 2009. Washington, DC. In 2008, the volume in the
    global market almost doubled, from 2.98 billion t CO2 in 2007 to 4.81 billion, and the average transaction cost
    increased from $21.25 t CO2 in 2007 to $26.25/t CO2. By far, the largest volume of transactions, 3.03 billion t,
    occurred in the European Union Emission Trading System, followed by the primary CDM market with 389 million t
    CO2. The average price in the primary CDM market was $16.76 t CO2.
                                                                                               Appendix 2        49


mechanism and other carbon finance initiatives have been expressly introduced to facilitate low-
carbon options in poor developing countries.7

                          Table A2.2: Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Capita
              Country                     1970         1980         1990         2000          2005
              Bangladesh                   0.05         0.09        0.14          0.20          0.26
              Cambodia                     0.17         0.04        0.05          0.04          0.04
              PRC                          0.94         1.51        2.11          2.64          4.26
              India                        0.35         0.51        0.80          1.14          1.28
              Indonesia                    0.28         0.63        0.84          1.36          1.90
              Lao PDR                      0.22         0.06        0.06          0.20          0.25
              Myanmar                      0.16         0.14        0.11          0.19          0.24
              Philippines                  0.67         0.76        0.72          1.02          0.89
              Pakistan                     0.39         0.38        0.63          0.77          0.86
              Sri Lanka                    0.29         0.22        0.22          0.54          0.56
              Viet Nam                     0.66         0.31        0.32          0.69          1.23
              Euro area                    8.26         9.26        8.39          7.95          8.07
              Japan                        7.08         7.88        8.75          9.49          9.63
              Singapore                    8.77        12.47       13.76         12.89         13.19
              United States               20.57        20.26       19.22         20.01         19.52
              World                        4.06         4.41        4.29          4.07          4.53
              PRC = People's Republic of China, Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic.
              Source: World Bank World Development Indicators database.

10.    That carbon emissions in the poor DMCs will increase in both absolute terms and as
emissions per capita is unavoidable. But even for the poorest countries, an emphasis on
economic development and economic efficiency does not necessarily lead to higher GHG
emissions, for there are many win-win strategies that offer sustainable development pathways.
But the magnitude of these increases will be dependent upon the interplay of policies and
opportunities in three main areas:
       (i)      technology improvements, directed to the increase of efficiency in energy supply
                and energy consumption;
       (ii)     energy pricing policy and the reduction of fuel subsidies; and
       (iii)    energy security enhancements (in some countries, diversification of supply
                increases carbon intensity; in others it decreases carbon intensity).

D.        Efficiency Improvements

11.     The potential for energy efficiency improvement is very large, including higher
efficiencies in power generation, reduced losses in transmission and distribution (T&D), and a
range of improvements in end use across all the major sectors. Particularly in South Asia,
electricity T&D losses are very high, providing many cost-effective opportunities for improving
the efficiency of the sector (and the focus of many ADB-supported projects in these countries).8
Even where a high proportion of these losses is from pilferage, commercial loss reduction will




7
    However, the CDM market is dominated by the PRC--which in 2008 accounted for 84% of the volumes supplied;
    followed by India with 4%, and the rest of Asia 4%. Brazil accounted for 3%, the rest of Latin America 2%, Africa
    2%, and Europe/Central Asia 1% (see World Bank. 2009. State and Trends of the Carbon Market). Primary CDM
    market transactions declined somewhat in 2008, reflecting a combination of the economic downturn, CDM
    regulatory delays, and uncertainties over post-2012 policy.
8
    For example, Rehabilitation of the Dhaka Distribution System in Bangladesh (Loan 1730) (where T&D losses were
    almost 40%), or the T&D rehabilitation projects in Madhya Pradesh (India) (Loans 1868/1869 and 2323/2324).
50      Appendix 2



also reduce consumption (because the newly metered former pilferers will consume less as they
have to pay for their consumption).9

12.     Yet despite the large potential for end-use energy efficiency improvements, and the
many studies and analyses, efforts to improve end-use efficiency have consistently fallen short
of expectations. Energy efficiency is simply not as visible as energy generation, and a lack of
rigorous monitoring and evaluation and the perception of electricity utilities that end-use
efficiency improvements are not in their self-interest hinder progress. And, as noted below,
subsidized energy prices constitute a further barrier to consumer-driven energy efficiency
improvement.

13.     Energy efficiency projects supported by the international financial institutions are much
more staff intensive than large supply-side projects, and disbursing large sums is difficult
(perhaps with the exception of mass distribution of compact fluorescent lamps) when compared
with loans for large generation projects. Several DMCs have enacted energy efficiency laws
(such as India in 2001 and the PRC in 1998), and a new law is expected shortly in Viet Nam. In
2004, the PRC National Development and Reform Commission issued its Medium and Long-
Term Plan for Energy Conservation, which set out specific energy efficiency improvement
targets for the industry, transport, and building sectors. ADB has supported a number of energy
efficiency projects in the PRC as reviewed in this study.

14.     The importance of energy efficiency, and the difficulties of implementing energy
efficiency projects, are noted in a recent ADB special evaluation study.10 The study notes that
correcting inefficiencies offers the potential for large financial returns and improved
environmental outcomes, and argues that improving energy efficiency by examining both
demand-side and supply-side alternatives should be made the single highest priority in ADB's
updated energy strategy. Before investing in new energy generation capacity, all feasible efforts
should be made to decrease the demand through energy efficiency initiatives and increases in
system efficiencies. The study notes three positive outcomes from using less energy: (i) capital
costs are reduced, since energy efficiency efforts are generally half the cost of adding additional
capacity; (ii) GHG emissions and other sources of air pollution are reduced; and (iii) energy
security is enhanced.

15.      On the supply side, in the PRC, much of the recent (and highly publicized) construction
of new coal-burning power generation capacity is in fact to replace small, old, and highly
inefficient coal projects built more than 20 years ago:11 in 2006, only 43% of the total coal-fired
capacity was in modern units of 300 megawatts (MW) or more, the rest being made up of small
units of very low efficiency (Table A2.3). Even if the main motivation for this policy is to reduce
the emissions of local air pollutants (nitrogen oxide, particulate matter with a diameter smaller
than 10 m, and sodium oxide), the concomitant reduction of GHG emissions is nevertheless an
important global benefit of this policy (and a good example of how efficiency improvements
benefit several objectives simultaneously). Indeed, the transition to large supercritical units not




9
   However, many of the systems in South Asia that have high commercial T&D losses also suffered from high levels
   of unserved demand. Therefore, the kilowatt hour freed up by lower technical losses and reduced consumption of
   former pilferers is taken up by customers who were previously subject to power cuts. But even though the net
   result of such a response is no change in total grid-based generation, there is still a net reduction in GHG
   emissions, because generation by diesel standby and captive generation is reduced.
10
   ADB. 2007. Energy Policy 2000 Review: Energy Efficiency for a Better Future. Manila.
11
   Mao, Xianxiong. 2009. How does China Reduce CO2 Emissions from Coal-fired Power Generation: Activities and
   Deployment of Clean Coal Power Generation and Carbon Capture in China. World Bank Energy Week.
                                                                                                Appendix 2         51


only lowers GHG emissions per kWh, but the higher efficiency also significantly reduces coal
transportation costs.12

              Table A2.3: Efficiency of the People's Republic of China Coal Plants
                                                            Net Coal                           Net
          Technology                      MW           Consumption (g/kWh)               Efficiency (%)
          Ultra supercritical            1,000               286.5                            43.03
          Ultra supercritical              600                292                             42.09
          Supercritical                    600                299                             41.10
          Subcritical                      300                 340                            36.15
                                           100                410                             29.98
                                            50                440                             27.93
                                            25                500                             24.53
                                            12                550                             22.35
                                             6               600+                             29.48
          Average 2005                                        367                             33.49
          Average 2006                                        357                             34.43
           g/kWh = gram per kilowatt hour, MW = megawatt.
           Source: Mao, Xianxiong. 2009. How does China Reduce CO2 Emissions from Coal-Fired
                   Power Generation: Activities and Deployment of Clean Coal Power Generation and
                   Carbon Capture in China. World Bank Energy Week.

E.       Energy Pricing and Subsidies

16.     Energy subsidies, particularly those that encourage consumption by setting tariffs below
cost, are a drain on government budgets, reduce economic efficiency (consuming more
resources to supply over consumption than is economically optimal), and generally impose
costs on the local and global environment (since more than optimal thermal generation results in
unnecessary local and GHG emission). Worse, despite the political rhetoric and the best of
intentions, the targeting performance of many energy subsidies is often very low: little of the
subsidy reaches the poor, and most accrues to the urban middle classes, who consume the
bulk of the commercial energy.13 And perhaps best exemplified by the Indian experience,
subsidies can create financial pressures on electricity distribution companies, resulting in severe
degradation of service quality to all, and imposing large costs on the presumed beneficiaries.14
In short, as stated by the World Bank, energy subsidies are "large, burdensome, regressive, and
climate damaging."15

17.      To be sure, there are some types of subsidies that do increase welfare. Subsidies to
provide electricity to the rural poor often have significant social and equity benefits: more
importantly, these tend to have good targeting performance (i.e., most of the cost does indeed
reach the poorest sections of society); and given the low level of consumption in newly
electrified households, the incremental burden of GHG emissions is miniscule compared with
that of the growth of the urban and industrial economy. The World Bank estimates that providing

12
   Coal in the PRC is transported over distances of up to 1,000 kilometers (incurring transportation costs of
   $10/metric ton to plants located on the Eastern seaboard). Thus, the difference between 36% efficiency in a
   300 megawatts subcritical plant and 41% efficiency in a supercritical plant translates into a reduction of about 15%
   in transportation cost per net kWh. Similar distances are involved in coal supply in India from the eastern state of
   Bihar to coal-fired projects in the greater Delhi region.
13
   Komives, K., Foster V., Halpern J., and Wodon Q. 2005. Water, Electricity and the Poor: Who Benefits from Utility
   Subsidies. World Bank. Washington, DC.
14
   World Bank studies in Andhra Pradesh and Haryana have shown that the costs of rewinding pump motors several
   times a year exceed the cost of a remunerative tariff (South Asia Regional Office. 2001. India: Power Supply to
   Agriculture. Report 22171-IN. Energy Sector Unit, June). Fortunately, this widespread Indian practice of free (or
   almost free) electricity to farmers is followed by few others.
15
   World Bank Independent Evaluation Group. 2008. Climate Change and the World Bank Group: Phase I--An
   Evaluation of World Bank Win-Win Energy Policy Reforms. Washington, DC.
52      Appendix 2



2 billion people with electricity access consuming 30 kWh/household/month would boost global
GHG emissions by less than 0.4% even if power were provided entirely by the most carbon-
intensive means: the rest of the world increases its carbon emissions by this amount about
every 2 months.

18.     The benefits of electricity access to the poor also far exceed any conceivable
environmental damage from the associated emissions. Results from many rural electrification
projects show that the willingness to pay for grid-connected electricity16 is in the range of $0.45­
$1.00/kWh (Table A2.4) for the first tranche of electricity consumption, typically used for lighting
and television watching.17 With typical emission factors of 0.6 kilograms of CO2 and a carbon
shadow price of $50/t CO2, the gross benefits would be reduced by only 3­6%.

      Table A2.4: Welfare Benefits and Greenhouse Gas Costs of Rural Electrification
      Item                                                     Indonesia      Lao PDR      Philippines
      Consumption                          kWh/HH/month          15.50          13.80         15.30
      WTP                                  $/kWh                  0.71           0.81           0.47
                                           $/year               132.00         134.00         86.00
      GHG emissions                        t/year                 0.11           0.10           0.11
      Damage cost @$50/t CO2               $/year                 5.60           5.00           5.50
                                                                 4.2%           3.7%           6.4%
      CO2 = carbon dioxide, GHG = greenhouse gas, HH = household, kWh = kilowatt hour, Lao PDR = Lao
      People's Democratic Republic, t = metric ton, WTP = water treatment plant.
      Source: Household energy surveys conducted by the World Bank.

19.     Subsidies expressly targeted to redress a specific market failure may also improve
welfare, for example because local environmental damage costs are not reflected in market
prices for electricity, subsidizing renewable energy producers up to the value of the social
avoided cost--i.e., including health damage costs--increases social welfare. A 2007 United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change report18 estimates that annual energy
subsidies are between $250 billion and $300 billion net of taxes, and account for 0.6­0.7% of
world GDP. This compares with support for low-carbon sources of $33 billion, of which only
$10 billion is for renewables, $6 billion for biofuels, and $16 billion for existing nuclear power
plants.

20.    The impact of fuel subsidies is readily illustrated. Consider Figure A2.4, which shows the
demand for electricity, the renewable energy supply curve, and the price of thermal energy in a
competitive generation market, PCGM, assuming that the coal price is subsidized in the amount.19
The quantity consumed at this price, Q, is given by the intersection of the demand curve with
PCGM. The amount of renewables will be R (namely that quantity whose production cost is less
than PCGM), and the balance will be fossil generation, T (R+T=Q).




16
   For a discussion of the methodology for such water treatment plant (WTP) estimates, see, e.g., Choynowski, P.
   2002. Measuring Willingness to Pay for Electricity. Economics and Research Department. Technical Note 3.
   Manila: ADB, July.
17
   See also World Bank Independent Evaluation Group. Welfare Impact of Rural Electrification, A Reassessment of
   the Costs and Benefits: This report cites a range of $0.47­1.11/kWh as the WTP.
18
   Morgan, T. Energy Subsidies: Their Magnitude, How They Affect Energy Investment and Greenhouse Gas
   Emissions, and Prospects for Reform. UNFCCC Secretariat, Financial and Technical Support Program.
19
   This situation would apply to a number of ADB's DMCs. For example in Viet Nam, both gas and domestic coal are
   provided to the electricity sector at below economic cost; a competitive generation market will be introduced
   shortly, and renewable energy producers have access to the grid at the avoided (financial) cost of the buyer.
                                                                                                 Appendix 2   53



                                Figure A2.4: Impact of Coal Price Subsidies




Source: Study team.

21.       Now suppose that the subsidy on domestic coal is removed, which increases the price to
P*. At this higher price, the demand curve intersects at Q*. More renewable energy will be
economic at the higher price P*, and the quantity of fossil energy reduces to T* (R*+T*=Q*).
Thus, there are three important consequences of reducing the subsidy on coal: (i) less electricity
is consumed; (ii) the amount of fossil energy, and hence GHG emissions, is reduced; and
(iii) the amount of renewable energy is increased. It is easily shown (box) that both social and
global welfare increases as a result of the elimination of the subsidy: the reduction in fossil fuel
subsidies is win-win.

22.     While all this is well enough known in principle, the magnitude of the costs involved has
only recently gained the attention it deserves. The 1999 International Energy Agency (IEA)
World Energy Outlook20 analyzed energy subsidies in eight non-OECD countries (including,
among ADB's DMCs, PRC, India, Indonesia, and Kazakhstan) for which on average end-use
prices are 20% below their opportunity cost or market-based reference levels. The studies found
that removal of these subsidies would reduce primary energy consumption by 13%, lower GHG
emissions by 16%, and increase GDP through higher efficiency by almost 1%.




20
     IEA. 1999. Insights, World Energy Outlook: Looking at Energy Subsidies: Getting the Price Right.
54         Appendix 2



                                      Welfare Effects of Fuel Subsidies
The cost of the fuel subsidy to government is equal to area E+F+I+K+M. At the subsidized level of
consumption Q, consumers enjoy a net benefit equal to the area under the supply curve less their cost,
the so-called consumer surplus, equal to the area A+B+E+F+I+H+K. Renewable energy producers enjoy
the producers surplus C. And GHG emissions are T x EF  where EF is the relevant emission factor.




Once the subsidy is eliminated, the government benefits by the amount of that subsidy. The consumer
surplus shrinks to A+H, but renewable energy producers increase their surplus to C+B+E. So the balance
of costs and benefits can be shown as in the table below:

          Beneficiary                               With Subsidy          No Subsidy          Net Impact
          Government (subsidy cost)              -E-F-I-K-M             0                   +E+F+I+K+M
          Consumers                              +A+B+E+F+H+I+K         A+H                 -B-E-F-I-K
          Renewable energy producers             +C                     C+B+E               +B+E
          Society (i.e. domestic)                A+B+C+H-M              A+B+C+B+E+H         +E+M
          Global environment                     -T x EF                -T* x EF            [T ­T*] x EF

In other words, society gains (because the cost of the subsidy exceeds the increase in consumer surplus
enjoyed by them under the subsidy), and the global environment gains (because there is less fossil
generation).

Source: Study team.

23.      The 2008 IEA Energy Outlook21 estimates subsidies on energy consumption in the 20
largest non-OECD countries at $310 billion in 2007 (Figure A2.5). ADB's DMCs are prominent
among the countries with large subsidies (PRC, India, and Indonesia rank 3, 5, and 7,
respectively). Most countries have declared policies to eliminate these subsidies, but the
process is slow, for sudden removal of subsidies often has significant political repercussions.
Viet Nam is a case in point: notwithstanding the declared intention of removing subsidies for
fuels used in power generation, and the commitment to market principles declared in the
Electricity Law, both domestic coal and natural gas prices remain subsidized.22 The main
difficulty is that even though the poor often receive only a small part of the total subsidy, for

21
     IEA World Energy Outlook 2008.
22
     Whether the use of subsidized fuel prices also distorts power sector investment decisions is unclear. An
     assessment of the use of financial rather than economic prices in Viet Nam's Sixth Power Development Plan found
     little impact on the optimal capacity mix as proposed by the Plan.
                                                                                               Appendix 2         55


them the subsidy makes a big difference, and removal of the subsidy imposes real hardship.
However, direct cash payments to the poor would much better achieve the social objective of
assisting them, without imposing high efficiency costs on the rest of the economy.

     Figure A2.5: Energy Subsidies by Fuel in Non-Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
                                      Development Countries




PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: International Energy Agency World Energy Outlook 2008.


24.     Recent programs in Indonesia and Ghana illustrate some new approaches. In May 2008,
Indonesia offset petroleum product price increases by cash payments to the poor (estimated at
15.5 million poor and near-poor households receiving $30 per quarter), distributed through the
post office system.23 In 2004­2005, the Government of Ghana implemented a series of
mitigation measures to offset the impact of a 50% fuel price hike on the poor. These measures
followed extensive public consultation24 and included the elimination of school fees at
government-run primary and junior secondary schools and a program to improve public
transport. Although the price increases were opposed by the trade unions, the public accepted
them, and no large-scale demonstrations occurred.

F.       Role of Energy Security

25.     All the large energy-importing countries of the world have energy security concerns with
respect to their dependence on imports. The October 1973 Arab oil embargo against the United
States first exposed the strategic dangers of excessive reliance on imported fuel, and the failure of
the United States to reduce its dependence on imported oil is widely seen as an important
geopolitical disadvantage: in 1973, the United States imported 35% of its oil, today it imports
60%.25 The current debate in the European Union over the excessive reliance on Russian gas is
equally pressing. And thus it should not be surprising that the PRC and India--whose energy
imports will account for an increasing share of global energy trade--have similar concerns.26




23
   Bacon, and K. Masami. 2006. Phasing Out Subsidies. Public Policy for the Private Sector. Note 310.
24
   The Ghana Poverty and Social Impact Assessment for Fuel demonstrated that the price subsidies most benefited
   the better-off, and the public awareness campaign of the costs of subsidy was launched by the Minister of Finance,
   involving wide consultations with stakeholders, including the trade unions and government officials.
25
   However, although net oil imports now account for 60% of the US oil consumption, in 2007 the sources of supply are
   well diversified, the largest single share being 17.2% from Canada, followed by 12.4% from Mexico, 10.7% from Saudi
   Arabia, 10.4% from Venezuela, and 8.1% from Nigeria United States Energy Information Administration.
26
   The 2007 IEA World Energy Outlook examines the energy security concerns of both PRC and India in some detail.
56         Appendix 2



26.      Energy security is no less a concern to ADB's smaller DMCs: but for most of these,
diversification of fuel supplies through imports is seen as a way to increase energy security. To be
sure, those who make the point that freedom from electricity imports enhances security, and
that the higher cost of an all-hydro system represents an insurance policy against possible
disruptions of electricity supply from neighboring countries. However, all-hydro systems are not
risk-free, given the nature of hydrological uncertainty: for example, inadequate thermal capacity
in drought years has caused significant disruptions. Indeed, those countries that have not
diversified have incurred significant economic costs as a result.

27.    In some cases, the concern over energy security is confused with concerns about price. In
Viet Nam in 2008, the high price of imported coal raised concerns about the wisdom of the
imported coal-based power sector expansion plan, and the fear of shortages--particularly in light
of the announcement by the Government of Indonesia that further expansion of coal exports
would be limited (in favor of using coal for domestic power generation). But there is never a
shortage of coal at the current market price: and the whole point of diversification is that the
system as a whole becomes more robust.27

28.      Thus, the relationship between energy security and climate change depends largely on the
extent to which countries are endowed with their own fossil fuel, and particularly coal. Increased
energy security of countries with no (or limited) indigenous fossil fuels drives least-cost energy
development into more carbon-intensive options; whereas in countries that do have their own
fossil fuels, increased energy security means that development generally implies diversification
into less carbon-intensive options.

29.     Sri Lanka is a good example of the former. Its only conventional energy resource is
hydropower, which until the early 1990s accounted for the bulk of electricity generation. Over
the last 20years, as conventional hydro options have become exhausted, most power
generation expansion has been based on oil, so the carbon intensity of electricity generation
has risen. And its costly dependence on imported oil has added new urgency to the construction
of coal-based power plants--which will increase carbon intensity still further, but will significantly
improve energy security through greater diversification of supply. In Sri Lanka, diversification
implies increasing carbon intensity.

30.     The PRC and India are both examples of the latter. Both are heavily dependent upon
domestic coal for electricity generation and industrial process heat (and in the PRC for residential
heating as well), so diversification means increased imports of oil, LNG, Russian pipeline gas for
the PRC, possibly Iranian or even Central Asian gas for India, as well as imports of coal from
Australia and South Africa. In India, even imported coal (slightly) reduces the carbon footprint,
because the better quality of imported coal reduces auxiliary power requirements.

31.     Several DMCs have plans for nuclear power, notably the PRC and India, which represents
another diversification of supply mix, and which will also reduce the carbon footprint. Although
nuclear power has its critics, the consensus of the scientific literature is that the life-cycle
emissions of nuclear power generation (i.e., including all the emissions associated with the fuel
cycle, reprocessing, construction, and decommissioning) is in the range of 20­25 grams of




27
     Over the long run at the global level, coal prices are linked to oil prices (as are LNG prices). But many supply-
     demand imbalances in particular fuels are due to local factors (such as the dispute between the Russian
     Federation and the Ukraine that affects European Union gas supplies, or labor disputes in Australian coal mines, or
     nationalization of Venezuelan oil assets).
                                                                                                Appendix 2         57


carbon dioxide equivalent per kilowatt hour (gCO2/kWh), compared with 900­1,000 gCO2/kWh
for coal.28

32.     Increasing the share of renewable energy is the most obvious route to diversification and
increasing energy security, though whether the ambitious targets announced by some DMCs can
actually be met remains unclear.29 For example, Sri Lanka has a target of 10% of electricity
generation by 2015, requiring an additional 375 MW of capacity over the 162.5 MW in place in
2009.30 Viet Nam's target is a more modest 3% by 2015, though small hydro (less than 30 MW) is
expected to account for over 750 MW of additional renewable energy capacity by 2015.31




28
   Hondo, H. 2005. Life-Cycle GHG Emission Analysis of Power Generation Systems: The Japanese Case, Energy
   (30) 2042­2056; Source: University of Sydney. 2006. Life-Cycle Energy Balance and GHG Emissions of Nuclear
   Energy in Australia. Report to the Australian Government, 3 November, Table 6.13; Source: Weisser, D., A Guide
   to Life-Cycle GHG Emissions from Electric Supply Technologies. 2007. Energy (32), pp. 1543­1559.
29
   There is a growing literature on the question of whether renewables reduce portfolio risk (akin to the role of
   treasuries in an optimal financial portfolio): see, e.g., Hertzmark, Donald. 2007. Risk Assessment Methods for
   Power Utility Planning. World Bank). However, there are a wide variety of other approaches to reducing risk in
   electricity and energy portfolios, including the creation of strategic petroleum reserves (as in the US) and hedging
   with conventional futures. One of the problems is that renewable energy projects also have year-on-year variability
   (wind speeds, hydro inflows) that effectively impose variation on renewable energy production costs little different
   from variations in oil-based power generation production costs.
30
   Ceylon Electricity Board. 2008. Long-Term Generation Expansion Plan 2009­2022. December.
31
   Ministry of Industry and Trade. 2009. Renewable Energy Masterplan. January.
58        Appendix 3



    OVERVIEW OF THE CONTEXT FOR GREENHOUSE GAS EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS
                  PROVIDED BY THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY

A.        The Backdrop

1.       That the climate change issue calls for sustained cooperation on the part of the global
community came to be recognized widely more than two decades ago. While a good and (most
likely) sustained beginning has been made toward addressing climate change issues, the needs
for accelerating the global response to climate change and for a more active role by the global
development community and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) are becoming increasingly clear.

2.      The intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) and various international forums
and organizations that have included climate change in their agendas in recent years recognize
the primacy of the UNFCCC for holding complex and composite international dialogue on
climate change mitigation. The activities of many such organizations and forums provide
valuable knowledge and insights to the UNFCCC, in particular (i) IPCC, which in recent years
has tried to establish the causal linkage between increased anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions and climate change; (ii) the International Energy Agency (IEA), which has
shown that for GHG concentrations to stabilize at desirable levels, energy-efficient and low-
carbon technologies (including some that are yet to be proven) must be diffused and deployed
quickly; and (iii) the multilateral development banks (MDBs), which have a wealth of experience
in financing development that can shift the developing countries to low carbon growth path.

3.     On their part, the Group of Eight (G8) highly industrialized nations has acknowledged the
important and leadership role that the G8 countries must play in addressing global climate
change issues. Likewise, five major developing countries (Brazil, People's Republic of China
[PRC], India, Mexico, and South Africa), collectively known as the Group of Five (G5), have also
stated their joint position toward management of global GHG emissions as their economies
expand and diversify in the coming decades.

4.     That the climate change issue must be taken more seriously has become increasingly
evident in recent years. The findings of the Stern Review1 and the Fourth Assessment Report of
IPCC (AR4)2 are discussed in sections B and C, respectively. Section D provides an overview of
the stands and commitments by the G8 and G5. The findings of major works commissioned by
the G8 to IEA and the World Bank are discussed in sections E and F, respectively. Section G
provides an overview of how the learnings and findings from such work have prompted
UNFCCC to increase the thrust of negotiations toward greater commitments post-2012. Section
H highlights the key features of the recently launched Strategic Program on Technology
Transfer and Climate Investment Funds to provide additional financing to developing countries.

B.        The Stern Review

5.      The Stern Review of 2006, although not the first economic report on climate change, is
the most widely known and discussed study of the subject. Although not without controversy--
particularly regarding the treatment of uncertainties of future energy consumption levels and
technology improvements--its broad conclusions have generally been accepted. It suggests
that climate change threatens to be the greatest and widest ranging market failure ever seen,

1
    Sir Nicholas Stern. 2006. Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge University Press: London.
2
    IPCC. 2007. Fourth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2007. Valencia.
                                                                                             Appendix 3         59


and points out that (i) the benefits of early action on climate change (estimated to cost 1% of
gross domestic product to achieve necessary reductions in atmospheric GHG concentrations by
2050) outweigh costs in terms of reduced welfare equivalent of a per capita consumption
reduction of some 5%­20%); and (ii) the impacts of climate change are not evenly distributed--
with the poorest countries likely to suffer the earliest and the most. Other key highlights of the
Stern Review are shown in Box A3.1.

                                Box A3.1: Key Findings of the Stern Review

(i)         Climate change is a major obstacle to continued poverty reduction in developing countries. The
            impacts of climate change are not evenly distributed ­ with the poorest countries likely to suffer
            the earliest and the most.
(ii)        The benefits of early action on climate change (estimated to cost 1% of GDP to achieve
            necessary reductions in atmospheric GHG concentrations by 2050) outweigh costs (i.e.,
            reduced welfare equivalent of a per capita consumption reduction of some 5­20%).a
(iii)       Even if mitigation measures are adopted in the near term, some impacts of climate change are
            inevitable.
(iv)        The challenge to reduce emissions and move to a low-carbon growth path in both developed
            and developing countries requires coordinated global intervention.
(v)         Existing technologies can deliver the emission reductions required in both developed and
            developing countries while maintaining economic growth.
(vi)        However, strong policy initiatives are required to remove existing barriers and bring down costs.
(vii)       The international development community should mobilize additional concessional funds to
            scale up investment in clean energy and climate change projects in developing countries.
(viii)      Carbon finance can accelerate action in developing countries, but capital flows into clean
            energy and other climate change projects in developing countries must be scaled up.

GDP = gross domestic product, GHG = greenhouse gas.
a
  In April 2008, Stern admitted that the risks of damage associated with temperature increases were underestimated,
  as also the probabilities of temperature increases. And by June 2008, in acknowledging that global warming is
  happening faster than predicted in his report, he conceded that the cost to reduce carbon would be even sharper,
  at 2% of GDP instead of 1% as projected in the original report.
Source: Study team.

C.          The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the Fourth Assessment
            Report

6.     IPCC3 was set up in 1988 to assess available scientific, technical, and socioeconomic
information relevant for enhancing the understanding of climate change, its potential impacts,
and options for mitigation and adaptation.

7.       For the first time, in AR4 of 2007, IPCC clearly stated on the basis of scientific evidence,
that warming of the climate system since the mid-20th century is unequivocal, and that it is very
likely (with more than a 90% confidence level) a consequence of increased anthropogenic GHG
emissions. Such climate change can slow the pace of progress toward sustainable
development. AR4 also points out that anthropogenic warming over the past decades has likely
had a discernable influence at the global scale of observed changes in many physical and
biological systems. And the more the temperatures rise, the greater is the likelihood of more
such disruptive changes (Box A3.2).




3
      IPCC was established by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme.
 60          Appendix 3




                                   Box A3.2: Key Findings of IPCC's AR4

 (i)         Warming of the climate system since the mid-20th century is unequivocal, and is very likely a
             consequence of increased anthropogenic GHG emissions. Warming of about 0.2oC per decade is
             projected for a range of emission scenarios.
 (ii)        The impacts of climate change are very likely to impose net annual costs that will increase over
             time as global temperatures rise. GDP growth rates will also slow down.
 (iii)       Some systems and regions are particularly vulnerable to climate change. In Asia, the climate
             change impacts will include glacier melts in the Himalayan region; decreased freshwater
             availability in central, south, east, and southeast Asia; and flooding of coastal mega-delta areas.
 (iv)        Many impacts can be reduced, delayed, or avoided by mitigation efforts.
 (v)         The UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol, which have stimulated an array of national policy
             responses, institutional mechanisms, and the carbon market, provide the foundations for future
             mitigation efforts.
 (vi)        Large-scale penetration of low-carbon energy technologies already available (and nearing
             commercialization) may take many decades.
 (vii)       Mobilizing financing of incremental costs of low-carbon technologies, substantial investment flows,
             and effective technology transfer are necessary for achieving significant GHG emission reductions.

 AR4 = Fourth Assessment Report of IPCC, GDP = gross domestic product, GHG = greenhouse gas, IPCC =
 intergovernmental panel on climate change, UNFCCC = United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
 Source: Study team.

 8.     AR4 also shows the need for substantive reductions in GHG emissions if average global
 temperature rise is to be contained within reasonable levels (Table A3.1). The targeted emission
 reductions are far higher than the commitments contained in the Kyoto Protocol.

  Table A3.1: Ranges of Differences between 1990 Emissions and Emission Allowances in
                2020 and 2050 for Various Target GHG Concentration Levels
Scenario Category              Region                    2020                                  2050
A. 450 ppm CO2-eq             Annex Ia      -25% to -40%                    -80% to -95%
 (temp rise of               Non-Annex I    Substantial deviation from      Substantial deviation from baseline in all
               O
approximately 2 C)                          baseline in Latin America,      regions
                                            Middle East, East Asia, and
                                            central Asia

B. 550 ppm CO2-eq              Annex I      -10% to -30%                    -40% to -90%
 (temp rise of               Non-Annex I    Deviation from baseline in      Deviation from baseline in most regions,
               O
approximately 3 C)                          Latin America, Middle East,     especially in Latin America and Middle
                                            and East Asia                   East

C. 650 ppm CO2-eq               Annex I       0% to -25%                    -30% to -80%
 (temp rise of               Non-Annex I      Baseline                      Deviations from baseline in Latin America,
approximately 3.6OC)                                                        Middle East, and East Asia
   CO2 = carbon dioxide, GHG = greenhouse gas, ppm = part per million.
   a
     Refers to the 37 industrialized countries and the European Union, which have emission reductions commitments
     under the Kyoto Protocol.
   Source: Intergovernmental panel on climate change AR4, Working Group III report (pp. 227, 776).

 D.          The G8 and G5

 9.    The G8 Gleneagles 2005 Declaration4 articulates a commitment to advance the goals
 and objectives of tackling climate change and promoting clean energy technologies (while

 4
       G8. 2005. Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable Development. Gleneagles.
                                                                                             Appendix 3         61


pursuing energy security and sustainable development) and to work with the UNFCCC to move
forward the global discussions on long-term cooperative action to address climate change. The
Declaration is supported by the Gleneagles Plan of Action, which calls for taking forward actions
regarding transforming the way energy is used by (i) promoting research and development, and
(ii) financing the transition to clean energy.5

10.    The Gleneagles Declaration also sets out a multi pronged agenda to work with appropriate
partnerships, institutions, and initiatives including IEA and the World Bank Group. The World Bank
has co-opted other MDBs including ADB for this initiative. The findings of the reports at the G8
summit in Hokkaido in July 2008 are discussed briefly below.

11.     Spurred by the findings of IPCC, IEA, and the World Bank, the G8 at Hokkaido summit
articulated their goal of achieving at least 50% reduction of global emissions by 2050, and to
share this vision with all parties to the UNFCCC. Due recognition was also given to the fact that
this global challenge can be met only by a global response from all major economies, and with
contributions that are consistent with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capabilities. However, the G8 leadership failed to specify the baseline against
which the stated goal of at least 50% emission reduction is set.

12.     The G5 countries comprising of 5 larger developing economies called for an integrated
approach to international energy cooperation and international development cooperation that
ensures access to energy in developing countries in an equitable and sustained manner. The
G5 urges the international community to set a long-term global goal for GHG emission
reductions, and work toward it through an equitable burden-sharing paradigm that (i) ensures
equal sustainable development potential for all citizens of the world, and (ii) takes into account
historical responsibilities and respective capabilities.

E.        The International Energy Agency and Its World Energy Outlook

13.    In support of the G8 Plan of Action on climate change, clean energy, and sustainable
development, the IEA report6 presents multiple GHG emission scenarios,7 some of which build
on the work of IPCC. IEA's objectives were more to assess the energy alternatives and
technology choices available to stabilize atmospheric GHG concentrations to specific levels
under the various scenarios. The most salient scenarios are as follows:
       (i)     Reference Scenario, in which GHG (carbon dioxide [CO2]-equivalent) emissions
               relating to energy increase from 27.9 gigatons (Gt) in 2005 to 40.6 Gt in 2030,
               and GHG concentrations exceed 1,000 parts per million (ppm). Four countries
               (PRC, India, Russian Federation, and United States [US]) contribute two thirds of
               the increase. These trends are in line with a long term temperature rise of up to
                o
               6 C from pre-industrial levels.
       (ii)    Alternate Policy Scenario (or 550 Policy Scenario, where GHG concentrations
               stabilize at 550 ppm), in which world energy demand grows annually by 1.2% to
               2030 (vs. 1.6% per year in the Reference Scenario). The share of fossil fuels falls
               markedly, and carbon capture and storage is deployed in about 160 gigawatts
               worldwide (of which about 70% is in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and

5
    The Gleneagles Plan of Action also proposes to manage climate change and its adverse impact by tackling illegal
    logging.
6
    IEA. 2008. Towards a Sustainable Energy Future: IEA Program of Work on Climate Change, Clean Energy, and
    Sustainable Development (In support of G8 Plan of Action). 2008.
7
    Scenarios are drawn from IEA, World Energy Outlook 2008.
62       Appendix 3



                  Development [OECD] countries). This scenario equates to a rise in global
                                                    o
                  temperatures of approximately 3 C from pre-industrial levels.
         (iii)    450 Policy Scenario (which describes a notional pathway of energy use that is
                                                                                            o
                  consistent with an increase in temperature to a maximum of about 2 C, the
                  smallest increase in any of the IPCC scenarios), in which energy-related GHG
                  emissions peak in 2012 and then fall to 23 Gt by 2030. This scenario requires
                  emissions in OECD countries to be reduced by 40% in 2030 compared with 2006
                  levels; and other major economies are required to limit their emissions growth to
                  20%. Much stronger and broader policy action is called for, including wide
                  participation in an international emissions trading system, faster deployment of
                  renewables (biomass, wind, other) in power generation to account for 40%
                  capacity worldwide, and 350 gigawatts of carbon capture and storage
                  deployment in fossil-fired power generation.

14.     Against the backdrop of its global energy demand/supply and energy-related GHG
emissions scenarios that reinforce the need to substantially scale up emission reduction efforts
at the earliest (see Box A3.3 for more information on the Asian context and emission
abatement), IEA expects that the post-2012 climate change policy regime will provide the
international framework for strong and coordinated action to curb the growth in GHG emissions.

Box A3.3: International Energy Agency Energy and Greenhouse Gas Emission Scenarios

         According to the business-as-usual scenario of IEA, energy-related GHG emissions will increase
from 27.9 gigatons (Gt) of CO2 equivalent in 2005a to 40.6 Gt in 2030 with developing Asia's contribution
of energy-related GHG emissions increasing to 17.3 Gt in 2030 compared with 8.4 Gt in 2006. On
incremental terms, developing Asia will contribute to 71% of global increase in energy-related GHG
emissions, with the PRC and India's contributions being 48% and 16%, respectively. However, the per
capita CO2 emissions of developing Asia (other than the PRC's) will remain below OECD levels. The
global atmospheric concentration of CO2 has increased from the pre-industrial level of 280 ppm to 385
ppm by 2006. It may further increase to 850­1,000 ppm by 2030 along with a rise in average global
temperature of 6°C, if the present pattern of development and energy consumption continues. According
to IPCC, this level of atmospheric concentration of CO2 is likely to result in significant changes in the
global climate, resulting in multifaceted adverse consequences.

         According to a recent study,b energy-related GHG emissions can be reduced by 16 Gt by
deploying presently available technologies at a marginal abatement cost of 40 per ton. It is estimated
that the CO2 concentration would increase to 450 ppm and stabilize at that level under this scenarioc and
the eventual rise in the temperature would be in the range of 2.4­2.8°C. The power generation will result
in 17.8 Gt of GHG emissions by 2030 under the business-as-usual case, which can be reduced to 7.2 Gt
at a marginal abatement cost below 40 through demand reduction (GHG savings of 3.7 Gt at zero or
negative cost), CCS (3.1 Gt at 20­30/t), increased use of renewable and nuclear energy (2.5 Gt at 5
per t), and improving the GHG efficiency of conventional fossil fuel-based power generation. A further
6 Gt of GHG emissions can be reduced in manufacturing industries through more efficient use of energy
(e.g., combined heat and power plants, fuel switching, variable speed mortars, improved thermal
insulation).

CCS = carbon capture and storage, CO2 = carbon dioxide, GHG = greenhouse gas, IEA = International Energy
Agency, IPCC = intergovernmental panel on climate change, OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, ppm = part per million, PRC = People's Republic of China.
a
  The total GHG emission in 2004 was 44 Gt and is expected to increase to 60 billion t by 2030.
b
  The McKinney Quarterly. 2007. A Cost Curve for Greenhouse Gas Reductions.
c
   It is also assumed that nonenergy-related sectors will also contribute 11 billion t of GHG emission reduction under
  this scenario.
Source: Study team.
                                                                                             Appendix 3         63



15.     Among the key findings of IEA are the following:
        (i)   With energy-related CO2 accounting for 61% of global GHG emissions, the
              energy sector will be central to the discussions on the level of concentrations to
              aim for, and how to achieve them.
        (ii)  Consequently, the target that is set for long-term stabilization of GHG
              concentrations will determine the pace of the required transformation of the global
              energy system, as well as how stringent the policy responses will need to be.
        (iii) Therefore, targets for global GHG emission reductions and the trajectory for
              these reductions will need to take into account technological and cost aspects;
              and it is important to recognize upfront the high costs associated with early
              retirement of conventional capital equipment for replacement by low-carbon
              capital equipment.8
        (iv)  Any major agreement will need to take into account the importance and
              perspectives of the five largest emitters (US, PRC, European Union, India, and
              Russian Federation), which together account for nearly two thirds of global CO2
              emissions. In particular, the contributions to emission reductions by US and the
              PRC will be critical to reaching a stabilization goal.
        (v)   The insurmountable challenges of achieving the most desirable 450 Policy
              Scenario are recognized. Besides country-level policy and international
              cooperation challenges, the stark reality is that the total global emissions in 2030
              in the 450 Policy Scenario are less than the level of projected emissions for non-
              OECD countries in the Reference Scenario. This means that the OECD countries
              alone cannot lead the world to a 450 ppm trajectory even if they completely
              eliminate their GHG emissions. And whether or not the scale of transformation is
              even technically achievable is not quite clear, as broad deployment of as yet
              unproven technologies is assumed.

F.      The World Bank and the Clean Energy Investment Framework

16.     In response to the G8 Gleneagles Declaration, the World Bank coopted other MDBs9
into reporting on the Clean Energy Investment Framework and related programs at the G8
Hokkaido summit.10 Prior to 2005, the various MDBs had been working individually and
collectively on the climate change agenda, particularly energy efficiency and renewables. The
Gleneagles G8 summit provided the impetus for the development of a coherent and focused
MDB response to the climate change challenge, while simultaneously accelerating efforts to
increasing energy supply to those without access to modern energy services.

17.     In defining a forward path for addressing climate change issues and helping their clients
mitigate the impact of past and future development programs on climate change, the MDBs'
goals are summarized as follows:
        (i)     MDBs are in the process of refining and deepening their climate change
                interventions to reflect emerging global priorities. With specific reference to fine-
                tuning of their mitigation strategies, for example (a) the European Bank for

8
   The useful economic life of much of energy sector capital equipment is long (up to two decades or even more) and
   that with the normal cycle of capital replacement, the penetration of low-carbon technologies is expected to be
   gradual at best.
9
   These include the African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development, European Investment Bank, and Inter-American Development Bank.
10
   Joint MDB Report to the G8 on the Implementation of the Clean Energy Investment Framework and Their Climate
   Change Agenda ­ Going Forward. 2008.
64       Appendix 3



                   Reconstruction and Development Board is focusing on further scale-up, as well
                   as innovation in both instruments and new thematic areas; (b) the Inter-American
                   Development Bank is focusing on implementation and on translating its broad
                   targets into specific programs and projects; and (c) the Asian Development Bank
                   is transforming its project pipeline to help its developing member countries move
                   toward lower carbon economies, considering ways to remove barriers to
                   introduction of clean technologies and better leverage the resources available
                   from its public and private windows.
         (ii)      The MDBs are prepared to scale up the current activities and are developing new
                   activities with respect to the three pillars in energy and environment sector
                   strategies (access, mitigation, and adaptation). In that sense, the MDBs consider
                   any scaling up to be a process of logical evolution of their climate change
                   policies, programs, and initiatives.
         (iii)     There is considerable "no-regrets" potential for GHG emission reduction by
                   improving the effectiveness of existing assets through better use of technology,
                   improved financing capacity in the sector, and institution building.11 Where
                   relevant, suitable pilot projects are also being developed.12
         (iv)      Increasingly, the emphasis will be on assisting the developing member countries
                   (including economies in transition) to integrate climate change issues into their
                   development programs. The MDBs will support this country-led approach through
                   finance, technology transfer, and capacity building.
         (v)       Although the new and accelerated agenda can be accomplished through existing
                   assistance instruments and programs, further scaling up calls for access to
                   additional sources of targeted concessional finance.
         (vi)      For this endeavor to succeed, the MDBs will require significant additional staff
                   and further improvements in the way they work together.

G.       The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Platform

18.     The UNFCCC was established in 1992, its goal being the avoidance of anthropogenic
interference with the climate system through (among other initiatives) a framework for action to
stabilize atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March
1994 and now has 192 parties that continue to review progress and make decisions on further
actions through meetings of the Conference of Parties (COP), normally held annually.13

19.     In line with the findings of the Stern Review, IPCC, IEA, and the MDBs, the UNFCCC
has been moving gradually from its role of encouraging action to manage climate change to that
of seeking commitments. It began with somewhat small commitments set in the Kyoto Protocol
and is now poised to seek larger commitments from the global community.




11
   By way of an example, a three-pronged approach is being developed that centers around the improved financial
   health of power sector entities so as to enable accelerated (i) implementation of new plants, thus reducing the duty
   cycle of old coal-fired plants; (ii) refurbishment of old and inefficient plants that have more than 10 years of residual
   life; and (iii) replacement of plants that are nearing the end of their useful economic life.
12
   For instance, the World Bank (with Global Environment Facility support) is preparing two pilot projects in PRC and
   India for refurbishment of coal-fired power plants.
13
   The COP is supported by other bodies. Two such bodies were established in 1995: the Subsidiary Body for
   Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation. Since 2005, two more subsidiary
   bodies have been added, one to investigate further commitments from Annex I countries to the Kyoto Protocol, and
   the second to focus on a long term cooperative action.
                                                                                                Appendix 3         65


20.    The Kyoto Protocol was adopted by the UNFCCC in COP 3 (1997) and entered into
force on 16 February 2005.14 Its major features are
       (i)    three flexible mechanisms to manage emission reductions--the clean
              development mechanism, emissions trading, and joint implementation; and
       (ii)   for the first time, an agreement under the UNFCCC actually committing 37
              industrialized nations and the European Union to reduce GHG emissions (to an
              average of 5% against 1990 levels over the 5-year period 2008­2012).

21.   Rules and operational details that govern how countries will reduce emissions and
measure their emission reductions were detailed in the Marrakesh Accords, which were formally
adopted at COP 11 and COP/MOP1 (2005) in Montreal.

22.      Discussions at COP 11 also led to two other major decisions:
         (i)    to establish a new subsidiary body, the Ad Hoc Working Group on further
                commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP); and
         (ii)   to constitute a Convention Dialogue that would continue until COP 13 (2007) to
                consider long-term cooperation regarding climate change matters.

23.    At COP 13 (2007), the Convention Dialogue resulted in an agreement on the Bali Action
Plan (BAP). The key decisions of BAP vis-à-vis climate change mitigation efforts are15
       (i)    to "launch a comprehensive process to enable the full, effective, and sustained
              implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action, now, up
              to and beyond 2012, in order to reach an agreed outcome ...;"
       (ii)   a shared vision for long-term cooperative action that incorporates the principle of
              common but differentiated responsibilities--which led to the establishment of the
              Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-Term Cooperative Action, with the objective of
              launching a comprehensive process on long-term cooperation for completion by
              2009 and adoption at COP 15 (2009);
       (iii)  enhanced national/international action on mitigation of climate change;
       (iv)   enhanced action on technology development and transfer to support action on
              mitigation; and
       (v)    enhanced action on the provision of financial resources and investment to
              support action on mitigation and technology cooperation.

24.    At AWG-KP's August 2007 meeting, focused on the findings of IPCC16--particularly that
GHG emissions need to peak in the next 10­15 years and then be reduced to well below half of
2000 levels by 2050 so as to stabilize atmospheric concentrations to 450 ppm CO2 equivalent.
The AWG-KP's conclusion was that Annex I parties to the Kyoto Protocol would be required to
reduce their emissions by 25­40% below the 1990 levels by 2020 set the tone for further
negotiations under the UNFCCC.




14
   As of 14 January 2009, 183 countries and one regional economic integration organization (the European Economic
   Community) have deposited instruments of ratification, accession, approval, or acceptance.
15
   Enhanced national and international action on adaptation is also one of the key decisions of BAP.
16
   In particular, to the IPCC AR4 Working Group III Report, "Mitigation of Climate Change," which addressed five
   issues relevant to policy makers worldwide: (i) What can we do to reduce or avoid climate change?; (ii) What are
   the costs of these actions and how do they relate to costs of inaction?; (iii) How much time is available to realize
   the drastic reductions needed to stabilize GHG concentrations in the atmosphere?; (iv) What are the policy actions
   that can overcome the barriers to implementation?; and (v) How can climate mitigation policy be aligned with
   sustainable development policies?
66     Appendix 3



25.     At COP 13 (2007), the AWG-KP identified a series of issues to be addressed during a
review of the Kyoto Protocol at COP 14. The progress made during the preparatory meetings
prior to and at COP 14 is highlighted in Table A3.2. It is clear that the findings of AR4 and the
IEA influenced the decisions regarding the post-2012 period.

 Table A3.2: Ad Hoc Working Group-Kyoto Protocol Deliberations Regarding Post­2012
                                      Period
Place, Date                                  Issues Discussed/Decisions Reached
Bali, December 2007       Identified issues to be addressed in the Kyoto Protocol review ­ CDM, AR4,
                          adaptation, effectiveness, implementation, compliance
Bangkok, April 2008       Concluded that the flexible mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol (CDM, joint
                          implementation, and emissions training) should continue in the post-2012
                          period, and be supplemental to domestic actions in Annex I countries
Bonn, June 2008           Addressed four specific issues: (i) land use, land use-change, and forestry
                          (LULUCF); (ii) GHGs, sectors, and source categories; (iii) the three flexible
                          mechanisms; and (iv) possible approaches targeting sector emissions
                          Considered relevant methodological issues
Accra, August 2008        Focused on the means for Annex I countries to reach emission reduction
                          targets
                          Considered other issues comprising GHG emissions, sectors, and source
                          categories; approaches targeting sector emissions; methodological issues;
                          spillover effects
Poznan, December          Agreed that future commitments for Annex I parties for the next commitment
2008                      period should principally take the form of quantified emission limitation and
                          reduction objectives (QELROs)
                          Noted that the scale of emission reductions to be achieved by Annex I parties
                          in aggregate should take into account scientific information, including AR4
                          Noted that QELROs for the various Annex I parties may vary widely and
                          depend on different national circumstances; mitigation potential; and
                          effectiveness, efficiency, costs, and benefits of current and future policies
                          Noted that emissions trading, project-based mechanisms, as well as LULUCF
                          should continue to be available to Annex I countries
                          Noted the pledges for emission reduction targets made by some Annex I
                          countries, and invited other Annex I countries to submit their possible
                          QELROs before the next session of AWG-KP
Bonn, March 2009         Noted information, including scientific information, and views submitted by
                         parties on the scale of emission reductions to be achieved by Annex I parties in
                         aggregate, the contribution of Annex I parties individually or jointly, consistent
                         with Article 4 of the Kyoto Protocol
                         Noted information on possible QELROs as provided by some Annex I parties;
                         also reiterated the invitation to Annex I parties to submit further information on
                         possible QELROs before the June 2009 session of the AWG-KP with a view to
                         completing its work by COP 15
                         Noted information on recent scientific analysis on stabilization of GHG
                         concentrations in the atmosphere at levels below the ones assessed by the
                         IPCC in AR4, hence, a greater urgency to address climate change
                         Agreed to continue deliberations on the scale of emission reductions to be
                         achieved by Annex I parties in aggregate as a key focus of the June 2009
                         session of AWG-KP
                         Continued deliberations on possible improvements to emissions trading and
                         project-based mechanisms, and agreed to continue deliberations in the June
                         2009 session of AWG-KP
                         Continued deliberations on how to address, where applicable, the definitions,
                                                                                               Appendix 3      67


Place, Date                                       Issues Discussed/Decisions Reached
                               modalities, rules, and guidelines for the treatment of LULUCF; AWG-KP
                               encouraged parties to share information, particularly data where available,
                               before its session in June 2009 to enhance understanding of the implications of
                               options and proposals for the treatment of LULUCF
Bonn, June 2009                AWG-KP presented two documents: a proposal on amendments to the Kyoto
                               Protocol pursuant to Article 3.9 (Annex I parties' further commitments); and a
                               text on other issues, such as LULUCF; the flexibility mechanisms; common
                               metrics and GHG, sectors, and source categories, as agreed upon during the
                               session in March 2009
                               Considered the various proposals put forth by the Annex I parties under the
                               Kyoto Protocol, but parties were unable to reach an agreement on emission
                               reduction targets post-2012
                               Noted that although options for the treatment of LULUCF to reduce emissions
                               had made progress, both aggregate emission reduction targets and individual
                               targets had yet to be decided
                               Encouraged parties to share before the informal meeting on 10­14 August
                               2009, views on the possible need for information and data to facilitate parties'
                               understanding of the implications of the options for the treatment of LULUCF
                               discussed and considered at the June 2009 session
AR4 = Fourth Assessment Report of IPCC, AWG-KP = Ad Hoc Working Group on further commitments for Annex I
Parties under the Kyoto Protocol, CDM = clean development mechanism, GHG = greenhouse gas, LULUCF = Land
Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry; QELRO = Quantified Emission Limitation and Reduction Objective.
Source: Study team.

26.    Much more work needs to be done on many of the issues addressed thus far, and
whether or not that can be accomplished by the time COP 15 is held in December 2009 remains
unclear. AWG-KP is continuing its ambitious work and convened three sessions prior to COP
15: March 2009 (Bonn), June 2009 (Bonn), and September 2009 (Bangkok). The results of the
sessions will be summarized in a text to be submitted for decision at COP 15 (December 2009)
in Copenhagen.

H.         Recent Initiatives to Accelerate Climate Change Projects

           1.       Poznan Strategic Program on Technology Transfer

27.    The Poznan Strategic Program on Technology Transfer (SPTT)17 is a step toward
scaling up the level of technology transfer to help developing countries address their needs for
environmentally sound technologies. In keeping with the contribution that this strategic program
could make to enhancing technology transfer activities in line with the BAP, the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) was given a fresh mandate at COP 14 to lead the SPTT, which is in
keeping with the BAP. In particular, GEF is required to
       (i)     build on its previous technology needs assessment work for developing countries
               by collaborating with its implementing agencies and updating (or preparing, as
               appropriate) the technology needs assessments, and
       (ii)    facilitate developing countries in the preparation of projects for approval and
               implementation under the SPTT.

28.        GEF is required to report on the progress made on this effort at COP 16 in 2010.



17
     Previously referred to as strategic program of the Global Environment Facility, renamed SPTT at COP 14.
68         Appendix 3



           2.      Climate Investment Funds

29.    The Climate Investment Funds (CIF), approved by the World Bank's Board of Directors
on 1 July 2008, have been established jointly with other MDBs (Asian Development Bank,
African Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and Inter-
American Development Bank). The CIFs are in support of the BAP, in particular, and in general
in recognition of the need to scale up the climate change management effort in developing
countries.

30.     The CIFs identified the need for increased financial resources and instruments to fill the
financing gap to scale up clean energy investments and to integrate resilience into development
assistance. The CIFs comprise
        (i)    the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), which seeks to fill a gap in the international
               architecture for concessional development finance available at a scale necessary
               to provide incentives to developing countries to integrate appropriate mitigation
               actions into investment decisions; the CTF is designed to support scaled-up
               demonstration units and transfer of low-carbon technologies in the power,
               transport, industry, and agriculture sectors; and
        (ii)   the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF), which is to provide financing to pilot new
               development approaches or to scale up activities aimed at a specific climate
               change challenge through targeted programs; the first SCF program that is
               already approved is the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience; among the
               mitigation programs that are under consideration are support for (a) investments
               to scale up renewable energy in low-income countries, and (b) a forest
               investment program.

31.    The CIFs will build upon the activities of the GEF to pilot and demonstrate innovative
technologies, remove barriers to transform markets, and create an enabling environment
through capacity building and establishment of codes, norms, and standards.

32.     The CIFs will complement existing bilateral and multilateral financial mechanisms, and
funding provided through CIFs will be additional to existing levels of official development
assistance. The CTF will utilize a range of concessional financing instruments (such as grants
and concessional loans) and risk mitigation instruments (such as guarantees), which will be
tailored on a case-by-case basis to identifiable incremental costs of low-carbon projects or risk
premium necessary to make a project viable.18 Grant and highly concessional funding available
through the SCF will be blended with existing resources of concessional funding and national
resources to promote specific initiatives to mitigate GHG emissions.

33.    The CIFs are designed to support UNFCCC negotiations and recognize the primacy of
the UNFCCC in climate negotiations. To ensure that they do not prejudice ongoing UNFCCC
deliberations regarding the future of the climate change regime, all funds and programs under
the CIFs have a limited period of operation. The CIFs will share with the UNFCCC their
experience gained through a learning-by-doing process.




18
     Projects deploying proven technologies with low marginal abatement costs may require a small proportion of
     concessional financing or guarantee cover, while projects deploying high-risk and high-cost (as yet unproven)
     technologies may require larger amounts of concessional finance to make them financially attractive.
                                                                               Appendix 4      69


                               ADB EFFORTS AND INITIATIVES

A.     Strategic Policy Framework of ADB Related to Climate Change and Greenhouse
       Gas Emissions

1.      The Asian Development Bank's (ADB) strategies, policies, and initiatives were assessed
in terms of their role in influencing ADB's lending and nonlending programs with respect to
addressing and mitigating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of energy sector operations during
the evaluation period 2001­2008. The Long-Term Strategic Framework 2001­2015 (LTSF
2001­2015) and the Medium-Term Strategy (MTS) 2001­2005 provided the overall strategic
framework for ADB's operations during 2001­2005, and the Energy 2000: Review of the Energy
Policy of ADB provides specific guidelines and priorities for its operations in the energy sector.

2.      The LTSF recognizes ADB's mission as the reduction of poverty through sustainable and
equitable economic growth. It identifies environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive
economic growth as one of the core strategic areas of ADB's assistance. The LTSF places
environmental considerations in the forefront of all development decision making and planning
in ADB initiatives. It requires ADB to play a proactive role in mitigating adverse environmental
impacts of its investments as well as reversing environmental degradation due to unplanned
development activities undertaken in the past. However, the linkages among rapid economic
growth, increased GHG emissions, and climate change had not been recognized as a
significant issue to be addressed during the implementation of LTSF 2001­2015.

3.      There has been a strategic shift in ADB's operations starting from 2005 to increase the
relevance of its assistance in the context of the changing priorities and needs of its member
countries as a result of the rapid economic growth experienced in some of the large middle-
income countries. MTS II 2006­2008 was prepared in 2005 in response to this. MTS II
recognized the environmental costs of the high growth scenario and its linkages with
environmental degradation ranging from localized issues such as loss of forest cover and
biodiversity to global impacts like climate change. MTS II identified priority sectors for ADB
assistance based on its comparative advantage, and promotion of sustainable energy was
selected as one of the priority areas. MTS II clearly started that Asian countries would have to
steer away from the growth path of high per capita energy consumption, adopted by the
developed economies of today, if global climate change impacts are to be maintained at
reasonable levels. MTS II recommended that ADB help its developing member countries
(DMCs) acquire low-carbon technologies and adopt energy efficiency and renewable energy
projects on a "no-regret" basis.

4.     In recognition of the strategic shift of the development challenges and priorities of DMCs
since the adoption of LTSF 2001­2015, ADB has adopted LTSF 2008­2020 (Strategy 2020).
Environmental degradation including climate change due to rapid economic growth is identified
as one of the major challenges to be addressed in Strategy 2020. In this context, the increasing
share of GHG emissions from the energy sectors of developing Asia (from 8% of global GHG
emissions in 1980 to 28% in 2005 and 42% in 2030) is mentioned as a major contributory factor
to global warming. Environmentally sustainable growth including mitigation and adaptation for
climate change is one of the three distinct but complementary development agendas
recommended in Strategy 2020.

5.     Strategy 2020 identifies five core areas of specialization to effectively promote its three
development agendas. The five core areas of specialization explicitly include
70     Appendix 4



       (i)    supporting infrastructure development including expansion of energy supply
              through clean energy sources; promotion of energy efficiency through supply-
              side and demand-side measures; and removal of policy, institutional, regulatory,
              technological, and legal barriers to clean and renewable energy development;
              and
       (ii)   promoting sound environment management including shifting of DMCs to low-
              carbon growth paths through more efficient and clean use of energy; reducing
              GHG emissions in nonenergy sectors such as forestry, land use, and agricultural
              and municipal waste; and modernizing efficient transport systems.

6.     Strategy 2020 also recommends escalated assistance to support environmentally
sustainable development including assistance to address GHG emissions and climate change
as one of the operational goals to be achieved by 2012.

B.     Energy Sector Policy Framework of ADB (2001­2008)

7.     ADB's Energy 2000: Review of Energy Policy (Energy 2000) refers to the possible link
between climate change and GHG emissions due to increased use of fossil fuel and to the
possible opportunities for the DMCs to access financing for clean energy projects through
carbon markets under the Kyoto Protocol. However, the Kyoto Protocol was not ratified, and
there were no functioning carbon markets in 2000. Energy 2000 mentions that ADB would
support interventions to increase the use of cleaner forms of energy and initiatives for GHG
abatement within the overall framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). However, this was not considered as a major policy thrust in
Energy 2000, nor was it given the same level of importance as addressing localized
environmental problems such as acid rains and other impacts related to energy sector
development. However, several other policy recommendations were made in Energy 2000 with
the primary objective of improving the overall efficiency and environmental performance of the
energy sector, which would have also contributed to improving GHG efficiency. These include
       (i)     policy advice and dialogue on withdrawal of subsidies and price distortions in
               energy sectors in a socially sensitive manner;
       (ii)    efficiency improvement in energy supply and use including energy conservation
               and demand-side management;
       (iii)   promoting clean coal technologies including more GHG-efficient technologies
               such as extracting of coal-bed methane, supercritical boilers, and integrated coal
               gasification plants;
       (iv)    promoting combined heat and power plants when there is demand for district
               heating and efficiency improvements in district heating networks; and
       (v)     support for cost-effective renewable energy projects and policy dialogue for
               policy reforms to remove policy and institutional barriers to the uptake of
               renewable energy.

8.     ADB has recently revised its energy policy with the objective of aligning energy sector
operations with Strategy 2020. The 2009 Energy Policy has brought the mitigation of the
increasing GHG emissions in the energy sector to the forefront of ADB's energy sector
operations together with energy security and access to energy. It specifically addresses the
environmental sustainability of energy sector development in the context of increasing concerns
about the causal link between increasing fossil fuel-based energy consumption and climate
change. Hence, it recommends several operational measures to guide ADB's energy sector
operations to promote energy efficiency and clean energy to reduce the carbon intensity of
energy usage in developing Asia while recognizing the importance of energy security and
                                                                             Appendix 4      71


access to modern forms of energy to the overall development of developing Asia. These specific
measures include
       (i)    promoting access to carbon markets for clean energy and energy efficiency
              improvement through ADB's carbon market initiative (CMI);
       (ii)   promoting new investment projects in clean energy and energy efficiency through
              technical assistance, credit enhancement, and grant financing of investment
              costs through the clean energy financing partnership facility; in this regard, ADB
              has set a target of $1 billion of investments in clean energy by 2008 and
              $2 billion by 2013;
       (iii)  proactively promoting new and more efficient coal technologies such as
              supercritical coal power plants and carbon sequestration carbon capture;
       (iv)   in recognition of coal's importance to energy security in many DMCs, supporting
              the improvement of environmental and social standards in coal mining; and
       (v)    given the more benign GHG emission characteristics of natural gas-based power
              generation, continuing to support gas-based power plants and gas infrastructure
              including liquefied natural gas terminals.

C.     ADB's Operational Initiatives (2001­2008) to Address Greenhouse Gas Emissions
       in the Energy Sector

       1.     Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Climate Change Program (2001­
              2006)

9.      ADB established the Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Climate Change
(REACH) program as an umbrella covering several energy-environment single donor trust funds
supported by the governments of Canada, Denmark, Finland, and Netherlands. Regional
technical assistance 5972: Promotion of Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and
Greenhouse Gas Abatement (PREGA), which was implemented over 2001­2006, was the
flagship initiative under the REACH program. PREGA was aimed at capacity building of
domestic stakeholders in 18 DMCs to promote investments in renewable energy, energy
efficiency, and GHG abatement technologies. The expected outcomes and outputs of the
PREGA were
        (i)      increased awareness of renewable energy, energy efficiency, and GHG
                 abatement (REGA) technologies among policy makers, project developers, and
                 financiers;
        (ii)     enhanced capacity among stakeholders to prepare, promote, and appraise
                 REGA projects eligible for clean development mechanism (CDM) financing;
        (iii)    policy and institutional analysis to remove barriers to REGA technologies;
        (iv)     feasibility studies for a pipeline of REGA projects with CDM potential;
        (v)      country reports on policy and institutional issues impacting on REGA
                 technologies; and
        (vi)     financing models for REGA projects.

10.    The PREGA program was primarily a capacity-building one and was not intended to
provide financing for subprojects developed under PREGA; and to that extent PREGA achieved
most of its intended outcomes. It also provided a forum for ADB staff to share information about
problems in promoting REGA technologies in DMCs and created the initial impetus within ADB
to mainstream REGA technologies in energy sector operations.
72     Appendix 4



       2.      Energy Efficiency Initiative 2006

11.      In recognition of increasing global concerns about rapid growth in GHG emissions in
developing Asian countries and their contribution to climate change, and of increasing emphasis
on addressing GHG emissions in MTS II and Strategy 2020, ADB launched the energy
efficiency initiative (EEI) in 2006 with the objective of increasing its assistance to clean energy
projects to $1 billion by 2008. The EEI, together with the CMI, form the key operational
initiatives taken by ADB under the Climate Change Program to address GHG emissions in the
energy sectors of developing Asia. The Clean Energy and Environment Program also includes
the sustainable transport initiative, energy for all initiative, and adaptation for climate change,
but these initiatives are outside the scope of this evaluation knowledge brief. The EEI has
identified several priority energy subsectors for promoting clean energy investments. These
include the following:
         (i)     Demand-side energy efficiency improvement: Demand-side energy efficiency
                 improvements compound the energy savings through the energy value chain.
                 These efficiency improvements can be achieved in the industry and commerce
                 sectors through employing more efficient plants and machinery and in the
                 residential sector through efficient lighting, heating, and cooling systems. The
                 EEI has identified awareness building and appropriate lending instruments for
                 channeling the funding to end users as the main barriers for increasing ADB
                 lending to demand-side energy efficiency improvement.
         (ii)    Supply-side energy efficiency: This involves the promotion of advanced fossil fuel
                 combustion technologies such as supercritical coal plants, fuel switching to
                 cleaner fuel such as natural gas, rehabilitation of existing thermal power plants to
                 improve thermal efficiency, as well as improving transmission and distribution
                 networks to reduce technical losses.
         (iii)   Renewable energy: Under the EEI, ADB has increased its assistance to
                 renewable energy projects such as hydro, wind, geothermal, and biomass
                 cogeneration projects. In addition to financial assistance, ADB has provided
                 assistance for policy reforms to remove barriers to investments in renewable
                 energy projects.

12.     The clean energy financing partnership facility (CEFPF) was established in 2007 under
the EEI to mobilize and channel financial resources to clean energy projects. The CEFPF is set
up as an umbrella trust fund where different bilateral and multilateral agencies including ADB
have provided financial resources. CEFPF resources have been used for (i) grant financing of
incremental costs as complementary financing for ADB's lending for more efficient technologies
that would not have been deployed otherwise, and (ii) technical assistance for preparing clean
energy projects and policy and institutional advice to remove barriers to clean energy
deployment. The possibility of using CEFPF resources for leveraging financing by domestic
financial institutions for clean energy investments through risk sharing arrangements is also
being explored.

13.     In 2008, ADB approved the $40 million Climate Change Fund to provide additional
resources to the CEFPF to complement the funds provided by bilateral donors to the CEFPF.
The Climate Change Fund is also expected to complement the proposed $5 billion Climate
Investment Fund aimed at channeling funds to high-impact climate change investments through
multilateral development banks such as ADB.
                                                                                 Appendix 4      73


       3.      Carbon Market Initiative

14.      The CDM under the UNFCCC framework, which came into force in 2005, provided
access by ADB's DMCs to carbon markets for clean energy projects that are GHG efficient
compared with the business-as-usual scenario. In anticipation of the emerging opportunities
under the CDM, ADB initiated the CDM Facility (CDMF) in 2003 with the objective of (i) initiating
CDM-eligible projects through ADB's existing relationships in DMCs, (ii) helping project
sponsors to prepare documents required for registration with the UNFCCC as a CDM project,
and (iii) providing information and advice to project sponsors about the opportunities for trading
carbon credits. The CDMF, established as a pilot facility from 2003 to 2006, was intended to
support approximately 16 ADB-financed projects in accessing carbon markets.

15.     The experience with the CDMF demonstrated the demand for an enhanced role for ADB
in the rapidly developing carbon markets and ADB started the CMI in 2006 in response to this
need. The CMI was set up with the objective of addressing several key barriers to CDM-eligible
projects in DMCs such as (i) lack of access to long-term project financing and difficulty of finding
upfront funding for carbon credits to be generated by investment projects, and (ii) lack of
technical capacity and expertise in carbon markets and the CDM registration process among
the executing agencies and project sponsors. The overall objective of the CMI is to increase
ADB investment in CDM-eligible projects, which include a significant share of clean energy
projects. The CMI originally comprised three components:
        (i)     Asia­Pacific Carbon Fund (APCF): The APCF provides the option of monetizing
                a portion of the expected future revenues during the first commitment period
                (2008­2012) by selling projected certified emission reductions in exchange for
                upfront finance. This funding can reduce the initial capital requirement for
                implementing a project.
        (ii)    Technical Support Facility: The technical support facility provides assistance to
                project sponsors during project preparation to undertake CDM eligibility
                assessment, CDM documentation, validation, and registration; and during project
                implementation to ensure the delivery of carbon credits.
        (iii)   Credit Marketing Facility: The Credit Marketing Facility will offer project
                developers marketing support for project sponsors in continuation of the
                assistance provided under the CDMF.

16.     As there was a dearth of ADB-financed CDM-eligible projects likely to be commissioned
during the first commitment period, the mandate of the APCF was expanded to include non-
ADB-financed CDM-eligible projects in ADB's DMCs. With the likelihood of agreement being
reached on post-Kyoto Protocol carbon markets beyond 2012, ADB launched the Future
Carbon Fund in 2008 with a mandate for purchasing carbon credits expected to be generated
after 2012. Clean energy projects such as energy, efficiency, renewable energy, and methane
capture and utilization have been identified as priority areas for the Future Carbon Fund.
74        Appendix 5



            GREENHOUSE GAS EFFICIENCY AND ACCOUNTING METHODOLOGIES

A.        Issues in Greenhouse Gas Accounting

1.       The basis for any measure of greenhouse gas (GHG) efficiency is GHG accounting.
However, despite concerted efforts on the part of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and its various bodies (such as the clean development mechanism Executive
Board) and the various multilateral development banks (MDBs), there is not much clarity about the
principles of GHG accounting. Progress has been painstakingly slow. Only recently have the
MDBs begun estimating GHG emissions associated with their operations.1 As per a survey of
various MDBs and other international financial institutions (IFIs) reported in 2008,2 there was little
convergence in the scope or sweep of GHG accounting of their operations. The wide variance
was in terms of (i) types of assistance--whether only direct loans are considered and/or
operations supported through equity holdings and/or financial intermediation are also covered;
(ii) assistance level--whether all projects are covered or only those with assistance above a
certain minimum value; (iii) type of projects--whether the entire portfolio is covered or only some
mix of energy efficiency, renewable energy, and fuel switch projects; (iv) size of projects--whether
all projects are covered or only those with emission implications above a certain minimum
threshold; (v) GHG reporting metrics--whether emissions are calculated ex-ante or are
recalculated annually, whether annual emissions are reported or life-cycle emissions, whether the
life cycle refers to useful project life or the period of MDBs' or IFIs' active involvement in the
project, whether absolute emissions are reported or change in GHG emissions resulting from the
project, whether the change of emissions is benchmarked against a static baseline (pre-
investment emissions) or a dynamic baseline (evolution without the project); and (vi) project
boundary--whether it is delineated on the basis of ownership/control or it is a physical boundary,
and whether or not changes in emissions elsewhere as a result of the project are considered.

2.     The wide variation in GHG accounting practices that have been (or are being) adopted in
the MDBs and IFIs perhaps reflects the fact that the underlying objectives and corporate drivers
themselves vary widely. For some, the key objective is largely to have better inputs for project
and component financial models. For others, there may be more strategic goals--such as
meeting environmental policy requirements, and/or improving upon their country partnership
and assistance strategies, and/or making disclosures to stakeholders.

B.        General Methodological Issues

3.      Scope of Emissions. Emissions (or avoided emissions) that are a direct consequence
of the Asian Development Bank (ADB)-supported project or component activity, referred to as
Scope 1 emissions, are considered. Emissions arising from fuel combustion in fossil-fuel fired
power plants, as well as avoided incremental emissions owing to the commissioning of
renewable energy projects or from methane capture, or reduction in technical losses in
electricity and gas transmission and distribution are Scope 1 emissions. Scope 2 emissions,
which are emissions associated with purchased electricity, are particularly relevant for ADB-
supported end-use efficiency projects and are also considered. Scope 3 emissions, which are
indirect and a consequence of activities of an ADB-supported project, but occur in facilities not
owned or controlled by the project, may be considered on a case-by-case basis. For instance, in
a coal gasification project in which coal is gasified with the intention of distributing coal-gas to
end-users who switch from highly emitting coal to lower emitting coal-gas, the avoided
emissions from the conversion are considered. However, methane emissions associated with
1
    Efforts until a few years back focused largely on carbon footprinting of their respective organizations (headquarters
    and other offices, as well as annual meetings).
2
    Survey report presented at the October 2008 meeting of the Multilateral Financial Institution Working Group on
    Environment.
                                                                                                Appendix 5        75


coal mining to supply coal to a newly set up coal-fired power plant are not considered, for
reasons evident from the life-cycle emissions related discussion below.

4.       Annual vs. Life-Cycle Emissions. There is little doubt that the bulk of net Scope 1 and
Scope 2 GHG emissions or emission reductions (savings) occur during the useful economic life of
the project or component. The increased focus on life-cycle emissions is largely a consequence of
criticism about claims regarding the GHG benefits owing to indirect emissions that are not
normally accounted for; for instance (i) hydropower plants with large reservoirs release methane;
and (ii) all renewable energy technologies (such as wind, run-of-river small hydro, and solar
photovoltaic) lead to some GHG emissions by virtue of the energy required for the manufacture of
equipment, as well as equipment transport, installation, commissioning, and decommissioning.3
Whether or not these life-cycle impacts should be considered for the purposes of this evaluation
knowledge brief (EKB) depends on (i) how large these indirect emissions are vis-à-vis direct
emissions, and (ii) whether or not reliable calculations of indirect emissions can be made.

5.      The consensus of the technical literature appears to be that, in general, the indirect
emissions associated with mining, transport, material inputs, construction, and decommissioning
represent 5­10% of life-cycle emissions for most fossil fuel technologies. Figure A5.1
summarizes the results of emissions from power generation activity in Japan. The indirect
emissions from coal-fired and oil-fired power generation are about 10% and 6%, respectively.4
The vast data requirements for this computation include (among others) the following: (i) energy
use for equipment manufacture; (ii) for a coal-fired power plant, the energy used in mining,
extracting, cleaning, and transporting coal to the power plant site; (iii) for an oil-fired plant, the
energy consumed for upstream activities (exploration, field development, and production) as
well as in refining and transportation to power plant site; (iv) for a gas-based power plant, the
energy used in upstream operations (exploration, field development, and production) as well as
in gas treatment and pipeline transportation to power plant site; and (v) for a re-gasified liquefied
natural gas-based power plant, the same as for the gas-based power plant, plus liquefaction,
shipping, and re-gasification. The seemingly large incremental effort would only help in fine-
tuning the emission impacts to a few percentage points.

                           Figure A5.1: Life-Cycle Emission Factors in Japan




CO2 = carbon dioxide, LNG = liquefied natural gas, PV = photovoltaic.
Source: Hondo, H. 2005. Life Cycle GHG Emission Analysis of Power Generation Systems: The Japanese Case.
        Energy 30, pp. 2042­2056.

3
    Likewise, claims regarding GHG benefits of nuclear generation have also been questioned.
4
    The high indirect emissions from liquefied natural gas-fired power generation, at 111­130 grams carbon dioxide
    per kilowatt-hour is due largely to the high carbon dioxide content of Indonesian natural gas (some 20­30%), which
    is released during processing and liquefaction.
76      Appendix 5




6.      Figure A5.2 summarizes the life-cycle emission estimates from over 50 studies. The
following observations (regarding technology choices of interest to ADB, given the type of
projects and components supported thus far) are useful: (i) total life-cycle emissions from solid
fuels are in the 500­1,700 grams of carbon dioxide equivalent per kilowatt hour (gCO2e/kWh)
range; (ii) total life-cycle emissions from oil- and gas-based power generation are in the 400­
1,200 gCO2e/kWh range; and (iii) total life-cycle emissions from wind and hydro are in the 1­40
gCO2e/kWh range. Clearly, accounting for indirect emissions associated with wind and
hydropower projects makes little sense.

         Figure A5.2: Life-Cycle GHG Emissions by Power Generation Technology




CCS = carbon capture and storage, GHG = greenhouse gas, PV = photovoltaic.
Source: Weisser, D. 2007. A Guide to Life-Cycle GHG Emissions from Electric Supply Technologies. Energy (32),
        pp.1543­1559.

7.       In the context of this EKB, GHG emissions estimates are being made ex-ante when
(i) only indicative or typical values can be ascribed to technical performance parameters of the
project or component (rather than actual performance-based values); and (ii) technical design
changes (albeit minor), which may actually be made during the project implementation phase,
cannot be taken into account (especially if a loan has been approved in recent years). In
addition, uncertainties regarding GHG emissions during the useful life also come from
insufficient data in many cases.

8.      Aggregation to Portfolio Level. While aggregating the GHG efficiencies across the
project portfolio, an issue that comes up is whether all projects should be considered, or only
those that result in GHG emissions or GHG emission savings above a certain threshold. Given
that the EKB is being carried out for projects as appraised, and that project-specific data in
many cases are limited, it was decided to include all projects for which sufficient data (to make
reasonable estimates) are available. However, it is important to note that annual GHG
emissions/savings are aggregated: (i) for several types of projects with different useful
economic lifetimes and expected to be commissioned and reach full capacity utilization at
different points of time, and (ii) even though the analysis reveals that the reliability or precision
of the GHG efficiency varies significantly across projects/components.
                                                                                          Appendix 6        77


       METHODOLOGIES ADOPTED OR DEVELOPED FOR GREENHOUS GAS EFFICIENCY
            ASSESSMENT OF ENERGY SECTOR PROJECTS AND COMPONENTS

Project/                 Specific                   Reference to                     Basis
Component           Project/Component                the Supp.                        for
Category                   Type                     Appendix B                    Methodology
Renewable        Grid-connected electricity             RE1        As per approved consolidated methodology
Energy           generation from renewable                         for CDM (ref ACM0002 of UNFCC); grid
                 sources (wind, hydro)                             emission factor applied to estimate GHG
                                                                   savings
Energy           Coal mine methane and/or               EE1        As per approved consolidated methodology
Efficiency       coal bed methane capture                          for CDM (ref ACM0008); baseline methane
Improvement      and use for power generation                      emissions and power grid emission factor
                                                                   applied to estimate GHG savings
                 Coal mine methane and/or               EE2        As per approved consolidated methodology
                 coal bed methane capture                          for CDM (ref ACM0008); baseline methane
                 and use for industrial,                           emissions and emissions from use of other
                 commercial, and residential                       fuel applied to estimate GHG savings
                 applications
                 Efficiency improvements in             EE3        Counterfactual ­ continued use of old, small,
                 centralized district heating                      inefficient coal-fired boilers, as well as
                                                                   inefficient pipeline network
                 Efficiency power plant                 EE4        Counterfactual ­ generation with average
                                                                   grid emission factor
Hydropower       Reservoir hydro                        RE1        As per approved consolidated methodology
                                                                   for CDM (ref ACM0002); grid emission factor
                                                                   applied to estimate GHG savings
                 Pumped storage hydropower              LH1        Counterfactual ­ gas-fired gas turbine of
                                                                   same capacity
Thermal          Thermal power plant (any              TPG1        This methodology is relevant when a
Power            coal-fired technology; any                        technology different from the conventional
Generation       gas/oil-fired technology)                         technology is introduced as a result of ADB-
                                                                   financed intervention; and/or when power
                                                                   system planners would like to meet certain
                                                                   overall targets regarding generation fuel-mix
                                                                   or hydro-thermal mix. Counterfactual is the
                                                                   combined margin consisting of the operating
                                                                   margin (i.e., average grid emission factor per
                                                                   unit of energy supplied of the grid to which
                                                                   the plant is connected) and the build margin
                                                                   consisting of a typical power plant using the
                                                                   same type of fuel but using the most
                                                                   common technology in the country.
                 Rehabilitation of old coal-fired       TPR        Counterfactual ­ plant continues to operate
                 power plant                                       inefficiently and the increased energy supply
                                                                   after rehabilitation is supplied by the other
                                                                   plants connected to the grid.
Gas              LNG regasification, pipeline           NG1        Same as above.
Infrastructure   supply, and end-use
Development
                 Gas transmission and                   NG2        The counterfactual to the project is use of
                 distribution expansion                            other types of fossil fuel that are replaced by
                                                                   the gas supplied under the project.
Power            Power evacuation from                  TL1        Investment in specific power project as well
Transmission     identified power sources                          as associated transmission line/substations
    78         Appendix 6



Project/                    Specific                  Reference to                          Basis
Component              Project/Component               the Supp.                             for
Category                      Type                    Appendix B                         Methodology
                                                                         is considered. Counterfactual ­ in the
                                                                         "without project" scenario, the existing power
                                                                         plants in the power system provided the
                                                                         energy generated from the power plants
                                                                         connected to the transmission line funded by
                                                                         ADB.
                    Power evacuation plus grid              TL2          Investments in generation and transmission
                    strengthening                                        during a certain time-slice are considered.
                                                                         Counterfactual ­ in the "without time-slice
                                                                         investment" scenario, the pre-time-slice
                                                                         generation and transmission system is
                                                                         stretched to its performance limits, and
                                                                         resultant power shortages are met by diesel-
                                                                         fired self-generation.
                    Transmission projects for loss          TL3          Relevant when, for instance, high voltage
                    reduction                                            lines are introduced or are used to replace
                                                                         existing lines. Load flow studies are normally
                                                                         required to assess loss reduction.
                    Power evacuation                        TL4          Relevant when the decision on a power plant
                                                                         location is to be made, with the fuel transport
                                                                         vs. power transmission as key criteria.
                                                                         Counterfactual ­ in the "without project"
                                                                         case, it is assumed that the power plant is
                                                                         located near a load center where fuel needs
                                                                         to be transported (e.g., coal transport by rail)
Power               33 kV and 11 kV system                DER1           The project emissions are the emissions
Distribution        improvement (technical loss                          associated with electricity supplied to meet
Network             reduction), low voltage level                        the electricity demand created under the
                    (technical and/or nontechnical                       project. The counterfactual is meeting the
                    loss reduction), conversion of                       electricity demand with the network that
                    low voltage to 11 kV                                 existed prior to the project. The reduction in
                    operation, extension and                             technical losses under two scenarios results
                    efficiency improvement, and                          in GHG savings, but the increase in
                    rural electrification                                electricity sales due to expanded network
                                                                         coverage would result in GHG emissions
                                                                         increases.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CDM = clean development mechanism, DER = distribution expansion and rehabilitation, EE
= energy efficiency, GHG = greenhouse gas, kV = kilovolt, LH = large hydropower, LNG = liquefied natural gas, NG = natural
gas, RE = renewable energy, TL = transmission line, TPG = thermal power generation, TPR = thermal power rehabilitation,
UNFCCC = United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Source: Study team.
       MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE EVALUATION KNOWLEDGE BRIEF
      ON THE GREENHOUSE GAS IMPLICATIONS OF ADB'S ENERGY SECTOR
                             OPERATIONS


       On 16 November 2009, the Director General, Independent Evaluation Department,
received the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.     General Comments

       1.      We welcome IED's Evaluation Knowledge Brief (EKB) on Greenhouse
       Gas (GHG) Implications of ADB's Energy Sector Operations. The EKB assesses
       recent ADB operations, develops analytical tools and offers suggestions for
       enlarging GHG-efficient investments in the energy sector. The report
       incorporates comments from the energy committee of ADB's energy community
       of practice (representing all operational departments).

       2.      We note the EKB's overall positive assessment of ADB's energy
       investments in selected countries, specifically the increase in annual lending for
       clean energy, the very large increase in nonsovereign energy sector lending and
       equity investments that also have GHG reductions, and the seven-fold increase
       in ex-ante GHG emission savings between the periods 2001­2005 and 2006­
       2008. The EKB has also ranked the energy supply technologies based on
       economic cost, and as generally accepted, has noted that a clear price for GHG
       emission reduction will be necessary to improve the ranking of renewable and
       other low carbon options.

       3.       GHG-efficient investments comprise a part of ADB's overall energy sector
       operations, and it is important to bear in mind the objective of ADB's Energy
       Policy (2009), which affirms the importance of energy security in ADB's
       developing member countries (DMCs) and ADB's vision of a region free of
       poverty. The objective of the Energy Policy is for ADB "to help DMCs to provide
       reliable, adequate, and affordable energy supplies for inclusive growth in a
       socially, economically, and environmentally sustainable way. It will emphasize
       promoting energy efficiency and renewable energy, maximizing access to energy
       for all, and promoting energy sector reforms, capacity building, and governance."
       In this regard, while the EKB focuses on the design of ADB energy sector
       projects in six high energy consuming countries, in most other DMCs that
       contribute little to global GHG emissions (and have low GDP), greater attention
       has to be placed on inclusive economic growth and the adaptation aspects of
       climate change.

       II.    Comments on Specific Recommendations

       5.      Recommendation 1: Assess GHG implications of future investments
       with significant GHG impacts or savings. We agree. Under the United Nations
       Framework Convention for Climate Change, procedures for measuring country-
       level annual GHG emissions are in place, but they need to be disaggregated to
       enterprise and project levels. While this disaggregation will be highly complex,
       we expect that a valid and internationally accepted accounting mechanism
should be in place by 2011. In the interim, ADB will continue to use a framework
to quantify GHG impacts or savings of future energy projects, and will refine it as
necessary. This interim framework has been used to quantify the GHG emission
reduction of completed projects that have been included in ADB's annual
development effectiveness reviews.

6.      Recommendation 2(i): Mechanism to buy down incremental costs of
clean coal technologies. We agree. In carbon dioxide capture and storage
(CCS) for example, the area that will have the highest incremental cost, ADB has
partnered with the Global CCS Institute, Australia to identify options in DMCs
with large coal use and to provide grant assistance for front-end investigations
and capacity building. The Climate Change Fund will also provide grant funds for
an integrated gasification and combined cycle project (currently being processed)
to partly buy down the incremental cost. For project proposals that use
supercritical and ultra-supercritical technologies, ADB's participation and risk
enhancement mechanisms help lower the cost of capital, but more needs to be
done. Where possible, assistance will be provided for registration under the
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol, so that additional
revenue streams can be generated. As more donor contributions become
available under the Clean Energy Financing Partnership Facility, ADB's support
for meeting such incremental costs can also increase.

7.       Recommendation 2(ii): Scaling up development of appropriate and
affordable renewable energy technologies. We agree. Technologies and
know-how are essential for scaling up renewable energy projects in DMCs. ADB
is implementing a study on establishment of a low carbon technology market
place, which would bring technology vendors and buyers together. We are also
cooperating with an international philanthropy to scale up solar power technology
in India. With the grant resources of the Clean Energy Financing Partnership
Facility, we are supporting DMCs on pilot projects that use advanced solar
lighting and storage technologies. We will continue seeking options for
introducing and scaling up renewable energy technologies in DMCs.

8.      Recommendation 2(iii): Aggressively pursuing methane destruction
projects. We agree. We will seek opportunities to extend support for coalbed
methane extraction and use in the South Asia region, which has large coal
reserves. We will also seek opportunities to support landfill methane capture in
other regions with large quantities of urban waste. The uptake of such projects
has been helped by CDM, and when the post-Kyoto international agreement
(post-2013) is in place, it is expected that more projects will be implemented in
DMCs. ADB has invested in some methane capturing and utilization projects
using the Asia Pacific Carbon Fund.

9.      With respect to the above, the following issues will have to be taken into
account: (i) Implementation time: in the People's Republic of China, which has
the highest use of methane, the investigations started in the mid-1990s, and it
took nearly 10 years to implement demonstration-scale projects; (ii) Regulatory
and administrative regimes: except for the People's Republic of China, methane
destruction projects will require a change in DMCs' regulatory and administrative
regimes as gaseous fuels are treated differently; and (iii) Attractiveness to the
private sector: Once the regulatory regime is clear, ADB's participation may be
limited as the high returns from the dual revenue stream, i.e. fuel and CDM, will
attract private sector financing.

9.      Recommendation 2(iv): Scaling up investments in industrial energy
efficiency improvement. We agree. We welcome the recommendation because
of the greater GHG-efficiency through reduction in energy demand following
higher industrial energy efficiency. We will acquire suitable expertise and develop
innovative mechanisms as we identify options for reducing energy use by the
industrial sector; the energy community of practice will assist in building
capability.
                   DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE (DEC)

          Chair's Summary of the Committee Discussion on 17 November 2009

   EVALUATION KNOWLEDGE BRIEF: GREENHOUSE GAS IMPLICATIONS OF ADB'S
                     ENERGY SECTOR OPERATIONS

1.      The evaluation knowledge brief (EKB) aimed to identify implications of energy operations
of ADB on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and to draw lesson to guide future energy
assistance. The study aims to improve GHG efficiency of ADB's energy sector assistance and
thereby help DMCs adopt a low carbon path, which is the prime objective of the ADB's energy
policy.

2.      The EKB concluded that ADB has done fairly well in recent years in terms of the
emphasis that has been attached to the energy sector, the assistance to clean energy, the
proportion of clean energy to the total, and the GHG savings realized from the energy portfolio
in recent years (2006-2008) compared to the earlier period. Director General, IED, noted that as
a mainstreaming measure, GHG assessment should be a part of regular assessment done for
projects with significant GHG emissions.

3.     Management (represented by Practice Leader for Energy; and Chair, Energy
Committee) acknowledged the usefulness of the EKB in dialogues with governments.
Management raised concern on accounting for the GHG emissions without recognizing the
development impacts of the projects. Management mentioned ADB's efforts to improve its
operations in countries where it can have an impact.

4.      DEC Chair inquired about the additional cost that DMCs incurred for producing cleaner
energy. Cost of clean energy should be compared to the cost of producing the same using the
least-cost option that may not be the cleanest form of energy. This would enable DMCs to make
informed decisions on technology options, taking into account both the GHG impacts and the
cost implications. One DEC member recognized that although DMCs would incur high costs for
renewable energy, such initiatives should continue, perhaps with the help of other development
partners and the private sector. Another DEC member noted the positive response of
Management to the IED recommendations, and looked forward to the monitoring of the
implementation of the recommendations, which may take longer time. The DEC member also
inquired on other financing mechanisms to support the recommendations for mechanisms to
buy down incremental costs of clean coal technologies. Lastly, the DEC member recommended
greater emphasis on the EKB's finding that ADB should encourage policy reforms to promote
GHG efficiency in energy sector.

5.      IED clarified that ADB does not saddle countries with the high cost technologies solely
aimed at achieving savings in GHG emissions. DMCs recognize their priorities in making
investment choices; the higher priority is energy supply (energy security and access) at an
affordable price. It is acknowledged that GHG efficiency is a desirable outcome but it is not a
major factor in the decision making process at present as DMCs do not have a legally binding
obligation to reduce the GHG emissions. Management mentioned that new safeguard
guidelines require the gross GHG impacts to be quantified for projects with significant GHG
emissions. The project level financial and economic analysis is undertaken without taking into
account the global benefits due to GHG savings. This ensures that the project is financially and
economically attractive to the DMC.
6.      On the additional buy-down mechanisms, IED noted that there are already mechanisms
in place. Management mentioned some existing mechanisms, including Clean Energy Financing
Partnership Facility (CEFPF) and the proposed Climate Investment Fund to be administered by
the World Bank with ADB as a participating agency. Management and IED also expressed the
hope that appropriate mechanisms for technology transfer and financing of incremental cost of
advanced energy technologies would be agreed upon in the forthcoming negotiations in
Copenhagen.

7.      On the recommendation for policy reforms, Management explained that policy dialogue
is part of CPSs and road maps, and supporting the implementation of the climate change action
plans. It was noted that policy reforms would be applicable to countries with significant GHG
emissions.

Conclusions

8.       DEC noted that GHG-efficient investments have been a part of ADB's energy sector
portfolio for many years without explicit recognition. ADB has been increasingly focused on
GHG-efficient investments since 2006.

9.     DEC looked forward to further refinements to evaluation methodology and presentation
that would include benefits and costs of enhanced environmentally efficient energy investments.




                                                         Ashok K. Lahiri
                                           Chair, Development Effectiveness Committee
