                                   PPA: IND 22008




PROJECT PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT




             ON THE




   ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
          (Loan 918-IND)



               IN



             INDIA




           March 2002
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                  Currency Unit ­ Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)

                     At Appraisal       At Completion     At Evaluation
                     September 1988     March 1999        December 2001

Re1.00     =         $0.07              $0.02             $0.02
 $1.00     =         Rs14.51            Rs42.43           Rs48.20

                               ABBREVIATIONS

ADB              ­       Asian Development Bank
AP               ­       Andhra Pradesh
EA               ­       Executing Agency
EIRR             ­       economic internal rate of return
km               ­       kilometer
m                ­       meter
MOST             ­       Ministry of Surface Transport
NGO              ­       nongovernment organization
NH               ­       national highway
NHAI             ­       National Highways Authority of India
OEM              ­       Operations Evaluation Mission
PCR              ­       project completion report
PPAR             ­       project performance audit report
PWD              ­       Public Works/Highway Department
TA               ­       technical assistance
TNRDC            ­       Tamil Nadu Road Development Company
UP               ­       Uttar Pradesh
VOC              ­       vehicle operating cost


                                    NOTES


         (i)         The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of India and the state
                     governments ends on 31 March.
         (ii)        In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                Operations Evaluation Department, PE-588
                                          CONTENTS

                                                            Page
BASIC DATA                                                     ii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                             iii

MAP                                                            v

I.      BACKGROUND                                             1
        A.    Rationale                                        1
        B.    Formulation                                      1
        C.    Purpose and Outputs                              2
        D.    Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements      2
        E.    Completion and Self-Evaluation                   3
        F.    Operations Evaluation Department Evaluation      4
II.    PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE                 4
        A.    Formulation and Design                           4
        B.    Achievement of Outputs                           5
        C.    Cost and Scheduling                              5
        D.    Procurement and Construction                     5
        E.    Organization and Management                      6
III.    ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE                         7
        A.    Operational Performance                          7
        B.    Performance of the Operating Entity              9
        C.    Economic Reevaluation                           10
        D.    Sustainability                                  10
IV.     ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS              11
        A.    Socioeconomic Impacts                           11
        B.    Environmental Impact                            11
        C.    Impact on Institutions and Policy               11
V.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT                                    12
        A.    Relevance                                       12
        B.    Efficacy                                        12
        C.    Efficiency                                      12
        D.    Sustainability                                  12
        E.    Institutional Development and Other Impacts     13
        F.    Overall Project Rating                          13
        G.    Assessment of ADB and Borrower Performance      13
VI.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                13
        A.    Key Issues for the Future                       13
        B.    Lessons Identified                              14
        C.    Follow-up Actions                               14
APPENDIXES                                                    15
                                                  BASIC DATA
PROJECT PREPARATION/INSTITUTION BUILDING
TA No.    TA Name                        Type                         Person-          Amount          Approval
                                                                      months              ($)             Date
955           Road Improvement                        PPTA             13               75,000         24 Feb 1988
1058          Pavement Management                     ADTA              22             490,000          3 Jan 1989
1059          Expressway System Planning              ADTA              18             260,000          3 Jan 1989
KEY PROJECT DATA ($ million)                              At Appraisal                      At Completion
                                                         September 1988                      March 1999
Total Project Cost                                            253.5                              233.6
Foreign Exchange Cost                                          87.0                               87.3
Local Currency Cost                                           166.5                              146.3
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization                                   198.0                              172.8
ADB Loan Amount/Cancellation                                                                      25.2
KEY DATES                                                    Expected                           Actual
Fact-Finding                                                                                 6-28 Jun 1988
Appraisal                                                                                18 Jul­4 Aug 1988
Loan Negotiations                                                                          12­14 Oct 1988
Board Approval                                                                                 10 Nov 1988
Loan Agreement                                                                                 27 Dec 1988
Loan Effectiveness                                           27 Mar 1989                       10 Apr 1989
First Disbursement                                                                             30 Oct 1990
Project Completion                                              Dec 1993                          Mar 1998
Loan Closing                                                 31 Dec 1994                       16 Feb 1999
Months (effectiveness to completion)                                  58                               109
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (%)                        Appraisal                 PCR                    PPAR
Economic Rate of Return
Entire Project                                            35.8                  22.4                   20.7
 Ballabhgarh­Mathura                                      34.1                  29.6                   28.8
 Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle                                 59.5                  23.3                   19.9
 Hyderabad­Ramagundam                                     25.4                  17.8                   15.2
 Chennai (Madras)­Cuddalore                               26.2                  20.6                   18.5
 Ankola­Hubli                                             24.1                  13.6                   10.8
BORROWER                            India
EXECUTING AGENCIES                  Ministry of Surface Transport; national highway departments of the states of
                                    Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh; Roads and Building Department of
                                    the state of Andhra Pradesh; Public Works Department of the state of Karnataka;
                                    and Highways and Rural Works Department of the state of Tamil Nadu.
MISSION DATA
                 1
Type of Mission                                          No. of Missions                     Person-days
Fact-Finding                                                    1                                 92
Appraisal                                                       1                                 68
Project Administration
   Inception                                                      1                                4
   Review                                                        17                              282
   Special Project Administration                                 2                               12
Project Completion                                                1                               28
                       2
Operations Evaluation                                             1                               45
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PCR = project completion report, PPAR = project performance audit report,
PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.


1
    Some of the review missions covered both the Project and 1041-IND: Second Road Project, for $250 million,
    approved on 30 October 1990, which was implemented in parallel.
2
    The mission comprised Caroline D. Heider, Senior Evaluation Specialist, and Ravinder Khera, Staff Consultant.
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

         The Asian Development Bank approved the first loan to the road sector in India in 1988
to assist the Government in improving selected national and state highways. The objective was
to facilitate faster, cheaper, and more efficient transport services in the project areas, and
thereby contribute to their industrial development. Five separate road sections in five states
were selected (a total of 665 kilometers); two were to be expanded to four lanes to meet
standards for national highways, while the other three were to be improved to state highway
standards. The estimated cost was $253.5 million.

        Implementation took place from April 1989 to March 1998, more than four years longer
than expected. The delay was attributable to (i) inaccurate cost estimates in the feasibility
studies (construction cost in local currency was underestimated to the extent that bids were 20
percent above the allocated resources); (ii) inadequate preparation, such as obtaining right-of-
way and clearing land, which in the case of one road section caused extended legal
proceedings; and (iii) slow performance of contractors. The actual project cost was $233.6
million. The 8 percent saving in dollar terms materialized because cost escalation was more
than offset by the devaluation of the Indian rupee. ADB financed $172.8 million of the actual
project cost; $25.2 million of the loan was canceled.

        The Project was generally implemented as planned, except for the following
adjustments: (i) extending one state highway to link with a national highway, (ii) changing
concrete to bitumen surfacing for parts of one national highway, and (iii) not proceeding with
some realignments of one state highway due to environmental concerns. The riding quality is on
average good and surface roughness is well within the designed level. The pavement conditions
are satisfactory, except for a few isolated portions where excessive bleeding of bitumen, rutting,
and surface cracking were observed. The approaches to some bridges are not smooth, and the
quality and maintenance of drainage is generally inadequate. But overall the project roads are in
satisfactory or very good condition.

        The road influence areas experienced economic growth in various sectors such as
agriculture, industry, and tourism. Additional developments along road corridors included
education centers and religious establishments. Road improvements contributed to these
developments by facilitating short-distance travel (as compared with rail travel), and improving
connections to markets thus increasing incentives for economic activities. However, not all of
these developments can be attributed directly to the Project, as the existing roads were
upgraded to increase capacity (by widening) and improve surface quality (by resurfacing). While
widening of the roads was anticipated to help separate fast- and slow-moving traffic (such as
bullock and camel carts), the change is not substantial.

         The Project was accompanied by two technical assistance (TA) grants to address
institutional issues such as the need for planning tools for state highways and pavement
maintenance (management). These TAs did not create requisite capacities and few traces of
sustained outcomes can be found. The planning tools for state highways were considered to be
studies rather than an effort to build capacity, and the pavement management system required
too much data to be kept updated. In addition, decision makers did not use the study results to
allocate maintenance funds or prioritize maintenance works. Both TAs are rated unsuccessful.
                                                iv

         As the first loan to India's road sector, the Project provided learning experiences that
have been incorporated into more recent projects and procedures. For instance, project
preparation is more closely supervised with the help of international consultants to check
feasibility studies; and supervision consultants are hired in the role of engineer with powers and
responsibilities defined by international standards--they no longer play the role of often-ignored
advisers. However, some of issues remain to be addressed, most prominently those of road
safety, and identification of priorities for and costing of road maintenance works. The
Government is experimenting with performance maintenance contracts, which will require
realistic costing and monitoring. For road safety, the Government's education campaigns need
to be expanded and law enforcement ensured.

        The Project has been relevant to the Government's strategy for the road transport sector
and complements some of the road sections that are being upgraded under a current program.
Project objectives were attained, albeit with serious delays, and the economic rate of return for
the Project as a whole is 20.7 percent in spite of these delays. Only one road section has a rate
of return below the cut-off rate of 12 percent. While maintenance funds have fallen short of the
standard rates applicable, sustainability of the roads still seems assured. Based on these
factors, the Project is rated successful.
                                             I.       BACKGROUND

A.        Rationale

1.        In 1988 India already had an extensive transport network, which comprised rail, road, air,
and water modes of transportation. The extent of the network as a whole and the road network
in particular were considered adequate but in poor condition. Only 30 percent of roads had a
cement concrete or bituminous pavement. While 90 percent of the state highways were paved,
almost all had a width of less than 6 meters (m). Thirty percent of the entire road network had
single-lane roads (3.7 m), and many of the roads had high degrees of road roughness. These
conditions resulted in constraints in terms of capacity, efficiency, transport time, road safety, and
transport cost, affecting freight and passengers transported on the road network. In the late
1980s, road transport accounted for 50 percent of freight and 80 percent of passengers. In
addition to these constraints, the road sector was expected to gain in importance over railways
because of (i) a change in commodity mix, (ii) the distances freight was being transported, and
(iii) liberalization of the road sector. With the increasing importance of the road network
combined with its poor condition, the Government decided to invest in selected sections of the
network. The road sections included in the Project1 were justified on the basis of the increasing
industrial activities in the road influence areas, which required an adequate transportation
system to spur economic growth.

B.        Formulation

2.      The Project was prepared in 1988 under a feasibility study supported by technical
assistance (TA).2 Domestic consultants, hired by the public works departments (PWDs) of the
respective state governments, prepared feasibility studies for a number of subprojects from
which specific road sections were selected (para. 4). One exception to hiring consultants was in
Tamil Nadu where the Highway and Rural Works Department of the state government
completed a feasibility study of the Chennai­Cuddalore road in less than six months. The study
for the Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle road in Andhra Pradesh (AP) was completed in less than
two months. In other cases, the detailed design was prepared in parallel with and completed at
the same time as the feasibility study. The Ministry of Surface Transport (MOST)3 scrutinized
some of the feasibility studies and missions of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) commented
on the studies. However, this limited time frame combined with the inexperience of domestic
consultants and state PWDs adversely affected the quality of feasibility studies, detailed
designs, and overall planning. For instance, aspects pertaining to the actual status of land,
existing obstructions and trees, environmental and social concerns, construction costs, traffic
data, and economic criteria were not adequately addressed. As such, the quality of the Project
at entry was inadequate. Based on the lessons learned, the feasibility and detailed design for
the subsequent project4 was scrutinized by dedicated international consultants on behalf of
MOST with better results.




1
    Loan 918-IND: Road Improvement Project, for $198 million, approved on 10 November 1988.
2
    TA 955-IND: Road Improvement, for $75,000, approved on 24 February 1988.
3
    The ministry has been subdivided and the part responsible for road transport renamed the Ministry of Road Transport
    and Highways.
4
    Loan 1041-IND: Second Road Project, for $250 million, approved on 30 October 1990.
                                                      2


C.        Purpose and Outputs

3.       According to the appraisal report, "the Project is designed to improve selected national
and state highway sections that constitute important infrastructure support facilities for industrial
activities in five States, mainly by strengthening existing pavements and widening carriageways
wherever needed for present and projected traffic." These improvements were expected to
reduce transport constraints and facilitate faster, cheaper, and more efficient transport services
in the project areas.

4.        The planned project outputs were (see the map on page v)

          (i)     four-laning and strengthening national highway 2 (NH 2) from Ballabhgarh to
                  Mathura (111 kilometers [km], of which 9 km were four lanes at the time of
                  appraisal) in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (UP);

          (ii)    four-laning and strengthening NH 5 from Anakapalle to Visakhapatnam (40 km),
                  and improving the existing Anakapalle bypass (6 km) AP;

          (iii)   improving the Hyderabad­Ramagundam road (216 km) in AP;

          (iv)    improving the Ankola­Hubli road (132 km) in Karnataka;

          (v)     improving the Chennai (Madras)­Cuddalore road (160 km) of the East Coast Road
                  in Tamil Nadu; and

          (vi)    providing equipment for quality control, pavement evaluation, and road
                  maintenance for the PWDs of the five states concerned with the Project.

5.     The project scope was not changed significantly during implementation, although
modifications were made to a number of the outputs (para. 14).

6.      Two TAs accompanied the Project. The aim of the first5 was to build state capacity to
improve the use of maintenance funds by introducing a computerized pavement management
system. This TA provided inputs for developing the computerized system and for training staff.
The second TA6 aimed to (i) increase MOST's capacity to plan, manage, and operate
expressways; (ii) develop an analytical system for assessing the likely diversion of traffic to
specific expressway segments, including an assessment of the impact of toll rates; and (iii)
develop an economic evaluation model for establishing traffic benchmarks for alternative
options of improving traffic corridors.

D.        Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

7.      The total project cost was estimated at $253.5 million, with a foreign exchange
component of $87.0 million (34.3 percent of the total) and a local currency component of $166.5
million equivalent (65.7 percent). The ADB loan of $198.0 million was to finance 78.1 percent of
the total project cost, while the Government was to fund the remaining 21.9 percent. The actual
project cost at completion was $233.6 million. ADB funded 74 percent, or $172.8 million; of this,


5
     TA 1058-IND: Pavement Management System for State Roads in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, for $610,000,
     approved on 3 January 1989.
6
     TA 1059-IND: Expressway System Planning Study, for $270,000, approved on 3 January 1989.
                                                            3


$85.6 million financed local currency costs. The balance of $25.2 million was canceled. The 8
percent cost underrun was attributable to underused contingencies.7 Appendix 1 provides a
summary of estimated and actual project costs. The Project was the first loan to MOST. Since
approval of the loan in late 1988 and the associated TAs in early 1989, the road sector in India
has received five loans and 21 TAs.

8.     MOST, the overall Executing Agency (EA), established a project implementation cell at
the central level within the department responsible for roads and highways; it was headed by a
chief engineer. MOST was also responsible for the national highway components of the Project
(Ballabhgarh­Mathura and Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle) for which it appointed chief engineers
in Haryana, UP, and AP, for procurement and distribution of the equipment, and for the TAs.
State highway components were executed by the (i) Roads and Buildings Department of AP
(Hyderabad­Ramagundam), (ii) Highway and Rural Works Department of Tamil Nadu
(Chennai­Cuddalore), and (iii) PWD of Karnataka (Ankola­Hubli). Each of the state
departments established a project implementation unit to supervise construction. The units were
headed by a project director of the rank of superintendent engineer (senior highway engineer)
nominated by each state for its stretch of the project road. The directors were assisted by
resident engineer(s) who worked alongside the consultants (para. 18) hired to assist in
implementing the Project. The chief engineers from the states had administrative functions.

E.        Completion and Self-Evaluation

9.      The project completion report (PCR) was prepared by the Infrastructure, Energy, and
Financial Sectors Department (West) and circulated to the Board of Directors in 1999. The PCR
observed delays in bidding, contract award, and construction, which were largely attributed to
the performance of the EAs, particularly at the state level, and noted conflicts between the
supervision consultants and the EAs. Environmental problems were noted in the PCR, as some
trees had to be cut along the Chennai­Cuddalore section, where, according to the PCR, minor
realignments were introduced to improve the geometric design. Nongovernment organizations
(NGOs) protested the cutting of trees, taking the case through the legal system. Eventually,
implementation resumed and the PCR commented that the issue could have been managed
better. The PCR noted that (i) the Project was built as planned, except for minor variations to
some of the components for which detailed descriptions were provided; and (ii) the quality of the
roads was as per design with no major pavement defects. The PCR also reported that the TAs
were implemented as planned and produced satisfactory results, but provided limited
information on capacities built and the potential for outcomes being sustained. The economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated for each component and resulted in rates lower
than appraised due to increases in construction costs, delays, and lower than expected traffic
counts. Nonetheless, none of the components had an EIRR of less than 12 percent and the
Project as a whole achieved an EIRR of 22.4 percent. The Project was rated generally
successful.

10.      The PCR adequately reflected the achievements and shortfalls of the Project, although
its assessment of the results of the TAs was too optimistic (paras. 36 and 37). The PCR
identified important lessons learned, some of which have been put into practice. For instance,
construction supervision consultants are now used as engineers in their capacity defined by


7
    In Indian rupee terms, the cost was underestimated at design; this resulted in lengthy negotiations with contractors,
    and affected the rate of return of project components. In dollar terms, these cost increases were offset by the
    devaluation of the Indian rupee against the US dollar.
                                                          4


international standards rather than advisers (para. 18).8 Project experience also demonstrated
the need for public participation and involvement of NGOs to avoid disruptions in
implementation.9

F.      Operations Evaluation Department Evaluation

11.     This project performance audit report (PPAR) assesses the Project's relevance, efficacy,
efficiency, sustainability, and institutional and other development impacts. The PPAR represents
the findings of the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) that visited the Project in December
2001. The PPAR is based on discussions with officials working for the EAs and other relevant
offices, people living in selected villages situated along the project roads, staff of multilateral and
bilateral agencies involved in the transport sector and of ADB, the analysis of documentation,
and visits to sites. The OEM inspected the entire length of the project roads. Comments were
sought from stakeholders from the Government, EAs, and within ADB and reflected in the final
PPAR.

                   II.      PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE

A.      Formulation and Design

12.     At the time of appraisal, the rationale for the Project was, at least in part, based on the
aim to contribute to the industrialization and economic growth of India, which were shared aims
of the Government and ADB. Road sections were to be selected to overcome transport capacity
shortcomings along certain routes and to support ongoing industrialization in the road influence
area. In addition to these criteria, ADB financing was to be provided to a number of states to
provide equal access to external funding. The actual selection of roads was influenced by the
submission of feasibility studies by the states (para. 2) before the deadline for proposing road
sections for ADB financing. At the time, ADB did not have a country operational strategy or a
road sector strategy. The individual road sections did not form a coherent whole under the
umbrella of the loan, but were selected for equity rather than economic reasons. The
involvement of a large number of EAs (necessary because each section fell under the
responsibility of different agencies and because of the geographic distance it involved) had
several effects. First, the impact of the Project as a whole is dispersed across several parts of
India without creating synergy effects, and second, coordination and supervision by MOST and
ADB was more time-consuming and costly than if the road stretch had been contiguous. Recent
ADB loans each cover one continuous stretch of road rather than a mix of different sections.

13.    Still, each of the road sections can be justified in its own context. The Ballabhgarh­
Matura and the Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle roads became part of the "golden quadrilateral" and
thus made a small contribution to the Prime Minister's National Highway Development Project.10
The Ankola­Hubli road links with the Mumbai­Chennai connection (NH 4) of the golden
quadrilateral, parts of which are presently being upgraded with ADB assistance,11 providing an
additional link to other parts of Karnataka. The Chennai­Cuddalore road is an important link to

8
   Loan No. 1274: National Highways Project, for $245 million, approved on 29 November 1993.
9
   ADB helped prepare environmental guidelines through TA 2002-IND: Environmental Management of Road Projects,
   for $240,000, approved on 29 November 1993.
10
   This project, estimated to cost Rs580 billion, comprises (i) the golden quadrilateral of 5,851 km connecting Delhi,
   Kolkata, Chennai, and Mumbai (estimated cost of Rs250 billion) for completion by end 2003, (ii) 7,300 km of North­
   South (Kashmir­Kanayakumari) and East­West (Silchar­Porbandar) corridors (estimated cost of Rs290 billion) for
   completion by end 2007, and (iii) port connectivity and link roads (estimated cost of Rs40 billion).
11
   Loan 1839-IND: Western Transport Corridor Project, for $240 million, approved on 20 September 2001.
                                                            5


developments along the coast, and the Pondicherry­Cuddalore section of this road has been
integrated into the national highway system. The Hyderabad­Ramagundam road does not
feature among the core network of state highways identified by the state government in
cooperation with the World Bank. However, it links with NH 16, an extension decided during
project implementation (para. 14), and with a state highway upgraded with World Bank
assistance.

B.         Achievement of Outputs

14.     Project outputs (para. 4) generally were produced as planned with the following
modifications. The Hyderabad­Ramagundam road was extended by 10.5 km to link with NH 16,
parts of the Ballabhgarh­Mathura road were finished with bituminous concrete rather than
concrete, and some realignments on the Chennai­Cuddalore road could not be implemented for
environmental reasons. The PCR documents and explains these deviations from original plans.
Bridges and culverts were strengthened as per design, although in some cases the approaches
to the bridges are not smooth. Drainage facilities are generally inadequate, either lacking or
overgrown, and poorly maintained. Hard shoulders were provided at varying width, and not
always with a hard surface. Service roads were built in few locations. Their use for other
purposes (e.g., repair shops) minimizes their utility for easing traffic congestion in town areas.
Equipment was provided with certain modifications in numbers and distribution to the five states.
In addition to the original specifications, asphalt content gauges were procured and distributed.
Appendix 2 provides details on the road improvements financed under the Project.

C.         Cost and Scheduling

15.     In dollar terms, the actual project cost was 8 percent lower than estimated at appraisal,
although the cost of civil works and right-of-way exceeded original estimates by 16 and 47
percent (Appendix 1). These increases were well within the limits of project contingencies. The
cost overrun was more pronounced in local currency because of higher base prices, price
escalation, and exchange rate movements of foreign costs to local contractors, but were off-set
by the devaluation of the rupee. The underestimated costs of works affected the schedule for
awarding contracts. Since bids exceeded estimated costs by more than 20 percent, government
and ADB approvals had to be sought to revise allocations. Combined with lack of experience
with ADB procedures, inexperience of state EAs in managing contracts, and environmental and
right-of-way issues that were not resolved during project design, these factors resulted in major
delays of more than four years for the Project as a whole. Some road sections were completed
with less delay. The causes for the delays and solutions to mitigate them are documented in the
Project Administration Study,12 summarized in Appendix 3.

D.         Procurement and Construction

16.     ADB's Guidelines for Procurement were followed. However, being the first road project in
India, the EAs, especially at the state level, were not conversant with international standards
and ADB guidelines. Long delays, therefore, occurred at each stage of the procurement cycle
(i.e., prequalification, preparation of bid documents including design and specifications,
evaluation of bids, and award of contracts). On the government side, the multitude of


12
     ADB's Project Administration Strategy Study in was carried out by the Indian Resident Mission in 1997-1998 to
     identify issues involved in implementation delays, their causes, and solutions to mitigate them. The study included
     most of the project roads, as well as project roads under the Second Road Project (footnote 4) and ADB-financed
     projects in the power and port sectors.
                                                             6


government agencies involved resulted in lack of ownership and too many approval stages
during construction and the procurement of equipment.

17.      Six contractors were engaged for the five road components comprising 15 contract
packages. The contractor for Ballabhgarh­Mathura did not have adequate concrete paving
trains, matching concrete placer, and concrete batching plants to cater for simultaneous work in
both states (Haryana and UP), and did not augment available resources in spite of being
requested to do so from the start. This resulted in reduction of the original scope of concrete
pavement works in the UP stretch of NH 2 (para. 14) to avoid further delay in completing works.
Although in all cases the quality of work was found to be satisfactory, the fact that all the project
roads were inordinately delayed, even with reduced scope, points to an unsatisfactory
performance of the contractors. On analysis, the various contributing reasons were (i)
insufficient importance given to prequalification of contractors,13 (ii) unsatisfactory site
management (in some cases due to the presence of consultants, contractors did not even have
qualified engineers at the site), (iii) inadequate financial management, (iv) poor performance of
contractors' plant and equipment, (v) inability to procure materials and deploy adequate
resources when required, and (vi) the subcontracting of works to inexperienced and
unsupervised subcontractors. This poor performance resulted in termination of one contract
package (replaced with the contract award to another contractor) and recommendations to
terminate another.

18.      The construction supervision consultants were to ensure that construction quality was
consistent with the specifications, while the day-to-day construction supervision/inspection
rested with the PWDs. Under this arrangement, the role of domestic and international
consultants was advisory and the intended benefits from engaging them could not be fully
utilized. MOST lacked experience in implementing conditions of contract as stipulated by the
Federation Internationale des Ingenieurs Conseils, and in many instances ignored the advice of
the consultants. This was corrected under the National Highways Project (footnote 8) as the use
of advisory consultants was dropped and the supervisory consultants were engaged as "the
engineer" under the international federation's conditions of contract. Notwithstanding the
limitations, the performance of the domestic consultants was generally satisfactory. They were
able to (i) monitor the Project, prepare detailed monthly reports highlighting problems resulting
in implementation delays, recommend ways to accelerate progress, and update cost estimates;
(ii) provide key input to redesign pavement in some cases; (iii) assist in the planning and
construction management of civil works; (iv) advise state PWDs on the contractor's claims; and
(v) certify the quality and quantity of the civil works. Each domestic consultant had an
international consulting firm as an associate, with limited inputs pertaining to project
management. The firm provided concrete (rigid) pavement and bituminous (flexible) pavement
expertise, as well as materials and contract administration support. The international
consultants also updated contractors and domestic consultants on current knowledge on
technical aspects of construction work.

E.         Organization and Management

19.    During implementation, the concept of administration and management of projects of this
magnitude and geographic spread was not well established. It was and continues to be a
learning exercise. However, being the first project of its kind, lessons were learned and many

13
     Some of the prequalified domestic contractors did not have sufficient resources to allocate for the contracts awarded.
     One of them was simultaneously involved in six road projects pertaining to the World Bank and the Project and thus
     had resources thinly deployed on each.
                                                           7


adopted through constant interaction of the ADB review missions, resident mission staff, and
consultants. The project implementation cell within MOST (para. 8), established at the
suggestion of ADB, coordinated with various agencies. However, MOST had difficulty complying
with covenants concerning land acquisition, separate accounting, and timely submission of
audited financial statements.14 The multitude of agencies involved in project implementation
affected ownership and coordination, causing delays in acquiring land and securing right-of-
way. In addition, other agencies such as the revenue department and those providing services
such as electricity, telephone, and water supply, do not give priority to implementing externally
aided road projects, but their cooperation is essential for procuring land and for identifying pipes
and underground cables that would affect road works. Some of these activities continued for up
to two years beyond the original scheduled completion of the Project itself, e.g., Hyderabad­
Ramagundam road. Having learned the lesson, the Government amended the land acquisition
act applicable to national highways, and state governments are considering similar changes to
state legislation.

20.     ADB conducted a total of 19 review and special administration missions comprising 294
person-days. These missions reviewed other loans including TAs that MOST was implementing
simultaneously. This appears to have been an effective use of ADB staff time and resources.
Active ADB intervention helped the EAs, which were not familiar with ADB procedures, avoid
even more delays in engagement of consultants and procurement, and helped the Project to
move forward in spite of implementation problems. Site visits were conducted and problems
were dealt with as they arose. ADB recommendations on technical aspects of the asphalt
pavement resulted in substantial savings in long-term maintenance costs and were instrumental
in bringing about a change of specifications after due deliberations by experts. The new
specifications reduce the quantity of tack coat,15 prevent early bleeding of pavement,16 enable
longer life of pavement, and lead to maintenance cost savings.

                            III.     ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE

A.       Operational Performance

         1.       Traffic Carried

21.     Based on the OEM's observations, the volume of traffic is slightly higher than at project
completion and the composition of traffic has more or less stayed the same. At appraisal the mix
of slow and fast-moving traffic on the road and its impact on traveling speed and road safety
was identified as a problem. The Project was intended to help segregate traffic, in particular
nonmotorized vehicles from motorized vehicles. However, such segregation has not happened
on any of the project roads. The roads are used by motorized vehicles, including tractors; by
nonmotorized vehicles, including bicycles and bullock carts; and by herders who drive their
cattle, buffalo, and goats along the road. The only notable stretch where some segregation
takes places is along the Chennai­Pondicherry route where about one third of the road




14
   Issues of separate accounting and of submitting audited financial statements were resolved during project
   implementation.
15
   Tack coat is the primer applied to substrates, concrete slabs, or stabilized base courses to provide good adhesion for
   the next layer. Cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsions are generally used as tack coat.
16
   Bleeding is migration of bitumen to the surface of the pavement.
                                                            8


shoulders have been resurfaced with concrete pavement blocks.17 The different color (light
gray) and rougher surface discourages use by motorized vehicles, except for emergency
situations, while bicycles and pedestrians were observed to stay mostly on the shoulders.

22.      Road improvements have not necessarily contributed to improving road safety. The
number of road accidents, injuries, and fatalities in the five states increased between 1985 and
1998, often doubling; but the fatality rate (number of fatalities per 1,000 registered vehicles)
actually dropped by more than 50 percent in most of the states (Appendix 4).18 On project roads
that were expanded to four lanes, traffic moves in both directions on both sides of the median at
intersections and in town areas. In a number of areas, the median has been broken to allow
traffic, including tractors, to cross the road in places that were not designed for this. In many
instances, the middle line and markings for the shoulder are missing, road signs are absent, and
no reflectors are installed, the absence of which adds to inappropriate safety standards.
However, most of the accidents have to be attributed to irresponsible driving, due to a lack of
driving skills, inattention, and fatigue. These and other shortcomings in road safety in general
are discussed in another evaluation.19

         2.       Technical Standards and Current Conditions

23.     In general, the project roads are in satisfactory or very good condition. The riding quality
is on average good and surface roughness is well within the designed level (estimated at 2,000-
3,000 millimeters/km). Overall, pavement conditions are satisfactory, except for a few isolated
portions where excessive bleeding of bitumen, rutting, and surface cracking were observed.
Potholes were generally filled, except in very few areas where maintenance needs to be
undertaken. The OEM was not able to establish conditions of the Chennai­Cuddalore road as
built under the loan, because since January 2001 a public-private concessionaire, the Tamil
Nadu Road Development Company Limited (TNRDC), has been operating and maintaining the
road. TNRDC has resurfaced more than 80 percent of the road, with plans to complete
remaining stretches within a few months. These works may not have been necessary from the
technical point of view; according to the PCR resurfacing should have been due after eight and
not six years. Nevertheless, the resurfacing was considered necessary to provide better service
to customers, who otherwise might be unwilling to pay a toll. In many cases, drainage systems
are overgrown or do not exist. Only along the Ankola­Hubli road are there stretches of drains
with a hard surface. Along the same road, a stretch of some 24 km suffered serious damage
(bituminous bleeding and rutting along a mountainous bending road stretch), possibly due to
overloaded vehicles. The condition of the roads stands out positively in comparison with
adjacent roads, including some of the national highways they connect with. Appendix 5 provides
details on each of the road sections.




17
   Under the Project, earthen shoulders were provided on this road section. Since the beginning of 2001, the road has
   been contracted to a concessionaire who decided to repave parts of the shoulders, choosing pavement blocks as a
   technically viable option apparently not more costly than bitumen for around one third of the road stretch. The
   remaining sections are about one third bitumen and one third earthen shoulders.
18
   At appraisal, traffic accident statistics were provided for the five states as a whole and not for the project roads as
   such.
19
   ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance in Road Safety.
   Manila.
                                                9


       3.     Maintenance

24.    After the defect liability period of one year for which the contractor was responsible for
maintenance, no major maintenance was required on the project roads, and regular
maintenance has been satisfactory. Maintenance allocations varied from Rs5,000 per km for the
Hyderabad­Ramagundam road to about Rs20,000 per km for the Ankola­Hubli road (both are
two-lane roads). For the maintenance of the UP stretch of the Ballabhgarh­Mathura road, the
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) sanctioned Rs64 million for 2001­2002 to improve
road safety, bridges, and approaches to bridges over railway lines. These varying allocations
were made on the basis of norms and available funds rather than of actual requirements
determined using methods such as the pavement management system (para. 36).

B.     Performance of the Operating Entity

       1.     Finance

25.     At appraisal the road sector generated $5.3 billion per annum from taxes, fees, and tolls.
Only tolls and part of the fuel tax were contributed to the Central Road Fund, which was a
dedicated fund for road maintenance. An increase in contributions to the fund by increasing the
fuel tax share, which was decreed in 1988, was expected to yield a total annual funding level of
$229 million equivalent at current exchange rates, 36 percent of which would be allocated to the
center and 64 percent for state expenditure. The total road sector expenditure at appraisal was
estimated at $1.9 billion equivalent at current exchange rates, funded from the general budget,
tolls, and the Central Road Fund. In 2000, the fund was revamped by establishing the
Dedicated Road Fund, again increasing its resource base by adding a new excise duty. The
new fund is expected to generate $1.3 billion equivalent per year at the then current exchange
rate. This fund is largely used for capital investments in the road sector, although funds can also
be used for maintenance.

26.     Expenditure for road maintenance is allocated from the central and state budgets, but
allocations reportedly fall short of requirements by around 40 percent. However, these
requirements are established on the basis of standard costing rates, which have been used for
more than 20 years without verification of how much they reflect actual maintenance costs. As
discussed in para. 23, the project roads are in good condition, implying that funds were
available and adequate for maintaining them, even though below standard costing rates.

       2.     Institutions

27.    The institutional framework for managing the sector has evolved since project appraisal.
MOST was restructured and part of it now forms the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
which is entirely focused on road transport and highways at the national level. It is responsible
for two of the previous state highway sections, namely the Ankola­Hubli and Pondicherry­
Cuddalore stretches, as they are being reclassified from state to national highways. In addition,
NHAI was established to be dedicated to national highways. It plays a major role in building and
managing specific national highways, in particular those under the Prime Minister's National
Highway Development Project (para. 13), which places the Ballabhgarh­Mathura and
Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle roads under its authority. The Chennai­Pondicherry road has been
contracted out to TNRDC (para. 23). Of all the project roads, only the Hyderabad­Ramagundam
road continues with the state government of AP.
                                                           10


28.    These institutions are increasingly moving to using maintenance performance contracts,
which require the private contractor to maintain the road at specified standards. NHAI is
introducing the corridor management concept, which will affect the Ballabhgarh­Mathura and
Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle roads. The concessionaire will collect tolls on these roads, while
being responsible for maintaining the roads at an agreed standard. An eight-year operational
maintenance contract is being finalized for the UP portion of the Ballabhgarh­Mathura road. The
concession given to TNRDC for the Chennai­Pondicherry route requires the concessionaire to
maintain the roads at specified standards, while giving it the right to toll the road and retain toll
revenue. TNRDC expects to break even after 15 years.20 TNRDC issued a six-year
maintenance contract with performance standards and penalties if these standards are not met.
A similar contract is being tried for a World Bank project in AP, and, if institutionalized, may
apply to the Hyderabad­Ramagundam road over the longer term. Under this contract,
Rs25,000/km are allocated for ordinary maintenance, while periodic maintenance (i.e.,
resurfacing) is planned based on actual requirements. Because these concessions are in the
experimental phase, their effectiveness in keeping roads well maintained cannot be assessed.

C.         Economic Reevaluation

29.    The EIRR has been reestimated following the same methodology as used at project
completion, and updating traffic counts, traffic growth projections, and vehicle operating costs.
All benefits and costs are expressed in 2001 constant prices. The EIRR has decreased in
comparison with estimates at appraisal and completion because of (i) changes in maintenance
cost (revised standards in publications of the Indian Road Congress), (ii) changes in traffic
growth rates, and (iii) an increase in construction cost and extended implementation period.

30.     The additional cost for upgrading the Chennai­Cuddalore road (para. 23) has not been
included in the EIRR calculation, because requisite data could not be obtained. The EIRR for
this road section and for the Project as a whole is therefore higher than it should be. The low
rate of return for the Ankola­Hubli road is explained by lower than expected traffic flows. The
EIRRs for each section and the Project as a whole are provided in Table 1. The detailed EIRR
calculation is in Appendix 6.

                            Table 1: Comparison of Economic Rates of Return
                                                           (%)

Road Section                                  Appraisal                 Completion                  Evaluation
Ballabhgarh­Mathura                              34.1                       29.6                       28.8
Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle                         59.5                       23.3                       19.9
Hyderabad­Ramagundam                             25.4                       17.8                       15.2
Chennai­Cuddalore                                26.2                       20.6                       18.5
Ankola­Hubli                                     24.1                       13.6                       10.8
Entire Project                                   35.8                       22.4                       20.7

D.         Sustainability

31.    The Project is sustainable from a technical point of view. Financially, the new
performance maintenance contracts will have to prove whether arrangements other than purely



20
     The portion of the ADB loan for this road section was not passed on to the concessionaire, but made as a government
     contribution.
                                                11


government-financed maintenance of roads are effective, although the Government will likely
keep maintaining roads at whatever standards can be afforded.

                IV.    ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

A.     Socioeconomic Impacts

32.     The OEM collected data to assess socioeconomic developments in the road influence
area. Baseline information in the appraisal report was limited to basic information on industrial
establishments and their output, and some indicators for agriculture production and tourism.
Data collected by the OEM indicates that most industrial and agriculture activities expanded in
terms of number of establishments, output, and/or yields. In addition, the OEM noted a number
of other activities that developed in the road influence area, such as tourism sites, education
centers, and religious establishments. In many cases, the project roads contributed to the
expansion of economic activities and facilitated travel over shorter distances (rather than rail
transportation). However, not all of these developments can be attributed to transportation
alone. Also, the appraisal report did not contain baseline data for social services or poverty
indicators. The OEM, therefore, did not collect information on these indicators as the project
impact (change as a result of the Project) could not be established. Appendix 7 summarizes the
observed development impacts.

33.    Transportation service charges were not recorded at the time of project appraisal or
completion. However, generally, the prices of transportation has been increasing and little
evidence is available to indicate that vehicle operating cost savings are being passed on to
users of transportation services.

B.     Environmental Impact

34.     Originally the Project did not anticipate any direct environmental impact. However, during
implementation major problems arose along the Chennai­Cuddalore section, where tree cutting
took place and resulted in protests of NGOs, which filed petitions against these practices. Court
orders were issued to suspend works until the Ministry of Environment and Forests provided an
environmental clearance, which was done in February 1994. However, the clearance was
revoked a year later when conditions attached to the clearance were not complied with. As a
result, ADB suspended loan disbursements between April 1996 and November 1997, when
eventually all conditions were met. These problems resulted in delays in project implementation
and changes in the alignment and construction standards of the road section (para. 14). Without
evidence on the preproject situation, the extent of environmental damage is difficult to
reconstruct. The PCR reported that "some trees" were cut, while according to other sources as
many as 5,000 trees were felled. Previously cleared road stretches are not denuded of
vegetation, although current vegetation is just about 10 years old (instead of previous mature
trees) and set back at a reasonable distance of about 5 m from the shoulder. The current
concessionaire is realigning the road in several sections (as foreseen under the Project). The
local population apparently accepts this, even though tree cutting is involved.

C.     Impact on Institutions and Policy

35.   As the first assistance to the road sector in India, the Project was the starting point of an
extended policy dialogue that has continued since its approval. Achievements in institutional
and policy reform are documented in the report and recommendation of the President of a
                                                12


recently approved loan (footnote 11). In addition, the Project generated lessons (para. 19) that
have been incorporated in design and implementation over the past years.

36.     The more explicit institutional goals pursued with the help of the two TAs (footnotes 5
and 6), namely introducing a pavement management system and an expressway management
system were not attained. The pavement management system was piloted only in Tamil Nadu
instead of two states. The basic data was collected and input into a computerized system
installed at a computer unit of the Highway Research Station. A second round of data was
collected in 1996, but not processed on the computer. Presently, the program is not installed or
used, although staff present at the computer unit were well aware of the program and had
operating manuals and input data at hand. Reasons given for not utilizing the program were its
time-consuming and costly requirements for data, and because results generated with the
program were not used in decision making. ADB and the World Bank have made similar
attempts in several states, but progress in finding acceptance of a pavement management
system is slow. Appendix 8 provides details on the TA.

37.     The TA for developing an expressway management system generated some reports and
an economic model that was used/referred to in a number of ADB reports. However, a system
for prioritizing the selection of highways is not in place other than using traffic counts and data
on capacity utilization. The choice of the golden quadrilateral, and the north-south and east-west
corridors (para. 13) was based on the need to connect main centers across the country, thereby
providing transport axis. The entire stretch will be four lanes regardless of whether some
sections warrant two, four, or six lanes. For the economic assessment of individual road
investments, the World Bank's highway development model is in common use. More details on
the TA are in Appendix 9.

                               V.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT

A.     Relevance

38.    The Project contributed to the Government's efforts to improve the road network in the
country and facilitated, to some extent, the shift from rail to road transport. Several sections
complement the core network now being upgraded under the Prime Minister's National Highway
Development Project. The Project is rated relevant.

B.     Efficacy

39.    The Project's objective was attained as transport constraints were eased and vehicle
operating cost savings realized. Therefore, the Project is rated highly efficacious.

C.     Efficiency

40.     The EIRR for the Project as a whole is 20.7 percent in spite of the major implementation
delay. However, one road section falls below the 12 percent cut-off rate. The Project is rated
efficient.

D.     Sustainability

41.   The project roads have been relatively well maintained in spite of constraints on
maintenance funds. New arrangements for performance maintenance contracts could be a
                                               13


suitable way to ensure the sustainability of investments in the project roads. The Project's
sustainability is rated likely.

E.     Institutional Development and Other Impacts

42.    Institutional development impacts were incidental in that the EAs learned from the
mistakes made during project implementation. Planned institutional development impacts to be
brought about with the help of the two TAs did not materialize. Other economic changes that
took place in the road influence areas can be attributed only in part to the Project. Both TAs are
rated unsuccessful, and overall the Project is rated as having modest institutional and other
development impacts.

F.     Overall Project Rating

43.    Based on the above criteria, the Project is rated successful.

G.     Assessment of ADB and Borrower Performance
44.    The Project, being the first to the road sector in India, was a learning experience for the
EAs, which could have handled some situations more efficiently and effectively. For instance,
land acquisition, right-of-way, and environmental issues could have been dealt with in advance
to avoid delays. Lessons have been learned from the experience with the Project (para. 49) and
changes introduced in procedures. ADB supervised the Project adequately (para. 20), although
more care could have been exercised in selecting road sections to be included in the Project
and in anticipating environmental issues.

                  VI.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.     Key Issues for the Future

45.    The ambitious Government plans (para. 13) for expanding the national highway system
raise some key issues that concern the project roads and the network as a whole. While some
are currently being tackled, they require further attention.

46.     To finance the recurrent cost of road maintenance, the Government is introducing a toll
system and performance maintenance contracts (para. 28). However, the cost per km of road
maintenance varies considerably and calls for a more systematic way of assessing the need for
and cost of road maintenance works. The Government would be well advised to analyze current
practices to avoid issuing contracts that may increase rather than rationalize maintenance costs.
Otherwise, the current questionable practice of budgeting for road maintenance (para. 26)
would be extended to a different contractual arrangement without reaping benefits that a
performance contract could bring about. In addition, mechanisms have to be put into place for
monitoring the performance of maintenance contractors to ensure that performance standards
are met.

47.    Capacity for identifying the need for and costing of road maintenance works must still be
developed. Such a system would be helpful to the Government for maintenance works
undertaken by its own departments as well as for costing the performance maintenance
contracts. Such a system was planned under one of the TAs (footnote 5), but expectations were
not met. To be more successful in building requisite capacity, the existing decision-making
processes (including inherent political pressures) must be understood, and systems identified
                                                14


that will improve decisions made. To manage political influences, decision makers need to be (i)
involved in designing management tools, and (ii) trained to understand how these systems can
support the decision-making process. The design of management systems should consider from
the outset how much labor/time can be spent on data collection and processing, and optimize
resource inputs versus expected outcomes.

48.    In addition, the following issues should be considered in future road projects:

       (i)     Truck/bus terminals for parking and vehicle repairs should form a part of the
               project scope to improve traffic flow and to avoid excessive traffic congestion as
               witnessed at the Haryana­UP border (Ballabhgarh­Mathura road).

       (ii)    Construction costs should be estimated on the basis of market prices rather than
               the PWD's schedule of rates, and should be checked rigorously for accuracy.

       (iii)   Hard shoulders should be built as specified.

       (iv)    Road safety measures should be implemented on an urgent basis. These should
               include extensive training and awareness building of drivers (in particular
               professional drivers) and stricter law enforcement.

B.     Lessons Identified

49.    Being the first project of its kind in India, the experiences gained have been well utilized
for ongoing ADB and World Bank-funded road projects. The lessons include

       (i)     more detailed and systematic project preparation and checking by supervision
               consultants before commencement of works, as done under one of ADB's more
               recent projects (footnote 8);

       (ii)    contract award only after land acquisition, removal of obstructions, and necessary
               clearances from various government department and ministries to ensure good
               start-up;

       (iii)   effective use of construction supervision consultants as the engineer according to
               internationally agreed standards (para. 18) and not as advisors; and

       (iv)    involvement of NGOs in environmental concerns (para. 10).

50.    A major technical issue that was adjusted during implementation and adopted for other
projects entailed reducing the quantity of tack coat application. This resulted in cost savings in
construction and maintenance, and helped avoid excessive bleeding of bitumen, leading to
longer road life.

C.     Follow-up Actions

51.    No immediate follow-up actions to the Project are necessary.
                                           15




                                     APPENDIXES


Number   Title                                          Page     Cited on
                                                               (page, para.)

1        Summary of Project Cost                         16        3, 7

2        Road Improvements Financed under the Project    17        5, 14

3        Summary of the Project Administration Study     19        5, 15

4        Traffic Accidents                               22        8, 22

5        Road Conditions at Appraisal and Evaluation     23        8, 23

6        Economic Analysis                               24       10, 30

7        Socioeconomic Development Impacts               33       11, 32

8        Pavement Management System for State Roads      38       12, 36
         in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu (TA No.
         1058-IND)

9        Expressway System Planning (TA No. 1059-        40       12, 37
         IND)
                                                                     16
                                                                                                                            Appendix 1

                                                SUMMARY OF PROJECT COST
                                                   ($'000 Current Prices)

                                  Appraisal Estimate           FX as               Actual                FX as     Percentage Change
                                                                % of                                      % of
   Component                     FX         LC        Total     total     FX        LC       Total        total    FX        LC       Total

   Right-Of-Way                        0      5.69     5.69      0%            0     8.38      8.38        0%           0      47%      47%

   Civil Works                    44.79     115.36 160.15       28%       57.34 128.15 185.49             31%      28%         11%      16%

   Equipment                       1.00           0    1.00 100%           0.86          0     0.86 100%          ­14%            0    ­14%

   Consulting Services                 0      3.92     3.92      0%        0.20      3.77      3.97        5%           0      ­4%       1%

   Incremental                         0      8.36     8.36      0%            0     6.04      6.04        0%           0     ­28%     -28%
   Operation and
   Administration
   Contingencies                  10.31      33.17 43.48        24%            0         0           0       0    ­100% ­100% ­100%

      Subtotal                    56.10     166.50 222.60       25%       58.40 146.34 204.74             29%       4%        ­12%      ­8%

   Interest During                30.90           0 30.90 100%            28.90          0    28.90 100%           ­6%            0     ­6%
   Construction
      Total                       87.00     166.50 253.50       34%       87.30 146.34 233.64             37%       0%        ­12%      ­8%
FX = foreign exchange, LC = local currency, TA = technical assistance.
Source: ADB appraisal reports and Project completion report.
                                                           17
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 1

                    ROAD IMPROVEMENTS FINANCED UNDER THE PROJECT


Planned At Project Appraisal                                Evaluation Observations
1988                                                        2001
                                                            About 152 km of NH stretches have been four laned, (i)
All national highway (NH) sections except the               111 km from Ballabgarh to Mathura as part of the NH 2
Anakapalle bypass (6 kilometers [km]) will be widened       in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, and (ii) 41
from two to four lanes and the existing pavement will be    km from Visakhapatnam to Anakapalle as a part of NH 5
strengthened.                                               in Andhra Pradesh. In addition, a 6 km stretch of
                                                            Anakapalle bypass was strengthened.

The Anakapalle bypass and all state highways will be        Strengthening and widening of other project roads
improved to two-lane standard, with widening of the         including the Anakapalle bypass has been carried out as
carriageway wherever necessary.                             originally envisaged. However, 10.5 km was added as a
                                                            part of the Project on the Hyderabad­Karimnagar­
                                                            Ramagundam road to link with NH 16. The total length
                                                            of state highways as built under the Project are
                                                            Hyderabad­Ramagundam 225 km, Ankola­Hubli 132
                                                            km, and Chennai­Cuddalore 160 km.

The present vertical and horizontal alignments are          Changes to the horizontal and vertical alignments have
generally satisfactory. However, minor changes will be      generally been made in line with design specifications.
made at certain locations to improve sight distances        However, along the Chennai­Cuddalore road,
and increase design speed.                                  realignment of some stretches would have been
                                                            desirable, as the existing alignment contained seven
                                                            right-angled curves, which are more prone to accidents.
                                                            However, realigning these stretches was not possible
                                                            due to local protests and resultant environmental
                                                            conditions set by the Ministry of Environment and
                                                            Forests.

All weak bridges and culverts on the project roads will     50 minor and major bridges have been constructed on
be strengthened or reconstructed as necessary and,          the project roads. These include six bridges on Ankola­
where warranted, overbridges will be constructed at         Hubli road, which were originally envisaged for widening
railway crossings. The design of these structures will      but due to their bad condition were reconstructed as part
be based on the Indian Roads Congress class AA              of the project works. A total of 1,114 culverts were
single-lane/Class A double-lane loading.                    constructed or widened. These include box culverts,
                                                            pipe culverts, and slab culverts. Three railway
                                                            overbridges (ROBs) were widened from two to four
                                                            lanes on Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle road. These ROBs
                                                            were, however, outside the scope of the Project. While
                                                            the structures were designed as per standards, the
                                                            approaches to some of the bridges and the existing
                                                            ROBs are not smooth, especially on the Ankola­Hubli,
                                                            Hyderabad­Ramagundam roads for bridges, and
                                                            Ballabhgarh­Mathura road for existing ROBs. One of
                                                            the existing ROBs at Mathura is an accident-prone spot
                                                            with a major intersection on the ROB itself; though not
                                                            constructed as a part of the Project.
                                                            18
                                                                                                Appendix 2, page 2

Planned At Project Appraisal                                 Evaluation Observations
1988                                                         2001
Drainage facilities alongside the roads will be improved,    In most of the low-lying areas where new construction
and in low-lying areas, the road embankment will be          was planned, road embankments have been raised. On
suitably raised.                                             the resurfaced stretches passing through paddy fields,
                                                             the aspect of proper drainage has not been addressed
                                                             (as in the Pondicherry­Cuddalore road). The drainage
                                                             facility along the project roads is generally wanting: in
                                                             most places the drains are overgrown, invisible, or
                                                             nonexistent. Where constructed with a hard surface,
                                                             they are not well maintained/cleaned, thus prone to
                                                             clogging.

Hard shoulders, 1.5 meters (m) wide, will be provided on     Hard shoulders of varying width have been provided on
each side of the roads throughout their length, with         Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle, Ballabhgarh­Mathura, and
suitable bituminous surfacing of the entire width of the     Hyderabad­Ramagundam roads with changed
shoulders within town areas.                                 specifications [from mix seal surface to 40 millimeter
                                                             (mm) bituminous concrete]. On the Ankola­Hubli road,
                                                             18.5 km length has been provided with hard shoulders
                                                             of superior specifications against double­coat surface
                                                             dressing on 225 mm thick water­bound macadam
                                                             originally designed. The balance length of the road has
                                                             however, been provided with soft shoulders. On the
                                                             Chennai­Cuddalore road, only 8 km are bituminous
                                                             concrete shoulders, while the balance of the road either
                                                             had earthen shoulders or no shoulders at all.

In the case of NHs passing through town areas with           The Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle road has been
many crossroads, parallel service roads will be provided     provided with about 7.5 km of service roads in selected
to limit the number of access points. The geometric          congested/built­up areas. Though about 22.5 km of
standards followed will be in accordance with the            service roads have been provided on the NH 2 stretch
relevant Indian Roads Congress standards applicable to       between Ballabhgarh and Mathura, this is highly
national and state highways.                                 inadequate with insufficient provision for proper
                                                             crossings from one side to the other. The border of Uttar
                                                             Pradesh and Haryana is a traffic bottleneck with
                                                             numerous trucks awaiting toll formalities resulting in
                                                             clogging of the highway, as parked trucks take up one
                                                             lane in each direction. Instead, parking facilities for
                                                             trucks would have been more appropriate, but were not
                                                             foreseen in the design. On the Chennai­Cuddalore
                                                             road, due to lack of availability of land in the highly
                                                             congested area between km 11.8 and 22, service roads
                                                             could not be provided. In fact the project road is abutting
                                                             the shops and other built up structures in this stretch.
                                                             However, at Marakanam a 2.25 km bypass has been
                                                             provided.

The pavement will be of a flexible (bituminous) type,        For the Ballabhgarh­Mathura stretch of NH 2, the rigid
except in the case of the additional two lanes for the       (concrete) pavement construction on the additional two
Ballabhgarh­Mathura section of NH 2, which will be a         lanes was reduced by about 27 km. The section was
rigid cement pavement.                                       constructed as flexible (bituminous) pavement. On the
                                                             Hyderabad­Ramagundam road, about 1 km of
                                                             bituminous surface was changed to concrete pavement
                                                             to guard against seepage from an adjacent reservoir.
Sources: Loan 918-IND: Road Improvement Project. Appraisal Report, October 1988; and Operations Evaluation Mission
         observations made during site visits and based on project documentation.
                                                          19
                                                                                               Appendix 3, page 1


                        SUMMARY OF THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION STUDY

           Issues                                   Causes                                       Solutions

A. Quality at Project Entry

·    Lack of project
     ownership
     - Inadequate               1.   No dedicated team responsible for project 1.     Core team is to be formed within
       involvement in project        design                                           Ministry of Surface Transport
       design                   2.   Lack of scrutiny at any specified level and      (MOST) and Executing Agency (EA)
     - Lack of coordination          responsibility thereof                           and assigned responsibility for
       between Government       3.   Different priorities and lack of urgency of      processing of the project.
       agencies                      concerned departments at center and         2.   An "empowered committee"
     - Inadequate                    states                                           comprising major departments under
       consultation with the    4.   Lack of interaction with project-affected        the of the secretary, MOST, to
       project-affected              people                                           resolve the bottlenecks.
       people                   5.   Lack of adequate interaction with and       3.   Core team and empowered
                                     within the state, Government departments,        committee are to be assisted by state
                                     and agencies                                     project management units.
                                6.   Lack of consultation with Nongovernment
                                     organizations (NGOs)
B.   Start up delays

·    Delays in establishing
                                1.   Government budgetary rules do not allow Instructions already exist for the setting
                                     funding of PIUs before loan approval     up of the PIU from the Ministry of
     project implementation
                                2.   Key personnel not properly identified in Finance. Needs to be enforced by EAs.
     units (PIUs)
                                     advance
                                3.   Lack of urgency on part of Government/EA
                                     in timely establishment (serious thought
                                     given after contract approval)

·    Environmental and
                                1.   Lack of coordination between the EAs and Environmental and forest clearance is
                                     Government approving agencies            completed prior to loan negotiations.
     forest clearances
                                2.   Unfamiliarity with the ADB loan
                                     requirements
                                3.   Complicated Government procedures

·    Land acquisition
                                1.   Government procedures do not allow
                                     budget allocation before loan approval
                                                                                 Land acquisition is to be completed prior
                                                                                 to contract award.
                                2.   Complicated Government procedures
                                     including legal problems

·    Recruitment of
                                1.   Government selection and approval
                                     procedures not clearly defined
                                                                                 A transparent and clear set of guidelines
                                                                                 consistent with Asian Development Bank
     consultants
                                2.   Poor selection and negotiations(rates fixed (ADB) guidelines to be developed.
                                     by the Government )
C.   Project Budgeting

·    Delays due to budgetary
                             Current procedures for reimbursement of
                             expenditure require three months before EAs
                                                                                 Streamline the procedures allowing faster
                                                                                 flow of funds.
     process and funds
                             receive funds.
     transfer
·    Diversion of funds
                             1. Lack of ownership of central Government -
                                 funded projects by states
                                                                                 Discuss with the state finance department
                                                                                 for ADB road projects by Department of
                             2. State priorities prevail due to local            Economics Affairs (DEA).
                                 pressures
                                                                 20
                                                                                                       Appendix 3, page 2

            Issues                                        Causes                                         Solutions

D.   Project Design/Construction Supervision Consultant

·    Deficiencies in project
     design and drawings
-    Inadequacies in project     1.        Lack of adequate attention to details at the 1.    Need to have comprehensive terms
     scope of work, e.g., tree             planning stage                                     of reference.
     planting and                2.        Insufficient budget provision for carrying   2.    Carry out detailed survey/soil
     landscaping, road                     out detailed investigation                         investigation carried out for ADB-
     safety, traffic             3.        Inappropriate methods of survey                    funded projects.
     management and                                                                     3.    State Project Management Unit
     important linkages.                                                                      (PMU) are to provide funds for
-    Insufficient and                                                                         required quality investigations and
     inaccurate site data                                                                     survey.
·    Quality of consulting
-    Role of consultants and     1. Role of consultants not clearly                      Consultants are now being allowed to act
     delegation of powers           appreciated/understood                               as "engineer" as per internationally
-    Contract management         Domestic Consultants:                                   agreed standards.
     skills                      1. Inadequate contract management skills
                                 2. Exposure to such projects mostly non-                Consulting firms are to assign personnel
                                    existent                                             with relevant experience in international
                                                                                         contract management.
E.   Procurement Delays

·    Lack of advance
                                      1.     Inadequacy in survey, soil investigation, 1.
                                             detailed design and drawings
                                                                                              Current policies require substantial
                                                                                              procurement activities prior to loan
     procurement planning
                                      2.     Lack of preparedness for the award of            negotiations.
                                             major contract                            2.     Use two-stage approval for highway
                                                                                              projects with detailed project
                                                                                              preparation and investment.

·    Delays in award of contract
-    Unfamiliarity with ADB's    Lack of proper understanding of procedures              Upgrade skills and familiarize project
     procedures and              by personnel involved (project staff, finance           personnel with ADB policies and
     international procurement department officials, and approving                       procedures.
                                 authority)
-    Evaluation process          1. Noncompliance of standard bidding                    1.   The Government issued standard
                                     document issued by the Government of                     bidding documents, which are
                                     India                                                    mandatory.
                                 2. Lack of proper guidelines in evaluation              2.   Advise project management units to
                                     of proposals resulting in time-consuming                 ensure compliance with the
                                     procedures                                               guidelines issued by the Government
                                 3. Interference by unauthorized personnel                    on the time frame for each activity in
                                     in the bidding process                                   the procurement cycle.

-    Lack of authority                Insufficient delegation of procurement and         Enhance delegation keeping in view rise
                                      financial authority at project level               in market prices
·    Contract packaging
                                      1. Discourages participation of large
                                           international contractors who are better
                                                                                         Contract packaging are to encourage
                                                                                         participation by international bidders.
                                           equipped to deliver the project in time
                                      2. Difficulty in supervising a number of
                                           small contracts
·    Prequalifications of
                                      1. Poor assessment of contractors'
                                           capability during prequalification, lack of
                                                                                         Proper verification of credentials
                                                                                         submitted by bidders is essential at the
     contractor
                                           verification, and lack of appropriate         time of prequalification.
                                           prequalification criterion
                                      2. Lack of awareness of contractors track
                                           record
                                                             21
                                                                                                    Appendix 3, page 3

            Issues                                    Causes                                          Solutions

F.   Contract administration

·    Weak project management
-    Deficiencies in project       1.   Lack of continuity due to frequent            With the establishment of dedicated PIUs
     management setup                   changes                                       and the role of consultant as "engineer"
-    Lack of proper planning of    2.   Monthly, weekly, and daily planning           as per Federation International des
     works at site                      procedures not in place in most cases         Ingenieurs-Conseil (FIDIC), projects
-    Lack of financial             3.   Invisible activities having bearing on the    should now be well managed. Further
     management and cash                main activity neglected in planning           changes in attitude towards consultants
     flow                          4.   Postponing timely actions                     and their role as "engineer" is essential.
                                   5.   Shortage of cash flow at site ­ delayed       The latter and the PIU should work in
                                        release of funds by the EAs                   tandem: (i) to ensure proper monitoring of
                                   6.   This is compounded by unwarranted             the contractors advance planning, (ii)
                                        deductions and delays in settlement of        adequate cash flow is maintained at site
                                        variations/claims                             by keeping the deductions strictly as per
                                                                                      contract, and (iii) mechanism to be in
                                                                                      place for settlement of variation
                                                                                      orders/claims of the contractor.
·    Slow progress of project
     implementation
-    Implementing procedures       1.   Absence of practical work                     1.   Work program has to be prepared
     and monitoring                     program/adherence                                  using latest computer software and
                                   2.   Lack of advance actions for critical               monitoring needs to be done at
                                        activities                                         appropriate level.
                                   3.   Lack of effective monitoring tools and        2. State PMUs to convene monthly
                                        lack of familiarity of key project staff on        review meetings to monitor the
                                        these techniques                                   progress. Meetings to monitor the
                                                                                           progress of work.
-    Insufficient resource         1.   Generally slow in mobilization of plant       Mobilization of plant, equipment, and
     mobilization by contractor         and equipment                                 staffing or human resources to be tied up
                                   2.   Mismatch of equipment and human               prior to award of contract and advance
                                        resources                                     payments to be linked with proper
                                                                                      mobilization
·    Lack of respect for the
                                   1.   Lack of compliance by the EAs to meet
                                        contractual obligations
                                                                                      1. Owner's obligations to be provided
                                                                                           strictly as per contract.
     contractual agreements
                                   2.   Inappropriate intervention from finance       2. Instruct state finance departments.
                                        and audit in the interpretation of                 That contracts in projects financed by
                                        technical matters                                  ADB be executed under the specified
                                                                                           conditions of contract and in the
                                                                                           event of conflict with EA's local
                                                                                           procedures, the specified conditions
                                                                                           of contract will prevail.
G. Staffing

·    Inappropriate staffing
                                   1.   Lack of incentive for field staff resulting
                                        in poor selection
                                                                                      1.   To attract/retain good quality staff,
                                                                                           project personnel to be given
                                   2.   Lack of continuity due to Government               appropriate incentives.
                                        policy on postings and transfers              2.   Selection procedures to be
                                   3.   Lack of relevant experience of project             streamlined so that project directors
                                        director on ADB projects                           are in place for the duration of the
                                                                                           project and are selected on the basis
                                                                                           of appropriate skills and experience.
·    Unfamiliarity with contract
                                   Decision makers, project directors, and other 1.
                                   key personnel on execution are mostly         2.
                                                                                           Need to develop a training program.
                                                                                           Ensure transfer of skills from
     conditions
                                   unfamiliar with international contract                  international consultants to project
                                   conditions and their interpretations                    directors and other key staff.
                                                            22
                                                                                                    Appendix 4


                                          ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS

                                                                     State
                                     Andhra
                                                                                a
Item                                Pradesh            Haryana      Karnataka       Tamil Nadu    Uttar Pradesh
Number of Accidents
  1985                                11,306               2,571        14,700          24,530           13,685
  1998                                27,599               7,983        30,899          46,723           17,631
  Increase (percent)                    144.1              210.5         110.2            90.5             28.8
Number of Injured
  1985                                  9,509              3,608        16,527          20,786            8,120
  1998                                31,735               7,893        43,531          42,495           14,193
  Increase (percent)                    233.7              114.5         163.4           104.4             74.8
Number of Fatalities
  1985                                  3,509                985         2,695           5,080             4,811
  1998                                  8,886              2,769         5,814           9,801             9,201
  Increase (percent)                    153.2              181.1         115.7            92.9              91.3
              b
Fatality Rate
  1985                                     6.4                4.7           4.0            10.4              6.1
  1998                                     3.0                2.2           2.6             2.4              2.9
  Decrease (percent)                   (53.4)             (53.7)         (35.4)          (76.8)           (52.5)
a
  For Karnataka the latest accident data available is for 1996.
b
  Number of fatalities per 1,000 registered vehicles.

Source: Road Safety Cell, Government of India. 2000. Statistics of Road Accidents in India (1991-1998), Delhi; and
        Transport Research Cell, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India. 1999. Motor
        Transport Statistics. Delhi.
                                                              23
                                                                                                              Appendix 5

                        ROAD CONDITIONS AT APPRAISAL AND EVALUATION

At Project Appraisal                                           Evaluation Observations
Conditions in 1988                                             Conditions in 2001
The project roads are at present deficient in several          The project roads are generally in satisfactory to very good
respects, the main deficiencies being inadequate               condition, except for a few portions. However, some few
pavement strength, poor riding quality of the surface, and     stretches are affected by excessive loading of single-axle
narrow width of carriageway on several stretches.              trucks and thus may warrant overlays before they would be
                                                               due if no overloading took place. Riding quality is average
                                                               to good and stands out compared with the adjacent roads
                                                               including some of the National Highways (NHs) they lead
                                                               to.

The project road between Visakhapatnam and                     Some stretches have excessive bleeding of bitumen. This is
Anakapalle (NH 5) in Andhra Pradesh has a two-lane             more pronounced in stretches with horizontal curves. Hard
bituminous pavement in far too bad condition requiring         shoulders are affected by heavy vehicles, which use
rehabilitation and widening of the carriageway to four         shoulders as regular carriageways, although shoulders are
lanes over 40 kilometer (km) of the 46 km section              not designed for this purpose. Riding quality is mostly good
because of heavy traffic.                                      except for the bleeding portions and certain embankment
                                                               stretches of the widened portions of Anakapalle bypass.

The section of NH 2 between Ballabhgarh and Mathura            Riding surface is generally good. In some isolated portions
(111 km) in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh has a four-lane          rutting has taken place due to excessive bleeding of
carriageway over 9 km and a two-lane carriageway over          bitumen. Approaches to the rail overbridge at Kosi and
102 km; both sections have bituminous pavement in fair         some of the major road junctions were recently repaired as
condition. Because of heavy traffic, the four-laning           a part of special maintenance.
needs to be extended over the remaining 102 km section
and the existing pavements require strengthening.

The Hyderabad­Ramagundam road (216 km) in Andhra               This project road shows signs of excessive bleeding in
Pradesh has a bituminous pavement in bad condition             many stretches resulting in rutting. The carriageway has
and about 25 percent of the road has a pavement width          developed cracks in about 25 percent of the road length
less than 5.5 meter (m). Improvements are needed to            and shows signs of pavement settlement. Shoulders are
upgrade and strengthen the road to two-lane standard,          deteriorating in many stretches due to inadequate crust
and bypasses are needed at Siddipet and Karimnagar             thickness. Potholes were unattended at a few places on the
towns due to heavy traffic congestion there.                   road. Bridge approaches are not smooth. Culverts in some
                                                               reaches are not flush with the road surface and traffic
                                                               cannot pass over these smoothly.

In Karnataka State, the Ankola­Hubli road (132 km) has         The riding surface of Ankola­Hubli road is fairly good
a two-lane bituminous pavement in fair to bad conditions       except a few portions in hilly stretches between km 48 and
which requires strengthening.                                  km 64, where the surface has developed undulations,
                                                               depressions, and serious rutting. These stretches are in
                                                               urgent need of major repair.

The project road along the east cost in Tamil Nadu             This project road has been overlaid to about 85 percent of
between Chennai (Madras) and Cuddalore (160 km) has            the length between Chennai and Pondicherry. This
mostly a substandard alignment and the pavement is in          resurfacing is undertaken by the concessionaire and was
bad condition, particularly over the single-lane stretches,    considered necessary to justify road tolls that are
which constitute more than one half of the road length.        introduced. Details on the technical condition of the road
Realignment, widening, and strengthening of the                before resurfacing were not available to the Operations
pavement are required.                                         Evaluation Mission. The few sections of the old pavement
                                                               that were visible show signs of a large number of repaired
                                                               potholes, although it cannot be said whether these
                                                               stretches are representative of the road condition before
                                                               overlaying started. Between Pondicherry and Cuddalore,
                                                               the original project road is in fair condition, showing cracks
                                                               and some potholes at a few locations.
Sources: Loan 918-IND: Road Improvement Project. Appraisal Report, October 1988; and Operations Evaluation Mission
         observations made during site visits.
                                              24
                                                                            Appendix 6, page 1

                                   ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
A.     General Assumptions
1.       The economic analysis of benefits and costs of the Project follows the same approach as
used at appraisal and completion. The economic life of the Project is assumed to be 20 years
from completion. No residual value of the road is assumed at the end of the Project's economic
life, as was done at appraisal and completion.

2.     Benefits are derived from vehicle operating cost (VOC) savings. The costs included in
the calculation are the project economic cost and maintenance cost. Savings are estimated by
comparing costs and benefits that would arise without the Project and those with the Project.
The valuation is expressed in Indian rupees (Rs) at constant 2001 prices.

3.     Not included in the economic evaluation are other benefits such as time savings and
other development impacts that are described in detail in Section IV, Achievement of Other
Development Impacts of the project performance audit report.

B.     Costs
4.      Costs considered in the reevaluation include the project economic cost (construction and
other costs, excluding taxes and adjusted by the standard conversion factor of 0.9), in 2001
prices, and incremental maintenance costs, which are based on actual maintenance
expenditure during the years of operation (1999­2001) and on standards published by the
Indian Road Congress. Periodic maintenance is assumed on average every five years for
bituminous pavements, but costs have been included in annual maintenance as per new
guidelines of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. No maintenance cost savings result,
because the widened carriageways increase the amount of road surface that needs maintaining.

C.     Benefits
5.      VOCs used at project completion were updated to reflect changes in the consumer price
index, road roughness, and level of road congestion or travel speed. Otherwise the same model
was used as at project completion. VOC savings are calculated by comparing the VOCs for
"with" and "without" situations as shown in Table A6.1.
                                                               25
                                                                                                     Appendix 6, page 2

                                 Table A6.1: Vehicle Operating Cost Savings
                                                     (Rs per vehicle-km)
Project Road Section                Year               Car                          Bus                       Truck
                                             WOP        WP       S(%)      WOP         WP     S(%)   WOP         WP     S(%)
Ballabhgarh­Mathura                 2001     2.63      2.20     16.14       8.33      6.61   20.62    7.59      5.81   23.45
                                    2008     3.62      2.60     27.97      10.83      7.78   28.09    8.62      6.42   25.52
                                    2015     4.70      3.65     22.31      13.30     10.66   19.79    9.80      7.97   18.61
Visakhapatnam­-Anakapalle           2001     3.57      2.21     37.96       9.96      7.54   24.29    8.95      6.07   32.17
                                    2008     4.54      2.53     44.21      11.90      8.37   29.63   10.03      6.56   34.63
                                    2015     5.26      3.23     38.49      13.44      9.99   25.71   10.94      7.54   31.03
Hyderabad­Ramagundam                2001     3.27      2.22     32.11       7.41      6.86    7.45    7.13      6.35   10.94
                                    2008     3.70      2.41     34.93       7.72      6.97    9.64    7.52      6.49   13.72
                                    2015     4.05      2.60     35.89       8.06      7.11   11.80    7.93      6.68   15.76
Chennai­Cuddalore                   2001     3.33      2.27     31.63       7.45      6.89    7.50    7.17      6.39   10.97
                                    2008     3.76      2.49     33.75       7.76      7.01    9.63    7.58      6.55   13.58
                                    2015     4.07      2.65     34.80       8.00      7.08   11.57    7.87      6.66   15.37
Ankola--Hubli                       2001     3.25      2.21     31.99       7.40      6.86    7.38    7.11      6.34   10.85
                                    2008     3.68      2.41     34.55       7.70      6.97    9.46    7.50      6.49   13.47
                                    2015     4.01      2.60     35.16       8.51      7.50   11.86    8.40      7.08   15.67
S(%) = Vehicle operating costs savings (percent, WOP = without project, WP = with project
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

6.     Comparing the current VOC savings with those estimated at project completion shows
that VOC savings have remained almost the same. Minor variations are due to an increase in
congestion and the usual deterioration of the road surface.

D.       Traffic Growth
7.     Traffic was counted at two to six counting stations along different project roads for a
consecutive period of three days for 24 hours each day. The counts were adjusted by seasonal
and weekday factors to represent typical annual average daily traffic. The results of the traffic
count are in Table A6.2. They represent an increase of 3 to 7 percent for passenger traffic (cars
and buses) and 3 to 5 percent for goods (truck) traffic over the estimated traffic for the year
2001 at project completion. The variance is on account of different categories of roads.

                                              Table A6.2: Traffic Count
                                                (Annual Average Daily Traffic)
                       Ballabhgarh         Visakhapatnam      Hyderabad                     Ankola            Chennai
Type of Vehicle         ­Mathura            ­Anakapalle     ­Ramagundam                     ­Hubli           ­Cuddalore
Cars                           7,745                  5,033          1,385                         727                3,453
Two Wheelers                   4,046                 10,127          1,543                       1,085                   56
Minibus                          309                      0              8                          91                   33
Bus                            1,012                  1,885            466                         271                3,555
LGVa                             844                    538            174                         167                   18
Truck 2-Axle                   3,781                  3,560            958                       1,465                9,748
Truck 3-Axle                   1,750                    538            225                         120                    1
Multi-Axle Trucks                129                     29              7                           3                   32
Tractor                          117                     14             33                          13                   20
Tractor with trailer             828                     60            123                          28                   52
Nonmotorized                     927                  5,248          1,042                         293                2,774
Total                         21,487                 27,032          5,964                       4,263               19,743
a
  LGV = light goods vehicles.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission
                                                      26
                                                                                     Appendix 6, page 3

8.     Projections for traffic growth were revised to reflect trends shown in the updated traffic
count data, net state domestic product, population growth rates, and income elasticity of
transport demand. The revised traffic growth rates for each vehicle type are shown in Table
A6.3.

                              Table A6.3: Annual Traffic Growth Rates
                                                  (percent)
Road section               Type of   At Appraisal                  At PCR                    At PPAR
                           Vehicle   1995- 2005              Up     2001-    2006-   2002-     2007-   2012-
                                      2004        -           to     2005     2020    2006      2011    2017
                                             2013          2000
Ballabhgarh­Mathura        Cars         7.8    7.2           6.8      7.5      6.8   10.01      9.48    8.33
                           Buses        6.3    6.0           5.0      5.5      5.3    8.51      9.14    7.81
                           Trucks       6.7    6.3           5.3      5.2      4.0    7.17      7.30    5.10
                           Others       9.2    8.4           6.8      7.5      6.8   10.26      9.25    8.47
Visakhapatnam­             Cars         7.9    7.1           6.8      7.5      6.8     6.8       7.5     6.8
Anakapalle                 Buses        6.3    5.9           5.0      5.5      5.3     5.0       5.5     5.3
                           Trucks       8.6    8.1           5.3      5.2      4.0     5.3       6.2     4.0
                           Others       9.1    8.3           6.8      7.5      6.8     6.8       7.5     6.8
Hyderabad­                 Cars         6.6    5.9           6.8      7.5      6.8     7.4       7.1     6.6
Ramagundam                 Buses        5.2    4.9           5.0      5.5      5.3     5.3       5.3     5.0
                           Trucks       8.7    8.3           5.3      5.2      4.0     5.5       5.2     5.0
                           Others       7.5    6.9           6.8      7.5      6.8     7.4       7.1     6.6
Ankola­Hubli               Cars         7.8    7.0          6.8       7.5      6.8     7.7       7.1      7.0
                           Buses        6.2    5.8           5.0      5.5      5.3     5.6       5.5      5.3
                           Trucks       7.9    7.5           5.3      5.2      4.0     5.2       4.4      4.2
                           Others       8.9    8.2           6.8      7.5      6.8     7.7       7.1      7.0
Chennai­Cuddalore          Cars         8.3    7.5           6.8      7.5      6.8     7.5       7.2      6.8
                           Buses        6.6    6.2           5.0      5.5      5.3     5.5       5.5      5.3
                           Trucks       6.7    6.3           5.3      5.2      4.0     5.8       5.3      5.2
                           Others       9.5    8.7           6.8      7.5      6.8     7.7       7.6      7.5
Source: OEM estimates.

E.      Economic Evaluation
9.     The economic internal rate of return for each project component is summarized in Table
A6.4, comparing estimates at appraisal, completion, and evaluation. Detailed cost and benefit
streams for each component and for the Project as a whole are in Tables A6.5-A6.10.

                      Table A6.4: Comparison of Economic Rates of Return
                                                  (percent)
Road Section                            Appraisal                  Completion           Evaluation
Ballabhgarh­Mathura                        34.1                       29.6                   28.8
Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle                   59.5                       23.3                   19.9
Hyderabad­Ramagundam                       25.4                       17.8                   15.2
Chennai­Cuddalore                          26.2                       20.6                   18.5
Ankola­Hubli                               24.1                       13.6                   10.8
Entire Project                             35.8                       22.4                   20.7
Source: OEM estimates.

10.     The results show the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) decreased in comparison
with estimates at appraisal and completion because of (i) change in maintenance cost (higher
revised standards in publications of the Indian Road Congress), (ii) changes in traffic growth
rates, and (iii) increase in construction cost and extended implementation period.
                                                              27
                                                                                             Appendix 6, page 4

11.    The additional cost for upgrading the Chennai­Cuddalore road was not included in the
EIRR calculation, because requisite data could not be obtained. The EIRR for this road section
and for the Project as a whole is therefore higher than it should be.

F.      Sensitivity Analysis
12.    Reducing benefits by 30 percent results in an EIRR of 16.4 percent for the entire Project.
A decrease in benefits of 53 percent would be required for the EIRR to reach the cut-off rate of
12 percent. Given the consistent growth in traffic such a situation is not likely to occur.

                      Table A6.5: Economic Benefit and Cost Streams, Ballabhgarh­Mathura
                                                   (Rs million)

           Year           Project Cost         Maintenance Cost           VOC Savings     Net Benefits
           1991                      82.89                                                        (82.89)
           1992                     159.17                                                      (159.17)
           1993                      82.88                                                        (82.88)
           1994                     161.22                                                      (161.22)
           1995                     153.79                                                      (153.79)
           1996                     372.10                                                      (372.10)
           1997                     483.52                                                      (483.52)
           1998                     303.81                    21.95              342.21            16.45
           1999                                               21.95              601.17           579.22
           2000                                               25.77              752.46           726.69
           2001                                               45.83              887.21           841.38
           2002                                               74.45            1,026.92           952.47
           2003                                               74.45            1,189.07         1,114.62
           2004                                               74.45            1,295.09         1,220.64
           2005                                               74.45            1,422.73         1,348.28
           2006                                               74.45            1,556.23         1,481.78
           2007                                               74.45            1,717.05         1,642.60
           2008                                               74.45            1,882.03         1,807.58
           2009                                               74.45            1,994.62         1,920.17
           2010                                               74.45            2,192.30         2,117.85
           2011                                               74.45            2,297.79         2,223.34
           2012                                               74.45            2,358.27         2,283.82
           2013                                               74.45            2,459.87         2,385.42
           2014                                               74.45            2,607.14         2,532.69
           2015                                               74.45            2,649.54         2,575.09
           2016                                               74.45            2,390.15         2,315.70
           2017                                               74.45            2,513.62         2,439.17
              EIRR                                                                                28.8%
     EIRR = economic internal rate of return, VOC = vehicle operating cost.
     Source: OEM estimates.
                                                        28
                                                                                        Appendix 6, page 5

             Table A6.6: Economic Benefit and Cost Streams, Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle
                                            (Rs million)

      Year              Project Cost       Maintenance Cost              VOC Savings    Net Benefits
      1990                      60.18                                                        (60.18)
      1991                      74.87                                                        (74.87)
      1992                      95.69                                                        (95.69)
      1993                     349.52                                                       (349.52)
      1994                     399.27                                                       (399.27)
      1995                     232.34                                                       (232.34)
      1996                     288.74                                                       (288.74)
      1997                      72.42                                                        (72.42)
      1998                      59.49                                         210.43         150.94
      1999                                                 0.78               411.58         410.80
      2000                                                 2.07               472.37         470.30
      2001                                                 2.41               474.90         472.49
      2002                                                37.80               545.41         507.61
      2003                                                37.80               625.39         587.59
      2004                                                37.80               716.72         678.92
      2005                                                37.80               794.24         756.44
      2006                                                37.80               864.86         827.06
      2007                                                37.80               940.01         902.21
      2008                                                37.80              1,018.80        981.00
      2009                                                37.80              1,103.50      1,065.70
      2010                                                37.80              1,193.47      1,155.67
      2011                                                37.80              1,280.56      1,242.76
      2012                                                37.80              1,368.01      1,330.21
      2013                                                37.80              1,453.25      1,415.45
      2014                                                37.80              1,549.98      1,512.18
      2015                                                37.80              1,576.82      1,539.02
      2016                                                37.80              1,598.03      1,560.23
      2017                                                37.80              1,614.17      1,576.37
           EIRR                                                                               19.9%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, VOC = vehicle operating cost.
Source: OEM estimates.
                                                         29
                                                                                       Appendix 6, page 6

              Table A6.7: Economic Benefit and Cost Streams, Hyderabad­Ramagundam
                                             (Rs million)

       Year            Project Cost        Maintenance Cost              VOC Savings   Net Benefits
      1990                       2.45                                                        (2.45)
      1991                      18.89                                                       (18.89)
      1992                    112.17                                                       (112.17)
      1993                      83.29                                                       (83.29)
      1994                    160.64                                                       (160.64)
      1995                    251.84                                                       (251.84)
      1996                    303.20                                                       (303.20)
      1997                    489.28                                                       (489.28)
      1998                    260.22                                          207.35        (52.87)
      1999                                                  3.67              229.09        225.42
      2000                                                  9.79              250.50        240.71
      2001                                                11.42               280.69        269.27
      2002                                                95.19               310.41        215.22
      2003                                                95.19               342.84        247.65
      2004                                                95.19               381.25        286.06
      2005                                                95.19               418.91        323.72
      2006                                                95.19               458.81        363.62
      2007                                                95.19               502.31        407.12
      2008                                                95.19               549.71        454.52
      2009                                                95.19               601.14        505.95
      2010                                                95.19               655.21        560.02
      2011                                                95.19               713.72        618.53
      2012                                                95.19               773.64        678.45
      2013                                                95.19               837.85        742.66
      2014                                                95.19               909.37        814.18
      2015                                                95.19               966.35        871.16
      2016                                                95.19              1026.94        931.75
      2017                                                95.19              1082.36        987.17
      EIRR                                                                                   15.2%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, VOC = vehicle operating cost.
Source: OEM estimates.
                                                         30
                                                                                        Appendix 6, page 7

                 Table A6.8: Economic Benefit and Cost Streams, Chennai­Cuddalore
                                             (Rs million)

      Year            Project Cost        Maintenance Cost               VOC Savings    Net Benefits
     1990                      36.09                                                         (36.09)
     1991                    119.06                                                         (119.06)
     1992                    197.57                                                         (197.57)
     1993                    191.61                                                         (191.61)
     1994                    135.71                                                         (135.71)
     1995                    184.41                                                         (184.41)
     1996                    198.01                                                         (198.01)
     1997                      96.24                                                         (96.24)
     1998                      59.79                                          188.53         128.74
     1999                                                  0.36               294.50         294.14
     2000                                                  0.73               329.28         328.55
     2001                                                  0.73               366.62         365.89
     2002                                                68.92                403.33         334.41
     2003                                                68.92                443.48         374.56
     2004                                                68.92                487.73         418.81
     2005                                                68.92                534.57         465.65
     2006                                                68.92                585.32         516.40
     2007                                                68.92                639.14         570.22
     2008                                                68.92                697.47         628.55
     2009                                                68.92                712.79         643.87
     2010                                                68.92                834.83         765.91
     2011                                                68.92                913.80         844.88
     2012                                                68.92                935.87         866.95
     2013                                                68.92               1,022.75        953.83
     2014                                                68.92               1,082.99      1,014.07
     2015                                                68.92               1,147.04      1,078.12
     2016                                                68.92               1,216.38      1,147.46
     2017                                                68.92               1,306.37      1,237.45
     EIRR                                                                                     18.5%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, VOC = vehicle operating cost.
Source: OEM estimates.
                                                         31
                                                                                       Appendix 6, page 8

                     Table A6.9: Economic Benefit and Cost Streams, Ankola--Hubli
                                             (Rs million)

      Year            Project Cost        Maintenance Cost               VOC Savings   Net Benefits
     1991
     1992                    130.73                                                        (130.73)
     1993                    249.02                                                        (249.02)
     1994                    258.14                                                        (258.14)
     1995                    252.33                                                        (252.33)
     1996                      42.38                                           77.15         34.77
     1997                      87.94                       3.02                84.70         (6.26)
     1998                                                  3.08                92.93         89.85
     1999                                                  3.03               104.68        101.65
     2000                                                  3.43               115.28        111.85
     2001                                                  3.50               127.99        124.49
     2002                                                57.03                140.46         83.43
     2003                                                57.03                154.17         97.14
     2004                                                57.03                168.74        111.71
     2005                                                57.03                184.61        127.58
     2006                                                57.03                200.83        143.80
     2007                                                57.03                222.79        165.76
     2008                                                57.03                237.19        180.16
     2009                                                57.03                257.30        200.27
     2010                                                57.03                284.00        226.97
     2011                                                57.03                307.42        250.39
     2012                                                57.03                332.00        274.97
     2013                                                57.03                355.33        298.30
     2014                                                57.03                377.80        320.77
     2015                                                57.03                399.13        342.10
     2016                                                57.03                421.88        364.85
     2017                                                57.03                439.68        382.66
     EIRR                                                                                    10.8%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, VOC = vehicle operating cost.
Source: OEM estimates.
                                                       32
                                                                                        Appendix 6, page 9

                   Table A6.10: Economic Benefit and Cost Streams, Entire Project
                                           (Rs Million)

     Year             Project Cost       Maintenance Cost                VOC Savings    Net Benefits
     1990                      98.72                                                         (98.72)
     1991                    295.71                                                         (295.71)
     1992                    695.33                                                         (695.33)
     1993                    956.32                                                         (956.32)
     1994                  1,114.98                                                       (1,114.98)
     1995                  1,074.71                                                       (1,074.71)
     1996                  1,204.43                                            77.15      (1,127.28)
     1997                  1,229.40                      3.02                  84.70      (1,147.72)
     1998                    683.31                     25.03                1,041.45        333.11
     1999                                               29.79                1,641.02      1,611.23
     2000                                               41.78                1,919.89      1,878.10
     2001                                               63.89                2,137.41      2,073.52
     2002                                              333.39                2,426.53      2,093.14
     2003                                              333.39                2,754.95      2,421.56
     2004                                              333.39                3,049.53      2,716.14
     2005                                              333.39                3,355.00      3,021.67
     2006                                              333.39                3,666.05      3,332.66
     2007                                              333.39                4,021.31      3,687.91
     2008                                              333.39                4,385.20      4,051.81
     2009                                              333.39                4,669.35      4,335.96
     2010                                              333.39                5,159.81      4,826.42
     2011                                              333.39                5,513.29      5,179.90
     2012                                              333.39                5,767.79      5,434.40
     2013                                              333.39                6,129.05      5,795.66
     2014                                              333.39                6,527.28      6,193.89
     2015                                              333.39                6,738.88      6,405.49
     2016                                              333.39                6,653.38      6,319.99
     2017                                              333.39                6,956.20      6,622.81
        EIRR                                                                                  20.7%
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, VOC = vehicle operating cost.
Source: OEM estimates.
                                                    33
                                                                                       Appendix 7, page 1
                            SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

Baseline Situation                                  Evaluation Observations
1988                                                2001
1. Ballabhgarh­Mathura

Motorcycle, scooters, tractors, diesel engines,     The number of working factories in 1988 was 1,527,
refrigerators, deep-freezers, and compressors       which increased to 3,078 in 1999. The major factories
(Faridabad). Footwear, steel pipes and tubes,       are rubber, plastic and petroleum products, chemicals
switch gear, metal containers, electric fans and    and chemical products, nonmetallic mineral products,
motors, process control instruments                 machinery, and machine tools. Most of these products
                                                    are moved by road. Transportation of industrial
                                                    products by road increased 15 times from 1988 to 1999,
                                                    while the capacity of the railway transportation system
                                                    has not increased in the corridor for the last 15 years.
                                                    The road improvement has given impetus for modal
                                                    shift.

Mathura refinery with an annual production of       The production capacity of Mathura refinery increased
7.5 million metric tons (t) of refined petroleum    to 9.7 million t in 1998. Currently, 42 percent of the
products, of which 20 percent are transported       petroleum product is being transported by road.
by road

Sugar mills with production capacity of around      The production capacity of sugar mills has increased to
440,000 t a year, flour mills, and other smaller    639,000 t per year. The number of flour mills has
plants producing pipes, steel forgings,             increased significantly from the baseline situation (from
petrochemical products, gas cylinders,              94 in 1988 to 178 in 2001). The entire production has
containers, and fire fighting equipment (Mathura)   been transported through the project road.

·   Wheat (2.5 million t per year)                  ·    Wheat production (3.7 million t) in 1998
·   Sugar cane (1.1 million t per year)             ·    Sugar cane (4.3 million t) in 1998
·   Bajra, gram, and rapeseed                       ·    Bajra, gram, and rapeseed transportation have no
·   Agra as major tourist attraction                     significant impact on the project road.
                                                    ·    Agra and Mathura are the major tourist centers.
                                                         Annual tourist traffic flow is 500,000. The tourist
                                                         traffic flow has increased significantly.
2. Visakhapatnam­Anakapalle

Steel, expected production mid 1989 at an           The Visakhapatnam Steel Plant was established in
annual level of 6.0 million t by 1998, of which     1991 with a production capacity of 10 million t (pig iron,
4.4 million t would be moved by road                steel structure, bar and rods, ammonium sulphate,
                                                    benenzone, toluene xylene solvents, naphthalene,
                                                    anthrocene, phenol, hard pitch, road tar, etc.). The
                                                    road's share for carrying byproducts of steel is 3.2
                                                    million t of the installed capacity. The steel plant and it's
                                                    allied industries generated employment for 30,000 in
                                                    2001 compared with 16,300 in 1991.
                                                      34
                                                                                         Appendix 7, page 2
Baseline Situation                                     Evaluation Observations
1988                                                   2001
Petroleum, with an annual production of 4.0           Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd had a crude oil
million t of refined oil products, of which 1.5       processing unit with a production capacity of 4.5 million
million t are transported by road                     t. (not 4.0 million t, as mentioned in the baseline
                                                      situation), increased its production capacity to 7.2
                                                      million t in 1999. Of the total production, 4.7 million t is
                                                      being transported by road.

Fertilizer with a total production of 0.7 million t   Coromondal Fertilizers, a private sector fertilizer
per year, half is transported by road                 production company more than doubled its production
                                                      from 0.7 million t to 1.6 million t in 2001. Of the total
                                                      production of 2001, 75 percent (1.2 million t) is
                                                      transported by road.

Steel and engineering factories, and zinc             The Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Public Sector Undertaking
galvanizing plant with 200,000 t of inputs and        producing zinc, lead, sulphuric acid, silicon, etc., with an
outputs moving by road.                               aggregate production and input raw material of 200,000 t
                                                      in the baseline situation increased production over
                                                      threefold to 656,000 t in 2001. Of the total input and
                                                      output value of 2001, 92 percent (603, 520 t) is being
                                                      transported by road.

Cement, 0.5 million t moved on roads                  The movement of cement increased to 1.25 million t in
                                                      2001 from 0.5 million t in 1988.

Several medium-sized industries with a                The aggregate demand of road transport of other
combined annual road transport demand of              medium chemical and other allied industries increased
0.5 million t.                                        to 1.75 million t in 1999­2000 from 0.5 million t in 1988.

Paddy 38 percent of cropped area                      In 1999­2000 the percent of cropped area of paddy
                                                      decreased (34.98 percent.). Yield per hectare increased
                                                      from 916 to 1,386 kilogram.

Bajra 23 percent of cropped area                      In 1999­2000 the percent of cropped area of bajra
                                                      decreased (5.94 percent). Yield per hectare increased
                                                      from 549 to 924 kilogram.

Groundnuts 11 percent of cropped area                 In 1999­2000 the percent of cropped area of groundnut
                                                      decreased (6.93 percent). Yield per hectare increased
                                                      from 885 to 1,256 kilogram.

Pulses 11 percent of cropped area                      In 1999­2000 the percent of cropped area of pulse
                                                       increased (16.42 percent).


Sugarcane accounts for almost three quarters           In 1999­2000 the percent of cropped area of
of total output                                        sugarcane increased (13.86 percent). Yield per
                                                       hectare increased from 40,521 to 55,357 kg.
                                                 35
                                                                                   Appendix 7, page 3
Baseline Situation                                Evaluation Observations
1988                                              2001
3. Hyderabad--Ramagundam

Cotton spinning mills, medium-sized steel        Apart from the industries mentioned in the baseline
rolling plants, auto parts manufacturing,        situation, new additions are (i) two sugar mills, (ii) one
ceramic tile factories, and chemical plants      Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. factory, and (iii)
                                                 140 rice mills. In the baseline situation, there were only
                                                 10, 5, 20, 4, and 7 of cotton spinning mills, medium-sized
                                                 steel rolling plants, auto parts manufacturing, ceramic
                                                 tiles factories, and chemical plants which have
                                                 increased to 25, 9, 35, 7, and 12 in 1999-2000
                                                 respectively. In 1988 the aggregate employment of the
                                                 above-mentioned factories was 45,000; this increased to
                                                 79,000 persons in 1999-2000. Newly added sugar
                                                 factories, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation factory, and
                                                 rice mills have provided employment for 20,000 people.

Cement, with annual production of 850,000 t of   The cement factory at Basant Nagar near Ramagundam,
which 50 percent moves by road.                  which had annual production of 850,000 t in 1988
                                                 increased its production to 1.35 million t per year in
                                                 2001. Basant Nagar is the new residential township
                                                 which has come up as cement Factory Township.
                                                 Consultation with the officials of cement factory revealed
                                                 that due to nonavailability of wagons when they are
                                                 actually required does not auger well for the railway
                                                 systems. Hence the improved road provides a direct link
                                                 to the other states like Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
                                                 and the transportation of the cement production is
                                                 dependent on the project road. Seventy-five percent of
                                                 the current production and 67 percent of the input raw
                                                 material are being transported on the project road. The
                                                 capacity enhancement of the current production from the
                                                 baseline situation has created an additional employment
                                                 for 29,000 people.

Coal, 6.0 million t annual production, with      Coal production increased marginally, from 6.0 million t
1.8 million t transported by road                annual production in 1988 to 7.8 million t in 2000. The
                                                 transportation of coal by road reduced significantly
                                                 because of the subsidy being provided by railways and
                                                 better carrying capacity of railways for coal (railways
                                                 introduced the 14 t coal wagon).

Fertilizer, with 450,000 t production per year   The fertilizer industry did not make significant
                                                 contribution. The transportation of fertilizer is heavily
                                                 dependent on the railway system, as the railway system
                                                 is cheaper for the industry (railway subsidizes the
                                                 transportation of fertilizer).
                                                  36
                                                                                    Appendix 7, page 4
Baseline Situation                                  Evaluation Observations
1988                                                2001
Paddy, 43 percent of cropped area, 57 percent     Paddy, 38 percent of the cropped area. Due to the
of total tonnage of food and nonfood crops        increase in the kilogram/hectare yield it has become 63
                                                  percent of the total tonnage of the food crop and non
                                                  food crop production in 1999­2000.

Barley, 21 percent of cropped area, 22 percent    The cropped area of barley increased 29 percent in
of total tonnage of food and nonfood crops        1999­2000. In terms of production it increased to 29
                                                  percent of the total tonnage.

Maize, 19 percent of cropped area                 The area for maize has marginally increased (21
                                                  percent).
4. Ankola­Hubli

-   Mineral resources particularly iron and        Government statistics do not provide a history of
    manganese ores and quartz, and major           production of these major industries mentioned in the
    granite quarries                               baseline situation.
-   Ferro manganese 1,550 t
-   Caustic soda 32,200 t
-   Liquid chlorine 8,400 t
-   Hydrochloric acid 62,000 t
-   Paper 100,000 t
-   Plywood 1.6 million square meters
-   Cotton yarn 5,100 t
-   Paddy 314,00 mt, 27 percent of total           Agricultural Activities: Not much improvement is noted
    agriculture production                         from the baseline situation. Agricultural activity is
-   Barley 26 percent of total agriculture         predominantly rain fed and subsistence in nature. In
    production                                     the baseline situation only 8 percent of the total
-   Sugarcane 23 percent of total agriculture      cultivable land was irrigated and it improved marginally
    production                                     (12 percent) in 1999. Paddy, sugarcane, and the
-   Groundnuts 11 percent of total agriculture     groundnuts are still the major agricultural crops. The
    production                                     tribal population (45 percent of the total population)
                                                   dominates the area. There is no major shift in terms of
                                                   cropping intensity and cropping pattern from the
                                                   baseline situation. In Hubli and Kalghatgi taluka
                                                   groundnut, sugarcane, and ragi are the main crops
                                                   after rice.
5. Chennai­Cuddalore

Oil and natural gas fields, drilling on­and         The local refinery is not yet functional. Forecasted oil
offshore, produce 200 t of crude per day. Crude     transportation is not achieved. Road utilization has
is trucked from the production center at            increased for transporting oil, (superior kerosene 37 t,
Narimanam to the refinery in Chennai.               high-speed diesel 53 t). Production output of oil has
Construction of a local refinery is expected by     increased from 60 t (and not 200 t) in 1988 to 90 t in
1990/91, after which 60 percent of the refinery     1999. With the increase in oil production transportation
output will be bound for Chennai, trucked along     on the project road also increased (as ascertained
the project road.                                   through the origin-destination survey and the traffic
                                                    volume survey). In addition, some ancillary industries
                                                    (rubber, plastic and petroleum products) which existed
                                                    at Appraisal, but perhaps not considered, have grown
                                                    from 4,998 to 6,880 in 1999 in the influence zone of
                                                    the area. Consequently, labor absorption by all these
                                                     37
                                                                                      Appendix 7, page 5
Baseline Situation                                   Evaluation Observations
1988                                                 2001
                                                     industries increased from 15,245 to 25,654 in 2001.
                                                     Discussions with officials and local people revealed
                                                     that the improved road coupled with industrial
                                                     development policy of the state have created the
                                                     impetus for development of the area.

Salt 1.7 million t per year                          Salt production has increased to 4.58 million t per
                                                     year. The majority of salt production is being
                                                     transported by the railway system. Hence the project
                                                     road has marginal influence on the salt industry except
                                                     the local transportation.

Steel rolling mills and plants producing yarn,       As mentioned in the baseline situation analysis,
cotton, and polyester cloths, trailers, chemicals,   different types of industries, like steel rolling mills,
iron castings, paper, ceramic tiles, fishnets,       paper, ceramic industries, etc., are the predominant
cement pipes and fittings, asbestos pipes, and       industrial activities and are growing due to
sago and glucose.                                    improvement of the project road. In Cuddalore, the
                                                     pharmaceutical industries, and in Pondichery, the
                                                     metal and mineral, and other industries are the major
                                                     beneficiaries of the project road. The turnaround time
                                                     of cargoes from Pondichery and Cuddalore have
                                                     reduced by almost 45 minuets to the transportation
                                                     hub in Chennai. The cargo capacity of Cuddalore port
                                                     has increased substantially during the last decade to
                                                     cope with the transport of goods produced by the
                                                     industrial estates located in Pondicherry and
                                                     Cuddalore.

Smaller industries in the area produce welding       The major industrial shift observed in the corridor is on
and cutting machines, and paints, plastics and       handloom and power loom industries in the small-scale
polyurethane.                                        industry sector. Predominant industries in this sector
                                                     are cotton textiles, hosiery and readymade garments
Polyvinylchloride pipes, textiles, plastic papers,   (8,722 in 1988 to 22,917 in 1999), silk and synthetic
tins and steel products; sulphuric acid 40,000       fiber (810 in 1988 to 2,645 in 1999), chemical and
and 16,800 t (in two locations); aluminum fluoride   chemical products (9,703 in 1988 to16205 in 1999),
7,500 t; color pigments 1,200 t; oloium acid         paper and paper products (2,120 in 1988 to 19,246 in
5,000 t                                              1999), etc. All the units are located in road influence
                                                     area. The goods produced are mainly transported by
                                                     the road system only. The railway located in this area
                                                     is meter gauge with limited transportation capacity.
                                                     The railway also does not provide any subsidy to carry
                                                     these goods unlike food and agricultural products.

Paddy 1.7 million t,                                 Agriculture is subsistence in nature and depends on
Sugarcane 0.5 million t,                             vagaries of nature (calamities like, excessive rainfalls,
Smaller quantities of groundnuts, millet, and        salinity ingression, cyclone, etc.). Major agricultural
maize                                                production is paddy, etc. The agricultural activity vis-à-
                                                     vis road development is unlikely to create any positive
                                                     or negative impact in the corridor in the future, as in
                                                     the past.
                                                           38
                                                                                                 Appendix 8, page 1

                     PAVEMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR STATE ROADS IN
                            ANDHRA PRADESH AND TAMIL NADU
                                     (TA 1058-IND)

Planned Objectives and             Reported Results at Completion             Evaluation Observations
Scope
Objective                                                                     Decisions for improving and maintaining
                                                                              roads continue to be based on standard
To enhance the operational                                                    norms established for estimating
efficiency and capability of the                                              maintenance requirements. Priorities are
highway departments in the                                                    based on observed requirements (ocular
states of Andhra Pradesh and                                                  inspection of roads) and on demands
Tamil Nadu for improving and                                                  from influential interest groups.
maintaining of roads in a cost-
effective manner utilizing
available funds
Outputs
To achieve the objective, a                                                   The data requirements of the
computerized pavement                                                         computerized system were time-
management system that is                                                     consuming and costly. The software may
both readily understood by staff                                              have been less user-friendly than one
in the two highway                                                            would expect from today's version,
departments, at headquarters                                                  although the Operations Evaluation
and operational levels, and                                                   Mission was not able to verify this
easily maintained within the                                                  because of the lack of an operating
resources that can be made                                                    system. Staff in one of the states was
available will be established in                                              aware of the computer program.
each of these states
1.   Detailed specifications for    -   Maintenance review report             Basic data was collected for roads in
     the system, after reviewing                                              Tamil Nadu but could not be located for
     existing systems and           -   Report on pavement management         Andhra Pradesh.
     practices                          system implementation
                                    -   Research on road inventory data,
                                        road condition surveys, road design
                                        standards, data on pavement
                                        deterioration under various
                                        maintenance regimes, and costs of
                                        intervention levels
2.   Inception report               -   Delivered

3.   Computer program               -   System establishes the cost of        The computerized system was installed at
                                        various maintenance activities and    the facilities of the Highway Research
                                        prepares optimal maintenance          Station. The computer program had been
                                        program                               removed from the current facilities, as
                                                                              computers were being upgraded. Also,
                                                                              the last data collection took place in
                                                                              1996. This data had not been entered
                                                                              into the computer. The main reason for
                                                                              not using the program was that the
                                                                              results were not used in the decision-
                                                                              making process and that the data
                                                                              requirements (collection and feeding into
                                                                              the computer) were too time-consuming.
4.   Manuals and                    -   Field evaluation unit manual          Available, but was not reviewed in detail
     documentation for the                                                    by the Operations Evaluation Mission.
     computerized system            -   Computer operator's manual

5.   Training aids
                                                             39
                                                                                                     Appendix 8, page 2

Planned Objectives and              Reported Results at Completion               Evaluation Observations
Scope
6.   Monitoring and control
     system to monitor
     information flow (quality
     control on data inputs)
7.   Trained staff in both           -   Three seminars were conducted for       Seminars were apparently conducted,
     departments                         staff from the two states plus staff    although staff attending these courses
                                         from other states that were             was not traced. The limited or nonexisting
                                         interested                              institutionalization of the system indicates
                                                                                 that ownership and acceptance of the
                                     -   "High-ranking state government          system as a useful tool are lacking.
                                         officials became convinced of the
                                         computer system's ability to predict
                                         maintenance strategies at various
                                         funding levels and to demonstrate
                                         the consequences (accelerated road
                                         deterioration) of underspending on
                                         maintenance"
8.   Maintenance program for         -   Pavement maintenance
     the year after the system is        management report, Tamil Nadu
     installed (test case system
     and data inputs)
9.   Final report on all work        -   Final report
     carried out
                                     -   Report on economic studies
Sources: Loan 918-IND: Road Improvement Project, Appraisal Report. Appendix 23, October 1988; TA 1058-IND: Pavement
         Management System, approved on 3 January 1989; Project Completion Report: IND 198-99, Road Improvement Project,
         August 1999; and additional reports submitted on project completion. Evaluation observations are based on discussions
         at the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the National Highways Authority of India, the Public Works Departments
         in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the Highway Research Station in Hyderabad, and the World Bank.
                                                                   40
                                                                                                                   Appendix 9
                                             EXPRESSWAY SYSTEM PLANNING
                                                    (TA 1059-IND)

Planned Objectives and Scope                 Reported Results at Completion                      Evaluation Observations
Objective:                                                                            The Government adopted the national highways
                                                                                      development program under which 6,000 km of
To assist the Ministry of Surface                                                     national highways that form the golden
Transport in establishing a system                                                    quadrilateral will be upgraded and expanded.
that aids decision making on                                                          This will be complemented by the north-south
improving traffic corridors, including                                                and east-west corridors, comprising a total of
improving the financial viability of                                                  7,300 km. These road sections were selected as
options                                                                               they connect major urban centers and link all
                                                                                      parts of the country. However, a standard of four
                                                                                      lanes was adopted for the entire upgrading
                                                                                      program regardless of whether traffic flows
                                                                                      warranted two, four, or six lanes. Equally, no
                                                                                      system exists to prioritize upgrading of other
                                                                                      national highways.
Outputs
1.   Analysis system for                 -   Technical paper on planning            The outcome of the technical assistance is
assessment of likely traffic                 methodology for development of         referred to as a "study" that, according to some
diversions to specific expressway            high density traffic highway corridors sources, was updated. It has not been perceived
segments                                                                            or used as a "system" in the sense of providing a
                                         -   Traffic flows and analysis             tool that can be used in decision making, and
                                         -   Analysis system for assessing likely upgraded or modified as required.
                                             traffic diversions for specific
                                             expressway segments
2.   Economic evaluation             -       Economic evaluation model                It appears that the economic model was used for
methodology for establishing traffic                                                  some time at least by Asian Development Bank
benchmarks by traffic corridor to    -       Supplemental computer tables from        in preparing economic analyses. The economic
determine the need for a                     benchmark methodology report             evaluation model currently in use in India is the
complementary expressway                                                              World Bank highway development model.
3.   Locations for additional traffic
surveys identified, data collected,
and interpreted
4.    Study on financial viability of    -   Financial feasibility investigation of   Whatever investigations were made at the time
expressways, toll facilities under           proposed toll expressway for             of implementing the technical assistance may
alternative toll rate scenarios, and         National Highway (HN) 1 and NH 2         have been used in later analyses. However, the
impact on traffic diversion                  (two reports)                            Operations Evaluation Mission was not in the
                                                                                      position to trace the use made to the test case.
                                         -   Benefit -cost analysis of various
                                             capacity augmentation alternatives
                                             (Delhi­Ambala Route, test case)
5.    Study on alternative toll          -   Toll system and interchange options Toll systems and some toll plazas are being
collection systems                           and recommended organizational      introduced on some of the national and state
                                             structure                           highways. However, the Operations Evaluation
6.     Advice on location and design                                             Mission could not ascertain whether and to what
of toll facilities.                                                              extent decisions had been influenced by the
                                                                                 technical assistance.
7.    System for management and                                                       No system of this nature is in place.
operation of expressways, including
staffing, materials and equipment,
and investment costs.
Sources:   Loan 918-IND: Road Improvement Project, Appraisal Report. Appendix 24, October 1988; TA 1059-IND: Expressway System
           Planning, approved on 3 January 1989; Project Completion Report: IND 198-99, Road Improvement Project, August 1999; and
           additional reports submitted on project completion. Evaluation observations are based on discussions at the Ministry of Road
           Transport and Highways, the National Highways Authority of India, and with the World Bank.
