Validation Report




Reference Number: PCV: IND 2008-69
Project Number: 31588-02
Loan Number: 1720-IND
May 2009




India: Urban and Environmental Infrastructure
Facility Project




 Independent Evaluation Department
                                       ABBREVIATIONS

            ADB              ­      Asian Development Bank
            FIL              ­      financial intermediary loans
            HUDCO            ­      Housing and Urban Development Corporation
            ICICI            ­      Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
            IED              ­      Independent Evaluation Department
            PCR              ­      project completion report
            RRP              ­      Report and Recommendation of the President
            TA               ­      technical assistance
            ULB              ­      urban local body
            WSS              ­      water supply and sanitation



                                           Key Words
adb, asian development bank, environmental, ied, independent evaluation department, india,
industrial waste, municipality, oed, project completion validation, sanitation, state, urban, water
supply




Director               R. B. Adhikari, Independent Evaluation Division 1, Independent
                       Evaluation Department (IED)

Team leader            W. Kolkma, Senior Evaluation Specialist, Independent Evaluation
                       Division 1, IED (until 5 January 2009)
Team members           A. Anabo, Senior Evaluation Officer, Independent Evaluation Division 1,
                       IED
                       V. Melo, Operations Evaluation Assistant, Independent Evaluation
                       Division 1, IED




In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status
of any territory or area.
                         PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT1 VALIDATION FORM

 A. Basic Project Data                                      PCR Validation Date:              May 2009
  Project and Loan             31588-02
  Number:                      1720-IND                                                          Approved          Actual
  Project Name:                Urban and                     Total Project Costs ($M):              NA              119.5
                               Environmental
                               Infrastructure Facility
                               Project
  Country:                     India                         Loan/Grant ($M):                       80.0              27.4
                                                             (SDR equivalent)
  Sector:                      Multisector                   Total Cofinancing ($M):               0.0           0.0
  ADB Financing ($M):          ADF: 0.0                        Borrower ($M):                      0.0           0.0
                               OCR: 80.0                       Beneficiaries ($M):                 0.0           0.0
  Cofinanciers:                        0.0                     Others ($M):                        0.0           0.0
  Approval Date:               17 Dec 1999                   Effectiveness Date:               17 Aug 2000 22 Sep 2000
  Signing Date:                19 May 2000                   Closing Date:                     22 Sep 2006 29 May 2006
  Project Officers:            Name:                          Location (HQ or RM):                From          To
                               Xiaoyan Ye                                HQ                       1999         2000
                               Alex Jorgensen                            RM                       2001         2002
                               Davendra Mittal                           RM                       2003         2004
                               Cheolsu Kim                               RM                       2005         2006
  Validator:                   R. Merrill
                               Consultant
                                                              Director:                        R. B. Adhikari, IED1
  Quality Control              W. Kolkma
  Reviewer/Peer                Senior Evaluation
  Reviewer:                    Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, HQ = headquarter, IED = Independent Evaluation
Department, IND = India, M = million, NA = not available, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = project completion report,
RM = resident mission, SDR = special drawing right.

B. Project Description (summarized from the Report and Recommendation of the President [RRP])

    (i) Rationale. Inadequate urban infrastructure and a deteriorating urban environment have been deterring
        India's social and economic development and adversely affecting quality of life. Although the
        Government has been trying to increase financial flows to the urban sector through fiscal concessions,
        the sector's development is constrained by the lack of long-term funds to match the gestation and pay-
        back periods of urban infrastructure projects; and by legal, institutional, and financial impediments to
        develop demand-driven projects. The Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project
        (the Project) was designed to have a demonstration impact on the sector by selectively financing viable
        urban and environmental projects in states and municipalities where essential reforms were creating an
        environment conducive to sector development. To ensure that the benefits of these projects will reach
        the poor, the Project would also integrate microfinance with urban and environmental infrastructure
        development.

    (ii) Impact. The Project aimed to assist the Government in improving urban and environmental
         infrastructure, and to encourage cost recovery and other municipal financial reforms. Ultimately, India's
         urban residents would benefit from an improved quality of life. High-priority subprojects included those
         that addressed basic human needs such as water supply and sanitation (WSS) and slum upgrading.




    1
        ADB. 2008. Project Completion Report on the Urban Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project in India. Manila.
   2



         The urban poor, who constituted 32% of the urban population in 1999, would gain health benefits and
         employment opportunities.

  (iii) Objectives or expected outcomes. The Project had three major objectives: (a) commercialization of
        urban and environmental infrastructure development, financing, operation and maintenance;
        (b) decentralization and implementation of the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992; and
        (c) enhanced access of the urban poor to improved urban environments and services.

  (iv) Components and/or outputs. The Project consisted of three bank loans: (a) $90 million to the Housing
       and Urban Development Corporation, Limited (HUDCO); (b) $80 million to the Industrial Credit and
       Investment Corporation of India Limited (ICICI); and (c) $30 million to the Industrial Development
       Finance Corporation Ltd. In addition, a technical assistance (TA) grant had three goals: (a) integrating
       microfinance institutions with urban infrastructure development projects, (b) building capacities of
       selected microfinance institutions for financing urban infrastructure projects, and (c) various pilot
       projects.

C. Evaluation of Design and Implementation (PCR assessment and Validation)

  (i) Relevance of design and formulation. The PCR had strong reservations regarding project
      formulation, judging it essentially inadequate. The PCR noted that key constraints identified during the
      early stages of the project preparatory TA and Fact-Finding Mission were not sufficiently addressed
      during the subsequent stages of project formulation. These constraints included the lack of urban local
      bodies' (ULBs) capacity to prepare commercially viable projects and, in turn, to mobilize financial
      resources. Moreover, besides lines of credit, project components proposed by the project preparatory
      TA included a risk-sharing facility and TA to launch a project development company, both of which
      would have enhanced ULBs' capacity. However, these components were dropped during pre-appraisal,
      which were then upgraded to appraisal. Given the extremely limited outputs of the Project and the fact
      that only two ULBs ultimately borrowed, the Independent Evaluation Department (IED)2 agrees with the
      PCR that the formulation process was inadequate.

  (ii) Project outputs. The RRP3 listed a long pipeline of likely subprojects in the priority subsectors of WSS
       and slum upgrading. However, since the vast majority of identified subprojects did not materialize
       (see para. C [iii]), the PCR questioned the viability of this subproject pipeline. The PCR noted that the
       main reasons for the differences between intended and actual distribution of subprojects were (a) the
       slow pace of enabling institutional and policy reforms; (b) more attractive funding opportunities in other
       sectors, such as retail lending, as opposed to more risky urban infrastructure projects for ICICI; and
       (c) the downward trend of domestic interest rates, which made the interest rates offered under the
       Project less attractive. The PCR also noted that only two subprojects (utilizing 3% of the original loan
       amount) contributed to outcomes. Thus, IED agrees with the PCR that the project outputs were only
       partially achieved.
  (iii) Project cost, disbursements, borrower contribution, and conformance to schedule (as relevant to
        project performance). As noted in the PCR, two major changes in project implementation altered the
        Project's nature and impact. The first was the decisions by HUDCO and Industrial Development Finance
        Corporation that the Project's terms and conditions were no longer attractive, given the downward trend
        in domestic interest rates. These two borrowers subsequently cancelled their participation in July 2001
        and September 2002, respectively, with remaining borrower, ICICI, for $27.4 million, or about 34% of
        the original $80.0 million loan. The second was the vastly reduced amount of the loan utilized by the
        allocation. Further, ICICI applied for and received permission to use the majority of the funds for




   2
       IED was named the Operations Evaluation Department, or OED, until December 2008.
   3
       ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Loans to
       India for the Housing and Urban Development Corp. Ltd, ICICI, Ltd; and the Urban Infrastructure Development
       Corp. Ltd. for the Urban Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project and Technical Assistance Grant. Manila.
                                                                                                           3



    industrial waste management subprojects (five subloans or 93%) while only two subloans were utilized
    for the original purposes--water, sanitation, and solid waste management (7%). Finally, ICICI could not
    come up with a sufficient number of eligible subprojects before the final commitment date of
    22 September 2004. The Government, therefore, withdrew its guarantee for the then-uncommitted
    balance of $37.8 million. Subsequently, following cancellation of one committed subloan and
    prepayment by another, the remaining $14.8 million was also cancelled, leading to early closure of the
    loan.

(iv) Implementation arrangements, conditions and covenants, related technical assistance, and
     procurement and consultant performance. Although ICICI was generally in compliance with the
     covenants, the PCR observed: (a) a revolving fund mechanism to use surpluses from prepayments of
     subloans for project purposes as per the Loan Agreement (Section 2.08) was not established; and
     (b) ICICI delayed demonstrating compliance with safeguard covenants and adopting an environmental
     and social management system. Regarding the TA grant, in spite of cancellation of the loan by HUDCO,
     TA was implemented, although it had little, if any, link to ICICI operations under the Project. The PCR
     rated the TA grant and the respective consultant performance as successful, because the consultants
     successfully achieved the TA grant's stated objectives within the time frame and allotted budget.
     However, IED rates the TA grant as unsuccessful, because it had no links to ICICI operations, which
     was its original purpose.

(v) Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency. While the PCR rated the performance of ICICI
    as satisfactory, this is based on a detailed section describing ICICI's growth and outstanding financial
    performance, especially with respect to financial ratios. However, given the vastly reduced loan amount,
    project lending accounted for only a small percentage of total ICICI operations. In addition, ICICI loans
    for industrial waste management subprojects did not contribute to project outcomes in the priority
    sectors of WSS and slum upgrading. Moreover, although ICICI had a long track record in project
    finance, the PCR pointed out that the shift in ICICI's lending policies toward commercial opportunities in
    the retail markets and away from development banking hindered the Project's successful
    implementation. However, since the PCR did not specifically rate ICICI's performance, IED has also not
    rated the performance of the Borrower.

(vi) Performance of the Asian Development Bank. The PCR rated the performance of the Asian
     Development Bank (ADB) during implementation as satisfactory. ADB could not, at the time of design,
     have foreseen the drop in the commercial lending interest rate and the radical shift in ICICI's lending
     from development to commercial markets. Although ADB acknowledged the lack of bankable
     subprojects and responded by approving an increase in the share of private industrial waste
     management subprojects, these were not in the priority sectors of water, sanitation, and solid waste
     management. The PCR justified this change in scope by stating that industrial waste subprojects also
     improve the urban environment, which was one of the expected project impacts. However, even with
     this scope change, only 32% of loan proceeds could be utilized for private industrial waste management
     subprojects within the time available. ADB undertook timely follow-up actions through review missions
     and tripartite and bipartite review meetings to maximize loan utilization. In addition, there were regular
     tripartite review meetings among ADB, the Department of Economic Affairs, and ICICI to review the
     performance of commitments and disbursements and to suggest steps for improved utilization. IED
     notes that ICICI considered ADB's responses to be proactive and timely, and that ADB conducted
     adequate due diligence on covenant compliance, particularly during the latter phase of project
     implementation. Therefore, IED concurs with the PCR's rating of ADB's performance during
     implementation as satisfactory.
   4


D. Evaluation of Performance (PCR assessment and Validation)

   (i) Relevance. The PCR rated the Project as partly relevant. The Project's expected outcomes were
       consistent with the Government's development priorities and ADB's country strategy. The PCR,
       however, noted that the appraisal had the following inadequacies: (a) insufficient links among outputs,
       outcome, and impact and insufficient consideration of lessons learned from ongoing urban sector
       projects in the country; (b) an ambitious and unrealistic subproject pipeline; and (c) inadequate
       assessment of the urban sector reform process. IED agrees with the rating, especially since most ULBs
       were not prepared for either commercial borrowing or decentralized project execution. Domestic
       interest rates decreased during project implementation, making project subloans more expensive than
       comparable domestic loans.

   (ii) Effectiveness in achieving outcomes. The PCR rated the Project as ineffective, as two of the three
        loans were cancelled, and of the remaining loan, the utilization was only 34%, with only 3% of that loan
        being used for the original purpose. Although the solid waste subproject demonstrated the success of
        commercialization and the water supply project implemented some reform actions, there were no other
        public urban infrastructure projects in ICICI's portfolio. Thus, these subprojects had little demonstration
        effect, and ICICI's PCR indicated that the Project did not influence its credit allocation. IED concurs with
        the rating of ineffective.

   (iii) Efficiency in achieving outcomes and outputs. Due largely to the marginal share of the water supply
         and solid waste subprojects in the loan in the context of the economy; the PCR rated the Project as
         less efficient. Timely repayment of most obligations indicated good subproject repayment performance.
         The water and solid waste subprojects led to improved service quality, while the industrial subprojects
         led to reduced operational costs. However, there was neither any demonstration effect nor any effect
         on the overall economy. IED adds that the preparation and approval of three loans is labor-intensive for
         all parties concerned, and not very efficient if two loans have to be cancelled fairly soon afterwards.
         Therefore, IED agrees with the PCR's assessment.

   (iv) Preliminary assessment of sustainability. The PCR rated the Project as less likely to be sustainable
        (para. 55). Based on the two criteria of sustainability (para. 51.iv), the PCR stated that the subprojects
        are financially viable, given their physical and financial performance. However, it noted that ICICI did
        not recycle the loan funds through a revolving fund because of the lack of eligible subprojects. Thus,
        the PCR believed that the Project's sustainability "remains highly questionable." Regarding the two
        criteria, the first subcriteria, i.e., "appropriateness of the policy and institutional environment to maintain
        the achievement of the Project's outcomes," as stated in the PCR (paras. 42, 58, and 59), the policy
        and institutional environment to maintain achievement of project outcomes was not in place either
        during project design or implementation. Moreover, given the low utilization of loan proceeds, the
        second subcriteria, "conditions and utilization ratio of the facilities funded under the Project, and the
        financial viability of the subborrowers," seems to be too narrow to judge overall project sustainability.
        Thus, while the first subcriteria would be appropriate for future PCRs and project performance
        evaluation reports of financial intermediary loans (FILs), possible additional subcriteria for the
        sustainability of such projects would be (a) generation of a substantial revolving fund for additional
        subprojects; (b) the increased use of government and/or private funds to finance subprojects; and
        (c) the accurate targeting of viable (e.g., WSS and slum upgrading) subprojects in accordance with
        project design. Hence, based principally on the first subcriteria, IED believes the Project is not
        sustainable.

   (v) Impact (both intended and unintended). The PCR found that all subprojects had positive impacts--
       mainly in the form of improved urban environment or augmented public services. All subprojects were
       designed to improve the environment through waste recovery, waste management, reduction in
       pollutant emissions, or, in one case, increased water supply. The PCR concluded that the subprojects
       contributed to an improved environment, especially since they were implemented per design and on
       schedule. Thus, in the narrow sense of subproject impact versus overall project impact on the sector
       and the economy, IED agrees with this conclusion.
                                                                                                               5


E. Overall Assessment, Lessons, and Recommendations (PCR assessment and Validation)
   (i) Overall assessment. The PCR rated the Project as unsuccessful, giving it a rating of 0.7 on scale from
       0 to 3.0. Based on the evaluation of performance in the foregoing section, IED concurs with the rating
       with the exception of sustainability, rating it a 0 instead of a 1.0, resulting in an overall rating of 0.5.
       This lower rating does not affect the summary rating, which remains unsuccessful.
   (ii) Lessons. The lessons set out in the PCR were well detailed, and based on the discussion in the text,
        are fully supported by IED. However, since project implementation, approaches to similar projects have
        evolved in both ADB and India. In ADB, the sector program approach with accompanying TA has
        become the general modality; while in India, financing of urban infrastructure through bond issues and
        general tax revenue has become more widespread. Hence, ADB should consider the lessons learned
        from the Project not only for future projects in India, but also in other developing member countries
        where urban institutions are less developed. For example, financing of large infrastructure projects such
        as roads, bridges, and dams lend themselves to commercialization; while financing of smaller urban
        service projects such as WSS depend largely on local government capacity, tariff policy, and effective
        project design. These, in turn, require strengthening local government institutional and financial
        capacities to structure and implement sustainable projects. IED notes that upfront TA projects, such as
        those proposed in the project preparatory TA, will result in a greater degree of achievement of project
        outcomes.
   (iii) Recommendations. In the opinion of the PCR, a sector development program loan containing prior
         feasibility studies might have been a better project design than the FIL model (para. 43). Given the
         Project's long-term nature, as well as the detailed qualification procedures of the subprojects, IED
         agrees that the sector program modality could have been more successful for projects of this nature,
         particularly where local governments are the predominant subborrowers. This modality has been utilized
         by borrowing governments for several urban integrated development projects, comprising multiple cities
         and multiple subprojects, in India and other developing member countries.

F. Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization (PCR assessment and validation)

   The RRP (footnote 2) called for preparation of baseline monitoring and evaluation information for each
   subproject to be submitted with application for finance. ICICI did provide a benefit monitoring report toward
   the end of the project in May 2006. However, it did not compel the subborrowers to establish monitoring and
   evaluation systems, as required. Therefore, ICICI could not provide accurate responses to specific financial
   and operational information on the subprojects for the PCR.

G. Other (e.g., safeguards, including governance and anticorruption; fiduciary aspects; government
   assessment of the Project, as applicable) (PCR assessment and validation)

   Except delays regarding ICICI demonstrating compliance with safeguard covenants and adoption of an
   environmental and social management system, there were no safeguard violations or unintended impacts.

                                                        Independent
                                         Project         Evaluation
                                       Completion        Department
H. Ratings                               Report            Review         Reason for Disagreement/Comments
  Relevance:                          Partly           Partly relevant
                                      relevant
   Effectiveness in Achieving         Ineffective      Ineffective
   Outcome:
   Efficiency in Achieving            Less efficient   Less efficient
   Outcome and Outputs:
   Preliminary Assessment of          Questionable     Not                 Small number of subprojects, no
   Sustainability:                    sustainability   sustainable         revolving fund, no demonstration or
                                                                           spillover effects
  6




  Borrower and Executing        Not rated         Not rated          Industrial waste management
  Agency:                                                            subprojects did not contribute to
                                                                     outcomes originally defined.
  Performance of the            Satisfactory      Satisfactory       With the exception of ADB's
  Asian Development                                                  performance during Appraisal, which
  Bank:                                                              was not satisfactory
  Impact:                       Positive          Positive           Of subprojects only
  Overall Assessment:           Unsuccessful      Unsuccessful       0.7 vs. 0.5 on scale of 0 to 3, both in the
                                                                     range of unsuccessful
  Quality of PCR:                                 Highly
                                                  satisfactory

I. Comments on PCR Quality

  IED finds the PCR to be very thorough and detailed, with adequate documentation and data to support its
  findings and conclusions. IED did not find information in other documentation that changed the PCR
  findings.

J. Recommendation for IED Follow-Up

  In view of the PCR quality and findings, IED does not feel it is necessary to conduct a project performance
  evaluation in the future.

K. Data Sources for Validation

  The primary data sources were the PCR, RRP, Borrower's PCR, final benefit monitoring and evaluation
  report, periodic progress reports, mission memorandum of understanding, aide-mémoires, and back-to-
  office reports.
     REGIONAL DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
                            VALIDATION REPORT

        On 20 October 2008, the Independent Evaluation Department 1 circulated the draft
Project Completion Validation Report for interdepartmental comments. Comments were
received from the India Resident Mission on 31 October 2008, which were incorporated in the
final report. One comment, referring to the report's downgrading of the sustainability rating from
less likely to be sustainable to unlikely to be sustainable, was not accepted.

         The resident mission pointed out that the project completion report (PCR) (para. 51) had
identified subcriteria with reference to the (i) definition of "sustainability" provided in the
Guidelines for Project Performance Evaluation Report (PPER) for Public Sector Operations,2 or
the Evaluation Guidelines (p. 9); (ii) determinants of sustainability indicated also in the
Evaluation Guidelines (pp. 15­16); and (iii) sustainability subcriteria used in PPERs on FILs,
e.g., the Rural Enterprise Development Project3 and the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility.4
The PCR had given a rating of less likely, instead of unlikely, considering that (i) conditions and
utilization ratio of the facilities funded under the Project were satisfactory; (ii) the "subprojects
themselves were financially viable" (PCR, para. 55); and (iii) "all of the subprojects had positive
impact" (PCR, para. 56), if not the outcomes.

        This response to the PCR, however, argues that the first subcriterion, although valid,
seems to be misinterpreted, while the second criterion is too narrowly based. Regarding the first
subcriterion, i.e., "appropriateness of the policy and institutional environment to maintain the
achievement of the Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility's (UEIF) outcomes" (PCR,
paras. 42, 58, and 59), the main point is that the policy and institutional environment to maintain
the achievement of the facility's outcomes was not in place either during the design of the
Project or during its implementation.

        With respect to the second subcriterion, given that the loan "utilization was poor at 34%,
of which only two subprojects contributed significantly to outcomes (3% of total loan funds or 7%
of net utilized loan amount" (para. 53), the "conditions and utilization ratio of the facilities funded
under the UEIF and the financial viability of the subborrowers," are insufficient grounds to judge
the overall sustainability of the Project. This is especially the case, given that "following
cancellation of one committed subloan by one subborrower and prepayment by another, the
remaining $14.8 million was also cancelled, leading to early closure of the loan." In addition, the
limited generation of a revolving fund for additional subprojects indicates a lack of overall
Project sustainability.

        While the first subcriterion would be appropriate to future PCRs and PPERs of FILs,
possible additional subcriteria for the sustainability of these projects are (i) the generation of a
substantial revolving fund for additional subprojects; (ii) the increased use of government and/or
private funds to finance subprojects; and (iii) the accurate targeting of viable (e.g., WSS and
slum upgrading) subprojects in accordance with project design. This conclusion has been
reflected in the PCR validation report.

1
    The Independent Evaluation Department was named the Operations Evaluation Department, or OED, until
    December 2008.
2
    Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2006. Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector
    Operations. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2006. Project Performance Evaluation Report on the Rural Enterprise Development Project in Uzbekistan
    (Loan 1504-UZB). Manila.
4
    ADB. 2006. Project Performance Evaluation Report on the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility in India
    (Loans 1480-IND and 1481-IND). Manila.
