Validation Report




Reference Number: VCR: REG 2010-18
August 2010




South Asia Regional Cooperation Partnership
Strategy (2006­2008) Completion Report




 Independent Evaluation Department
                                       ABBREVIATIONS

            ADB             ­     Asian Development Bank
            BIMSTEC         ­     Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and
                                  Economic Cooperation
            BTILS           ­     BIMSTEC Transport, Infrastructure, and Logistics Study
            CPS             ­     country partnership strategy
            DMC             ­     developing member country
            GDP             ­     gross domestic product
            ICT             ­     information and communication technology
            OREI            ­     Office of Regional Economic Integration
            PPP             ­     purchasing power parity
            RCI             ­     regional cooperation and integration
            RCPS            ­     regional cooperation partnership strategy
            RCPS-CR         ­     RCPS completion report
            SAARC           ­     South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
            SAFTA           ­     South Asian Free Trade Area
            SAOC            ­     South Asia Country Coordination and Regional Cooperation
                                  Division
            SARD            ­     South Asia Department
            SASEC           ­     South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation
            SRMTS           ­     SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport Study
            TA              ­     technical assistance

                                              NOTE

                             In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

                                           Key Words

adb, asian development bank, regional cooperation and integration, south asia regional
cooperation , infrastructure, tourism, energy, information highway, regional public goods



Director General      H. S. Rao, Independent Evaluation Department (IED)

Team leader           R. B. Adhikari, Director, Independent Evaluation Division 1, IED
Team members          A. Anabo, Senior Evaluation Officer, IED
                      G. Castillo, Senior Evaluation Assistant, IED
Peer reviewers        H. S. Hettige, Director, Independent Evaluation Division 2, IED
                      V. B. Tulasidhar, Advisor, IED
                      H. Feig, Principal Evaluation Specialist, IED

                         Independent Evaluation Department, VR-2


 In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
 territory or geographic area in this document, the Independent Evaluation Department does not
 intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                                            CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                     Page

I.        INTRODUCTION...............................................................................................................1
II.       THE SOUTH ASIA REGIONAL CONTEXT ......................................................................1
III.      OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE REGIONAL COOPERATION STRATEGY AND
          PROGRAM........................................................................................................................2
IV.       IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT......................3
          A.        Implementation Progress ......................................................................................3
V.        STRATEGIC AND INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE ....................................................4
          A.        Strategic Relevance and Positioning.....................................................................4
          B.        Institutional Cooperation and Capacity Building ....................................................6
          C.        Value Addition .......................................................................................................6
          D.        ADB's Institutional Performance............................................................................7
VI.       PROJECT AND OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE .........................................................8
          A.        Relevance of Lending and Nonlending Programs .................................................8
          B.        Effectiveness in Achieving Regional Cooperation Strategy and Program
                    Objectives..............................................................................................................8
          C.        Efficiency in Resource Use ...................................................................................8
VII.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT ................................................................................................9
VIII.     KEY LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................12
          A.        Key Lessons ........................................................................................................12
          B.        Strategic Issues for the Future ............................................................................12


APPENDIXES

1.      Regional Socioeconomic Indicators                                                                                                14
2.      Regional Cooperation Strategy and Program Lending Program: Planned vs. Actual                                                    17
3.      List of Supported Studies on Regional Cooperation in South Asia                                                                  21
4.      Technical Assistance Projects Completed During the Regional Cooperation                                                          25
        Strategy and Program 2006­2008 Period
5.      Regional Cooperation Strategy and Program Results Framework: Planned vs.                                                         32
        Actual Results


SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX (available upon request)

A.      South Asia Regional Cooperation Strategy and Program (2006­2008) Completion
        Report (dated 5 November 2009)
        Available online at http://www.adb.org/documents/south-asia-regional-cooperation-strategy-
        and-program-2006-2008-completion-report
The guidelines formally adopted by ADB's Independent Evaluation Department on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
Steve Tabor was the consultant. H. Hettige, V. B. Tulasidhar, and H. Feig peer reviewed the
report. To the knowledge of the management of ADB's Independent Evaluation Department,
there were no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
                                          I.       INTRODUCTION

1.      The purpose of this validation report on the South Asia regional cooperation partnership
strategy (2006­2008) 1 completion report (RCPS-CR) prepared in November 2009 by the South
Asia Department (SARD) 2 is to review and validate the RCPS-CR and identify lessons and
strategic issues as an input to the preparation of a new regional cooperation partnership
strategy (RCPS) and related operations. The validation report is based on desk research, which
reviewed the RCPS-CR and other related reports and documents. It presents a contextual
review of the implementation of the RCPS.

2.      When the RCPS 2006­2008 was initiated in January 2006, SARD covered Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. In May 2006,
Afghanistan and Pakistan became part of a reorganized Asian Development Bank (ADB)
Central and West Asia Regional Department. The ADB-supported regional cooperation activities
in these two countries were not covered in the RCPS-CR and likewise are not covered in this
validation exercise.

                            II.     THE SOUTH ASIA REGIONAL CONTEXT

3.      There was progress in economic growth in many SARD countries despite a volatile and
challenging global setting, but performance has been mixed in achieving Millennium
Development Goals (Appendix 1, Table A1.1). The growth process in the region has been led
by high levels of private investment and double-digit rates of export growth. High rates of gross
domestic product (GDP) growth have contributed to steady progress in poverty reduction,
although the region continues to be home to half of the world's poor. 3 Among the SARD
countries, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and the Maldives have registered considerable progress in human
development; while India, Bangladesh, and Nepal are all on track to reduce child mortality by
half in 2015 (Appendix 1,Table A1.2). Despite such progress in social development, the region
is regrettably not on track to meet its income, poverty, hunger, and maternal health-related
Millennium Development Goal commitments; inequality is increasing; and several of the poorest
parts of South Asia are border economies, including northeast India, northern Bangladesh, and
western Nepal.

4.      Conceptually, major economic benefits from regional cooperation and integration (RCI)
include access to larger markets and regional public goods. These eventually would produce
economic efficiency gains as economies of scale are realized and innovations contribute to
creating dynamic comparative advantage. When such benefits are distributed fairly, this would
lead to increased welfare gains in the region. Potential for benefits accruing to all participating
countries is a major prerequisite for RCI success. Despite significant benefits that could be
gained from increased RCI, progress in achieving such benefits has been slow. Intra-regional
trade accounts for an average of just 2% of GDP, compared to 20% in East Asia. Similarly,
intra-regional exports have hovered around 4%­5% of total exports, while reaching 50% in East
Asia. 4 Although import tariffs have been significantly reduced, the costs of trading across

1
    ADB. 2006. South Asia Regional Cooperation Strategy and Program (2006 - 2008). Manila.
2
    ADB. 2009. South Asia Regional Cooperation Strategy and Program (2006­2008) Completion Report. Manila. The
    governments of Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka were consulted during the preparation of the
    completion report by SARD. The completion report was interdepartmentally reviewed in ADB.
3
    World Bank. 2009. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC.
4
    R. Chandra and R. Kumar. 2007. South Asian Integration Prospects and Lessons from East Asia. Paper presented
    at the Emerging Asian Regionalism Workshop, ADB Thailand Resident Mission, Bangkok, 19­20 July 2007; ADB
    and United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2008. Quantification of Benefits from Regional
    Cooperation in South Asia. New Delhi; World Bank. 2009. Accelerating Growth and Job Creation in South Asia.
2

borders remain among the highest in the world--the World Bank estimates that it takes more
than 33 days to export from South Asia compared to 12 days from Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development countries, and that trade in South Asia could be doubled if
appropriate regional agreements on roads, rail, air, and shipping were put in place. Major border
crossings are among the most congested in the world, leading to extremely high customs and
port clearance times. In addition, there are state level trade barriers, including local taxation and
entry requirements. However, smaller economies (such as Bhutan and Nepal) import heavily
from India. Despite vast differences in energy endowments, only India, Bhutan, and Nepal trade
modest amounts of electricity, and the national gas and electricity networks in the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) 5 countries are largely isolated from each other. 6

5.      Many factors hinder the success of RCI initiatives in SARD countries, including the
following major ones: (i) the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) has had limited effect
because of the exclusion of services and a large number of agriculture products from the
agreement; (ii) longstanding development challenges--such as persistent poverty, social
exclusion, and geopolitical and security issues--have taken precedence over RCI concerns; 7
(iii) many of the domestic policies, institutions, and capacities required to pursue successful RCI
are either missing or inadequate; and (iv) inadequate awareness and attention accorded to
potential gains in the area of regional public goods and optimum utilization of natural resources,
including natural gas and water.

               III.    OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF THE REGIONAL COOPERATION
                                  STRATEGY AND PROGRAM

6.      The main goal of the RCPS 2006­2008 was to help the region achieve its full economic
and social potential while playing an effective role in wider Asian integration. A reduction in
poverty and closer regional and cross-regional integration would also help to promote peace
and security within South Asia and beyond. The RCPS had six operational objectives--(i)
improved connectivity, (ii) trade and investment, (iii) regional tourism, (iv) cooperation in energy,
(v) private sector cooperation, and (vi) environmental cooperation. The management of cross-
border water resources was deemed to be initially too sensitive from a geopolitical perspective,
and a strategy of information sharing and environmental capacity building was adopted instead.
To achieve these operational objectives, a set of six complementary operational approaches
was to be pursued: (i) support for project- and/or program-based cooperation, (ii) support for
ongoing subregional cooperation initiatives, (iii) promotion of interregional cooperation, (iv)
strengthening of regional cooperation, (v) strengthening of mechanisms to deliver cooperation
projects, and (vi) strengthening of coordination with other development partners. Institutionally,
cooperation was to be supported in four different ways: (i) at the subregional level through the
South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation (SASEC) 8 program, (ii) at the regional level
through the SAARC, (iii) at the interregional level through the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-


    New Delhi; ADB and the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID). 2009. Study on Inter-Regional
    Trade and Investment in South Asia. Development Partnership Program for South Asia. Manila.
5
    SAARC, established in 1985, comprises Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan,
    and Sri Lanka. SAARC is headquartered in Kathmandu, Nepal. Foreign ministries of member countries play an
    active role in SAARC operations.
6
    World Bank. 2007. South Asia: Growth and Regional Integration. Washington, DC.
    http://go.worldbank.org/5OBGI14XS0; and ADB. 2008. Technical Assistance for South Asian Regional Cooperation
    in 2030: The Potential Role of India and Pakistan. Manila.
7
    See the discussion of regional cooperation impediments in ADB. 2008. Technical Assistance for South Asian
    Regional Cooperation in 2030: The Potential Role of India and Pakistan. Manila.
8
    The SASEC program was launched in 2001 with ADB financial assistance to support regional cooperation activities
     of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, and Nepal.
                                                                                                                     3

Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), 9 and (iv) through collaboration with
networks of regional policy research institutes.

7.     Planned ADB assistance for 2006­2008 included nine regional and national projects
with regional implications amounting to $1.566 billion and nonlending assistance comprising
10 regional technical assistance (TA) projects amounting to $6.7 million (Appendix 2). Project
lending was to include regional road, tourism, information technology, private sector trade
creation, trade facilitation projects, and support for the Bangladesh Padma Bridge and the
Dhaka­Chittagong economic corridor. Two of these proposed projects were prepared and
approved by the end of 2009 and others are under preparation. The nonlending program was
concentrated on support for regional plans and strategies for transport and trade facilitation,
energy trade, and environmental management (covering only air pollution and hazardous
waste). The RCPS program was updated and extended in regional cooperation operations
business plans prepared in 2008 and 2009 10 and a new RCPS is to be prepared and issued in
2010.

         IV.      IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT

A.       Implementation Progress

8.       Of the nine regional (including national projects with regional implications) investment
projects planned (para. 7), two projects were approved by the end of 2009. 11 This includes the
(i) Information Highway Project approved in November 2007 for a total grant and lending value
of $16.8 million; and (ii) the South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development Project approved in
November 2009 for a total grant and lending volume of $57.5 million. 12 A transport infrastructure
and logistics project is currently under preparation. Four of the planned projects were dropped
and one substantially delayed. No regional private sector operations were prepared during
2006­2009. Under the nonlending program, two regional TA projects were successfully
completed, five are ongoing, one is under preparation, and two have been dropped. ADB has
also financed regional TA projects for the SAARC and SASEC programs (SAARC II, and
SASEC II and III) to develop regional cooperation capacity. 13 The second regional TA in support
of SASEC was completed during the RCPS period and was assessed, at completion, to be a
success. 14 The third regional TA in support of SASEC is ongoing and is designed to identify and
prioritize subregional projects.
9
   BIMSTEC comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, and was established in
    1997.
10
    ADB. 2008. Regional Cooperation Operations Business Plan: South Asia, 2009­2010. Manila; and ADB. 2009,
    Regional Cooperation Business Plan: South Asia, 2010­2012. Manila.
11
   ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Asian Development
   Fund Grant Road Network Project II. Manila. This Project ($10 million from the Asian Development Fund regional
   cooperation fund) was not included in 2006­2008 program, got included in the 2009 RCPS Business Plan and
   approved in November 2009, but it was not reported in RCPS-CR.
12
   ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Grant, Loan, and
   Technical Assistance to the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Kingdom of Bhutan, India, and Nepal for the South
   Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation Information Highway Project. Manila; ADB. 2009. Report and
   Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans, Grant, and Administration of Loan to
   the People's Republic of Bangladesh, India, and Nepal for the South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development
   Project. Manila. Bangladesh ($12 million, Special Funds resources), India ($20 million, ordinary capital resources),
   Nepal ($12.75 million, Special Funds resources, and $12.75 million grant).
13
    ADB. 2008. Technical Assistance for Promoting South Asia Regional Economic Cooperation. Manila (TA 6512-
    REG, approved on 12 December, for $1.5 million); ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance for South Asia Subregional
    Economic Cooperation II. Manila (TA 6010-REG, approved on 27 December, for $500,000); and ADB. 2006.
    Technical Assistance for Subregional Economic Cooperation III. Manila (TA 6297-REG, approved on 11 January).
14
    ADB. 2006. Technical Assistance Completion Report: South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation II (TA 6010-
    REG). Manila.
4


                   V.       STRATEGIC AND INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE

A.      Strategic Relevance and Positioning

9.      The RCPS-CR rated the strategic relevance of the RCPS substantial because of its clear
strategic goals and the alignment with the development priorities of most of the countries in
South Asia and the region as a whole. This validation report rates the relevance of the RCPS
modest. While the RCPS was broadly relevant to the needs of the region, it overestimated what
could be successfully implemented given a complex geopolitical setting, weak political will and
trade creation prospects, only partial coverage of South Asian countries 15 in many RCI
assistance activities, and insufficient attention accorded to regional public goods. 16

10.     This validation agrees with the RCPS-CR's rating on strategic positioning as modest.
There were positive synergies to be gained from efforts made to build policy consensus for
regional cooperation at a regional level through SAARC, inter-regionally through BIMSTEC, and
at a project level through SASEC working groups. The RCPS also positioned ADB well to help
build ownership and capacity for regional cooperation by providing institutional support to the
SASEC working groups, the SAARC secretariat, and the BIMSTEC working group; and to lay
the foundation for project support through preparation of sector assessments, sector strategies,
and master plans. The emphasis on infrastructure development, through support for policy
studies and strategies in transport and energy, was in line with ADB's organizational
comparative advantage. 17

11.     The development challenges addressed in the RCPS were consistent with the needs of
the South Asia region, as confirmed by the findings of numerous studies undertaken prior to and
during RCPS implementation, and by continued support voiced by SAARC leaders for greater
regional cooperation at SAARC summits and in consultations with ADB. Overcoming challenges
in each of the areas of RCPS focus was designed to contribute to economic growth and poverty
reduction. In design, the RCPS was consistent with ADB's 2006 regional cooperation strategy--
it focused mainly on the first pillar of that strategy, which was to assist regional and subregional
economic cooperation programs on cross-border infrastructure and related software supported
by lending activities. 18 The RCPS built on lessons learned from previous confidence-building
support to the SASEC working groups and on a memorandum of understanding between
SAARC and ADB signed in 2004. Strategic relevance was maintained during implementation,
with the focus of environmental support broadened to include assistance for climate change and
with changes made to the lending and nonlending program in the 2008 and 2009 business
plans to reflect evolving regional cooperation priorities and project readiness.

12.    However, the strategy lost some elements of relevance during its implementation, as
only a few regional investment projects that were planned had been approved by the end of
2009, four were dropped and one delayed (paras. 7 and 8). The regional TA projects were
broadly relevant to the needs of the region. In addition to the project preparatory studies for the
two regional investment projects, the regional TA program included (i) the SAARC Regional

15
   Mostly Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, and Nepal.
16
   According to SARD, 'regional public goods' was not the focus of the PCPS. This validation maintains that there
   were some useful regional technical assistance supporting regional public goods such as air quality, managing
   hazardous wastes, and climate change, and RCPS could have included more, resource permitting, as regional
   public goods is an important area of regional cooperation.
17
   ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank, 2008-2020.
   Manila.
18
   ADB. 2006. Regional Cooperation and Integration Strategy. Manila.
                                                                                                                 5

Energy Trade Study and national energy-sector capacity building programs; 19 (ii) the SAARC
Regional Multimodal Transport Study (SRMTS); 20 (iii) the BIMSTEC Transport, Infrastructure,
and Logistics Study (BTILS); 21 (iv) the SASEC Corridor Operational Efficiency Study; (v) policy
studies undertaken by regional research institutes on regional trade, investment, and the human
dimension of regional cooperation (Appendix 3); and (vi) major knowledge products prepared on
quantifying the benefits of regional cooperation in South Asia (2008), interregional trade and
investment in South Asia (2009). 22 Assistance provided for a small number of national projects
with regional implications also made a modest contribution to RCI initiatives.

13.      In the presence of numerous political sensitivities, low levels of ownership combined with
lengthy and complex decision-making processes--and without regional cooperation firmly
anchored in ADB's country assistance strategies and programs of support--it was very unlikely
that RCI could have been developed in South Asia to the extent envisioned in the RCPS.
Hence, the realism of the RCPS as an assistance strategy can be questioned. Two of the SARD
countries (Bhutan and Nepal) are already heavily integrated in terms of trade through their
bilateral cooperation initiatives. Independent perception surveys undertaken for recent country
assistance program evaluations in India (2007) and Bangladesh (2009) found that regional
cooperation ranked very low on the list of priorities of all stakeholders for ADB assistance,
including developing member country (DMC) governments. Moreover, SARD country strategies
and programs covering 2006­2009 accorded little priority to regional cooperation, and did not
explicitly integrate regional and national programs of assistance. 23

14.     While it is useful to engage with the regional cooperation institutions and initiatives,
working with them simultaneously can be costly and complex, particularly when it is not
systematically strategized and implemented. Support was provided to the SAARC Secretariat,
the BIMSTEC Working Group, six SASEC working groups, and two regional policy research
networks without a detailed assessment of institutional needs, capacity development
requirements, or expected institutional improvement results. 24 One of the key SASEC working
groups (i.e., energy) has been inactive throughout the RCPS period and the long-term
sustainability of the SASEC working groups hinges on continued ADB support and ownership of
the participating DMCs.

15.    The RCPS was formulated in the context of evolving political economy supporting
regional cooperation in South Asia. The 12th SAARC Summit in Islamabad of January 2004 and
the 13th SAARC Summit held in Dhaka in November 2005 were interpreted by the RCPS to
have significantly enhanced the prospects for regional cooperation in South Asia. 25



19
   ADB. 2006. Technical Assistance for Preparing the Energy Sector Dialogue and SAARC Energy Center Capacity
   Development Project. Manila (TA 6368-REG).
20
   Prepared under ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance for Promoting South Asian Regional Economic Cooperation.
   Manila (TA 6187-REG).
21
   ADB. 2006. Technical Assistance for BIMSTEC Transport, Infrastructure, and Logistics Study. Manila (TA 6335-
   REG).
22
   ADB and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2008. Quantification of Benefits from
   Economic Cooperation in South Asia. New Delhi; ADB and AusAID. 2009. Study on Inter-regional Trade and
   Investment in South Asia. Manila; and Centennial Group. 2009. India 2039: An Affluent Society in One Generation.
   Manila (prepared for ADB).
23
   An exception to this is the Nepal CPS prepared late in the RCPS period: ADB. 2009. Country Partnership Strategy:
   Nepal, 2010­2012. Manila. This included a detailed thematic strategy for regional cooperation and integrated
   regional cooperation into the forward assistance program.
24
    According to SARD there have been numerous attempts to undertake reviews of capacity development
   requirements and that unfortunately have resulted in limited progress.
25
   see footnote 1.
6

B.     Institutional Cooperation and Capacity Building

16.     This validation report concurs with the RCPS-CR's rating on the RCPS's institutional
cooperation and capacity building dimension as modest. ADB has worked closely with regional
bodies, the private sector, nongovernment organizations, and civil society in SARD countries to
implement various regional TA projects. However, these were limited to the scope of the
approved regional TA projects. ADB was a catalyst for the two regional projects, involving four
SARD countries. Cooperation with development partners, however, has been limited to
cofinancing one major study and to cofinancing one of the country components of a regional
project. Evidence on the capacity building outcome of regional TA projects is weak in the RCPS-
CR. The RCPS-CR states that ADB's honest broker role could have been extended to mobilize
stronger coordination across central and line ministries within SARD countries. It notes that
while SASEC program had been successful in identifying and implementing potential regional
projects, more headway could have been made in developing regional projects had the foreign
ministries been more closely engaged from the beginning of the RCI project process. While this
validation report recognizes the importance of the honest broker role, such a role cannot be
unilaterally driven and needs to take into account political sensitivities. Such a role for ADB will
need to be underpinned by the stated desire of willing parties.

17.     ADB has provided considerable regional TA assistance to develop the institutional
capacity of regional organizations and national government bodies in identifying regional
cooperation activities. ADB support for SASEC has facilitated the working groups, most notably
in the areas of information technology, tourism, and transport to move beyond dialogue,
information sharing, and confidence building to the identification and formulation of regional loan
projects. Support for the SAARC Secretariat and the BIMSTEC Working Group has facilitated
the development and high-level endorsement of regional strategies for transport and energy
trade, both of which have the potential to serve as a foundation for future public investment and
aid mobilization efforts. ADB capacity building support for the SAARC Energy Center in
Islamabad was successfully delivered and has laid the groundwork for developing a network of
such centers in the region. Regional TA for managing hazardous wastes has developed training
modules for managing hazardous wastes, and the air quality monitoring regional TA provided
support for the establishment of a coordinated air quality information-sharing and cooperation
network.

C.     Value Addition

18.     The RCPS-CR rated the value addition of ADB assistance under the RCPS substantial.
This validation rates the same modest. ADB's value addition or additionality (what would have
happened if ADB had not provided assistance?) could be viewed in terms of additional
concessional finance; additional public sector finance mobilization and cofinancing; risk
mitigation and private sector finance mobilization; additional market access and realization of
economies of scale and increased trade facilitation through removal of physical and nonphysical
barriers. Very little progress has been made in all these areas; only $35 million out of $69 million
from the Asian Development Fund for regional cooperation was utilized by end 2009; a weak
private sector response; and varied degree of DMC ownership.

19.     As to nonlending program, four TA have been completed and their outputs (reports)
were to inform decision making on investment projects. For example, transport, information and
communication technology (ICT), and tourism studies have laid the foundation for investments
in projects with major regional and interregional implications. In transport, two milestone studies,
the SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport Study and the BIMSTEC Transport Infrastructure
Logistics Study, which aim to improve transport connectivity in South Asia, were completed with
                                                                                                                7

ADB support under the RCPS nonlending program. These studies represent strategic
interventions that lay the groundwork for potential investment opportunities over the medium
term. ADB also assisted in preparing the ICT master plan that led to implementation of the
Information Highway Project, which was the first regional project approved for South Asia. The
completion of a subregional tourism development plan became the basis for preparing the
South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development Project approved in late 2009. Development
outcomes from these lending and nonlending projects are yet to materialize.

D.         ADB's Institutional Performance

20.     This validation agrees with the RCPS-CR's rating on ADB performance in implementing
the RCPS and related programs as modest. As implemented (by the end of 2009), the RCPS
fell short of delivering planned projects and related development results intended in the RCPS,
although a number of performance targets were achieved in part. A comparison of the planned
and achieved results in the results framework is in Appendix 5. Key results that were in line with
RCPS plans included strong growth in South Asian tourism numbers and the identification of a
number of possible future regional projects in information technology and tourism. Compared to
RCPS targets, no tangible contribution was made to improving regional roads, trade facilitation
systems or regional energy trade; only modest progress was made in identifying and prioritizing
regional projects in transport, trade facilitation, and the energy sector; financing mechanisms for
regional tourism promotion have yet to be identified; the South Asia Business Forum has been
inactive; and no regional private sector activities were launched with ADB support during the
RCPS period. Links between RCPS and country partnership strategies (CPSs) were not strong.

21.     The RCPS results framework was designed to highlight the key outputs and outcomes of
planned assistance in the sectors, but it suffered from a lack of realism. The results framework
presumed that ADB assistance could make a meaningful contribution to improved infrastructure
and services in the region, although by the end of the RCPS period, no regional projects would
have been at a sufficiently advanced stage to do so. Moreover, the results framework baselines
and targets were imprecise, and ultimately, the results framework was neither tracked nor
updated during the course of RSCP implementation. There was little evidence to suggest that
the results framework included in the 2006 RCPS was utilized in managing the program, in
tracking performance, or as a framework against which progress was assessed in the RCPS-
CR. Similarly, project monitoring has focused more on outputs and very little on outcomes or
impacts of project assistance.

22.       Other than partnering with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
for a study on regional cooperation and mobilizing cofinancing from the OPEC Fund for
International Development for a portion of the Nepal cost of the regional tourism project, there is
little evidence that assistance was positioned to complement support for regional cooperation of
other development partners. In some cases, this has contributed to apparent duplication of
assistance efforts. For example, both the World Bank's South Asia assistance program and
ADB have generated studies on the economics of regional trade reform. 26

23.    Partnership and coordination efforts were largely activity-based and somewhat ad hoc.
There are no formal mechanisms for coordinating external aid for regional cooperation in South
Asia, and little effort was made by ADB to involve other development partners in the design or
implementation of its core program of support for SASEC, SAARC, and BIMSTEC. There would,

26
     World Bank studies on trade reform in South Asia undertaken during the RCPS period included World Bank. 2007.
     South Asia: Growth and Regional Integration. Washington, DC (http://go.worldbank.org/5OBGI14XS0); and World
     Bank. 2009. Accelerating Growth and Job Creation in South Asia. New Delhi.
8

however, have been particular advantages to encouraging the involvement of like-minded
development partners in the support provided for the SASEC working groups given that the
potential financing requirements for regional projects are likely to exceed the concessionary
resources that ADB has available for regional cooperation in South Asia.

24.      Internal ADB implementation arrangements for RCI have been fragmented and have
tended to isolate regional cooperation support from the mainstay of ADB support to the South
Asian DMCs. ADB's South Asia Country Coordination and Regional Cooperation Division
(SAOC), together with representatives in each of the SARD resident missions, has led the
regional cooperation support effort, with limited participation (and buy-in) of the sector divisions
responsible for the ultimate design and delivery of national projects. Coordination between
SAOC and other departments providing regional cooperation assistance (i.e., the Regional and
Sustainable Development Department, Office of Regional Economic Integration, and the ADB
Institute) has also been limited because of the lack of a common planning and performance
tracking system. In addition, the transfer of responsibilities for assistance to Pakistan and
Afghanistan to ADB's Central and West Asia Department has complicated the management of
ADB support to the region, and in particular to SAARC.

                   VI.     PROJECT AND OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE

A.     Relevance of Lending and Nonlending Programs

25.     The envisaged lending and nonlending programs were consistent with the RCPS
strategic thrusts. The RCPS was formulated through extensive consultation with stakeholders
and concerned staff and management in participating DMCs. Its lending and nonlending
programs focused on critical impediments in infrastructure, trade facilitation, environmental
management, and private sector cooperation. Once implemented, these projects are likely to
have high economic impacts. National projects with regional implications, which were not
originally identified under the RCPS 2006­2008, are also expected to contribute significantly to
increased connectivity in South Asia. Results framework was not adequate for monitoring of
implementation and evaluation at completion.

B.     Effectiveness     in   Achieving    Regional    Cooperation     Strategy    and    Program
       Objectives

26.    The RCPS-CR assessed the effectiveness of ADB assistance as effective on the
grounds that assistance in the trade and environment sectors was less effective but that
assistance was effective in the other sectors. In terms of meeting the objectives set forth in the
RCPS, this validation finds that assistance could only be rated less effective based on the
progress in achieving operational objectives as reported in the RCPS-CR.
C.     Efficiency in Resource Use

27.     The RCPS-CR has rated the efficiency of ADB assistance less efficient because of the
long delays incurred in the design and delivery of RCPS projects. This validation report concurs
with the RCPS-CR assessment and rates the efficiency of ADB assistance, in terms of the cost-
effectiveness of the design and delivery of assistance, partly successful. Regional TA projects
have generally delivered the outputs expected of them. Eight of the nine regional TA operations
that exited the portfolio during 2006­2009 were self-evaluated and rated successful in terms of
                                                                                                                9

achieving their objectives (Appendix 4). 27 Supervision reports from the ongoing regional TA
projects indicate that these are also likely to generate the outputs expected within budget.
However, their outcomes and impacts are not visible yet.

28.    Efficiency of resource use has been less than optimal because of long delays in the
design and implementation of projects and activities, partly caused by a complex consultation
process among countries and within regional institutions. ADB regional TA projects that exited
the portfolio during the RCPS period experienced completion delays of 6 months to 1.5 years
(Appendix 2). Ongoing regional TA projects are likewise experiencing delays. Development of
regional investment projects has taken an extraordinary amount of time. For example, a SASEC
ICT master plan was drafted in 2005 and accepted by the SASEC ICT Working Group in 2006.
Subsequently, the Information Highway Project was prepared in 2005­2006 and approved in
November 2007. The loan agreement was not signed until March 2009 and became effective
July 2009. Other regional and national loan projects with regional implications have either been
dropped or postponed for several years as a result of delays in design and complex decision-
making processes.

29.     Only studies in ICT, tourism, and transport have led to the preparation of follow-up
national and regional investment projects. Other studies (e.g., in the areas of trade reform,
private sector development, energy trade, environment, and human development) have
contributed to a wider understanding of issues and options for harnessing regional solutions to
development challenges, but have not led to specific follow-up activities or clearly identified
policy reforms. Limited involvement of other development partners in the design and delivery of
ADB regional TA has also reduced ADB's ability to leverage scarce regional cooperation
resources for follow-up loan projects.

                                      VII.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT

30.     This validation report concurs with the RCPS-CR and rates overall performance under
the RCPS 2006­2008 partly successful. Table 1 presents the summary of the validation of the
RCPS-CR ratings. In retrospect, the RCPS was too optimistic about the scope for RCI initiatives
given political obstacles and DMC preference to utilize ADB support for national objectives.
What was delivered was far less than what was planned and the time taken to initiate, plan, and
implement regional projects was very long. ADB has, however, made an important contribution
to developing regional strategies for transport, energy, tourism, and ICT and has initiated the
first generation of South Asia regional projects. In this sense, it may be said that the transition
from purely confidence-building support to concrete regional cooperation initiatives has begun.
The two regional investment projects (ICT, tourism) under implementation have already been a
useful learning experience. They have demonstrated that although cumbersome and
demanding in terms of time, resources, and bureaucratic procedures, it is possible to pursue
regional projects, and important process-lessons have been learned. Moreover, the context for
cooperation measures within SAARC is gradually improving following the signing of the SAFTA
agreement in 2004 and amid ongoing efforts under way to forge a regional response to the
challenges posed by climate change.

31.    The validation report rates the quality of the RCPS-CR satisfactory. It provides a candid
assessment of RCPS objectives and achievements, and summarizes clearly the factors
impinging on the design and delivery of the lending and nonlending assistance program. It is

27
     Of the nine regional cooperation regional TA projects for which completion reports were prepared from 2006 to
     2009, only ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprise Growth and Development in
     the South Asia Region. Manila (TA 6087-REG, approved on 19 December) was rated partially successful.
10

especially noteworthy for its effort to apply the methodology for regional cooperation assistance
program (e.g. Greater Mekong Subregion Program), particularly given the difficulties associated
with evaluating an assistance program that is mainly comprised of ongoing activities. The
strength, weakness, opportunity, and threat analysis and self-assessment included in the
appendixes of the RCPS-CR add value to the report. However, the RCPS-CR is repetitive in
presenting its findings, particularly evidence on actual achievements.

32.      There are gaps in the RCPS-CR's methodology and coverage. An assessment of the
effectiveness, sustainability, and impact of projects that have not yet been designed, approved,
or become effective is speculative and should not be included in an evaluation exercise. In
terms of coverage, important regional TA projects undertaken by ADB's Office of Regional
Economic Integration were not included in the report. The discussion of development
coordination in the RCPS-CR is limited to a review of ADB's achievements in mobilizing
cofinancing. There is no discussion of ADB's performance in fostering more effective regional
aid utilization or coordination. Likewise, in light of numerous political barriers to cooperation, the
report would have benefited from a more candid assessment of the quality of ADB's services as
an honest broker in helping to raise and tackle challenging regional cooperation issues, both big
and small.

33.    In addition, the RCPS-CR identified a number of the projects as national projects with
regional implications, including national road, railway, and power projects in Bangladesh and
India and a port project in Colombo, Sri Lanka. These projects were not classified in the national
CPSs and business plans as having major regional cooperation goals and objectives, nor
should they be treated as such in the RCPS-CR. Finally, the RCPS-CR could have drawn
lessons from the difficulties experienced in accomplishing the central challenge posed by the
RCPS--i.e., identifying and implementing quick and successful RCI projects.

     Table 1: Rating Summary--Regional Cooperation Partnership Strategy Completion Report
                        and Independent Evaluation Department Validation
                                RCPS-CR
Criteria                         Rating     IED Rating               IED Validation Explanation
Top-Down Ratings

Strategic assessment         Substantial   Modest         While the RCPS was relevant to the region's
(relevance and positioning                                needs, it was ambitious in terms of the feasibility
of the RCPS)                                              of implementation because of a complex setting
                                                          and low ownership of the regional agenda by all
                                                          participating DMCs. Coordination with DMC
                                                          agencies, development partners, and internally
                                                          within SARD and ADB was weak. Results
                                                          framework was not strong.
Institutional cooperation    Modest        Modest         Institutional cooperation has been limited to the
and capacity building                                     scope of the approved regional TA projects. ADB
                                                          was a catalyst for the two regional projects,
                                                          involving four SARD countries. Evidence on the
                                                          capacity building outcome of regional TA projects
                                                          is weak in the RCPS-CR.
Value addition               Substantial   Modest         The substantial value addition rating by the
                                                          RCPS-CR was based on the three-pronged
                                                          approach; sector studies (transport, energy, and
                                                          tourism); and support to national projects with
                                                          regional implications. This validation rates the
                                                          value addition or additionality modest in terms of
                                                          both financial and nonfinancial, because (i)
                                                          additional finance mobilization was low, and (ii)
                                                          little progress or efforts in achieving long-lasting
                                                                                                                  11

                                RCPS-CR
Criteria                         Rating           IED Rating                  IED Validation Explanation
                                                                  outcomes related to market access, economies of
                                                                  scale, and trade facilitation.
ADB's institutional          Modest             Modest            The RCPS fell short of delivering results
performance                                                       (projects). Partnerships and coordination efforts
                                                                  could be more systematic than ad hoc. Success in
                                                                  mobilization of cofinancing was evolving albeit
                                                                  modestly. Internal coordination has not been
                                                                  strong. ADB helped to advance planning efforts
                                                                  for regional projects in infrastructure and approved
                                                                  two regional projects. ADB's honest broker rule
                                                                  could have been extended to mobilize stronger
                                                                  coordination across central and line ministries
                                                                  within SARD countries.
Bottom-Up Ratings

Relevance of RCPS            Highly relevant    Relevant        This validation rates the RCPS projects only
projects                                                        relevant since their relevance was diminished as
                                                                four projects were dropped because of lack of
                                                                ownership and consensus.
Effectiveness of projects   Effective          Less effective   Modest progress was made in identifying and
in achieving RCPS                                               prioritizing regional projects in transport, trade
objectives                                                      facilitation, and the energy sector; and none in
                                                                private sector. Only about one-third of the planned
                                                                projects got approval. Only in information highway
                                                                and tourism was assistance likely successful in
                                                                meeting RCPS objectives. There was no tangible
                                                                contribution made to improving regional roads,
                                                                trade facilitation systems, or regional energy trade.
Efficiency                  Less efficient     Less efficient   There were long delays in the design and
                                                                implementation of assistance, and low returns (in
                                                                terms of follow-up projects) in many knowledge
                                                                products.
Sustainability of outputs   Less likely to be Not rated         As none of the investment projects are more than
and outcomes                sustained                           a few months into implementation, it is premature
                                                                to assess how these may be sustained.
Impact                      High               Not rated        Expected long-term impacts depend on the
                                                                success of implementation and how well the
                                                                investment projects are managed and sustained.
                                                                It is too early to assess the RCPS's impact at this
                                                                point in time. There is an inconsistency in the
                                                                RCPS-CR ratings. If project benefits are unlikely
                                                                to be sustained, their ultimate impact would be
                                                                modest at best.
Overall Assessment          Partly             Partly           The transition from confidence-building to
                            successful         successful       concrete regional cooperation initiatives has
                                                                begun but the RSCP was too optimistic about the
                                                                scope for regional cooperation and far less was
                                                                delivered than was planned. It fell short in
                                                                materializing regional projects and their
                                                                implementation, ADB's institutional performance,
                                                                effectiveness in achieving intended results, and
                                                                value-addition in general.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, IED = Independent Evaluation Department,
RCPS = regional cooperation partnership strategy, RCPS-CR = regional cooperation partnership strategy completion
report, SARD = South Asia Department, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Independent Evaluation Department, Asian Development Bank.
12

                      VIII.   KEY LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Key Lessons and Recommendations

34.    Prospects for and awareness of benefits for all, geopolitical factors, and coordination
across and within participating countries and institutions are key factors influencing the success
of RCI activities. The influence of complex procedures and changing geopolitical factors on the
preparation and implementation of regional projects suggest that the strategy and program
should be realistic, and certainly not overambitious.

35.     The RSCP-CR includes an extensive array of detailed recommendations regarding
measures that could be taken to implement regional projects, to strengthen support and country
ownership, increase resources for regional cooperation, and to strengthen ADB's internal
mechanisms. Of particular importance is the RCPS-CR recommendation that clear criteria be
established for identifying those national projects that have significant regional implications.
While the validation report broadly concurs with the recommendations provided, the degree to
which financing for regional cooperation should be increased needs a careful analysis, given
low levels of utilization for investment assistance during this most recent RCPS period. Since
concessional resources are scarce, their use should be put to mobilizing other sources of
resources. Given the importance of RCI in ADB's Strategy 2020, ADB should provide adequate
staff resources to SAOC to be able to pursue RCI initiatives more proactively and vigorously.

B.     Strategic Issues for the Future

36.    Set realistic goals, objectives, and focus. Potential returns from RCI in South Asia are
enormous, but progress toward economic integration in the region has been modest. The
impact of spreading limited ADB TA resources over a wide range of regional cooperation bodies
and efforts in South Asia, under the current RCPS, has been limited. Looking ahead, the initial
focus should be on cross-border projects and regional public goods. Bordering provinces/states
should be engaged in strategizing and implementing the next RCPS.

37.      Realistic regional cooperation objectives should be set in the forthcoming RCPS. ADB's
limited RCI resources should likewise be focused in those areas, and on assistance to those
institutions, where the probability of success is the greatest. More than ever before, there is a
need to focus on quick-yielding projects to ensure that tangible benefits from regional
cooperation are realized. Experience to date suggests that multi-country projects can take a
long time to design and move to effectiveness, as they require consensus building and
bureaucratic formalities to be completed in each participating DMC. Regional TA resources
could be devoted more to producing and disseminating regional public goods--including work
on the impact of climate change, renewable energy, and water resource management--which
could benefit the region as a whole and address issues of chronic poverty in bordering areas of
the participating countries. In addition, a high priority should be accorded to timely
implementation of the two ongoing regional projects.

38.     Ownership and leadership. A strong political commitment is needed to underpin
regional cooperation. More time and effort will be needed to build the trust and confidence
necessary to secure national ownership and leadership of RCI efforts. ADB's role as an honest
broker will be critical to ensuring that agreements reached in the formulation of regional
transport, tourism, trade, power, and climate-change strategies, and in the formulation of ADB's
regional projects, are honored in practice. In particular, ADB needs to actively engage foreign
ministries in each participating DMC in addition to local authorities in bordering states and
provinces concerned with cross-border projects.
                                                                                               13


39.     RCPS and CPS integration. The RCPS-CR rightly recommends a closer alignment of
regional and country level programs of assistance. Toward this end, regional cooperation
objectives and activities need to be better integrated in country strategies and programs. In line
with the example set by the 2009 Nepal CPS, country teams should be encouraged to prepare
country strategies and programs for fostering RCI.

40.    Monitoring implementation and tracking results. ADB assistance for regional
cooperation should be planned and managed in a way that emphasizes the delivery of intended
development results. In formulating the new RCPS, there is a need to pay more attention to
results monitoring and evaluation including establishing baseline information, monitorable
progress targets, and regular results-monitoring mechanisms.
14      Appendix 1



                           REGIONAL SOCIOECONOMIC INDICATORS

                            Table A1.1: Regional Socioeconomic Indicators

 Item                                 Year     BAN        BHU        IND        MLD        NEP         SRI
 Population, total (million)          2008    142.4        0.7     1,150.0       0.3      27.0        20.2
 Population growth (%)                2008      1.3        1.9       1.4         1.5       2.2         0.9
 GDP (based on PPP in current
 international $, billion)*           2008    213.7         ...    3,361.3        ...     31.5        92.0
                                      2007    196.8        3.3     3,096.9       1.6      29.5        84.9
 GDP share of world total (based
 on PPP, %)a                          2008      0.306      0.005      4.862      0.002     0.046       0.132
 Real GDP average annual %
 growth                               2008      6.2        ...        6.7        5.8       5.3         6.0
                                      2007      6.4      21.4         9.0        7.2       3.3         6.8
 Real GDP per capita % growth         2008      4.9        ...        5.2        4.2       3.0         5.0
                                      2007      5.0      19.2         7.5        5.1       1.1         6.1
 Growth rate of consumer price
 index (%)                            2008      9.9        8.4      10.7       12.3        7.7        22.6
                                      2007      7.2        5.2       6.3        7.4        6.4        15.8
 Fiscal balance b (as a percent of
 GDP)                                 2008     (5.3)        ...      (6.0)    (13.6)       (2.0)       (7.0)
                                      2007     (3.2)       0.6       (2.7)     (4.7)       (1.8)       (6.9)
 Total government expenditure b
 (as a percent of GDP)                2008    15.5         ...      16.6       64.0       17.1        22.1
                                      2007    14.1       29.4       15.1       61.7       16.1        23.2
 Total government revenue b (as
 a percent of GDP)                    2008    11.1         ...      10.6       44.6       12.8        14.9
                                      2007    10.5       19.6       12.4       48.4       11.9        15.8
 Real export of goods and
 services growth rate (%)             2008     7.0         ...      12.8          ...      -3.4        0.4
                                      2007    13.0       20.9        2.1          ...       0.5        7.3
 Real import of goods and
 services growth rate (%)             2008    (2.1)      55.0       17.9          ...      7.5         4.5
                                      2007    16.0        7.6        6.9          ...      1.1         3.7
 Intra-SAARC Export Growth
 (%)c                                 2008    42.9          ...     21.3       14.2       21.7        13.0
 Intra-SAARC Import Growth
 (%)c                                 2008    39.3          ...     20.7       14.2       14.2        14.2
 Intra-SAARC Exports Share
 (%)c                                 2008      3.1         ...       5.0        8.8      73.9         8.4
 Human Development Index              2006      0.524      0.613      0.608      0.749     0.530       0.742
 ... = not available, ( ) = negative. BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, GDP = gross domestic product, IND = India,
 MLD = Maldives, NEP = Nepal, PPP = purchasing power parity, SRI = Sri lanka,
 * GDP is converted to international dollars using purchasing power parity rates.
 a
    World Bank. 2009. World Development Indicators Online at
    http://ddp-ext.worldbank.org/ext/DDPQQ/member.do?method=getMembers&userid=1&queryId=6
 b
     Data refer to central government, except for Bangladesh and Pakistan, where data refer to consolidated
    government or general government.
 c
    Asian Development Bank. 2009. Asian Regional Integration Center Integration Indicators Database at
    http://www.aric.adb.org/indicator.php.
 Source: Asian Development Bank. 2009. Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2009. 40th Edition. Manila.
                                                                                               Appendix 1         15


             Table A1.2: Social and Poverty Indicators of South Asia Department Countries

    Item                                                 Year     BAN      BHU      IND     MLD       NEP         SRI


A. Population Indicators (2008)
1.   Total population (million)a                         2008 142.4         0.7   1,150.0      0.3    27.0        20.2
2.   Annual population growth (%)                        2008   1.3         1.9      1.4       1.5     2.2         0.9

B. Social Indicators
1.   Total fertility rate (births per woman)a            2007      2.8      2.2     2.7        2.6     3.0         1.9
2.  Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live
                                                         2005
    births)b                                                     570.0   440.0    450.0     120.0 830.0       58.0
3.   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)b      2007     47.0    56.2     54.3      26.0  43.1       16.5
4.   Life expectancy at birth (years) a                  2007     64.1    65.7     64.7      68.5  63.7       72.4
        a. Female                                        2007     65.0    67.5     66.4      69.5   64.2      76.2
        b. Male                                          2007     63.2    64.0     63.2      67.6   63.2      68.8
5.   Adult literacy (%)a                                 2007     53.5    55.6     66.0      97.0  56.5       91.5
a.      Female                                           2007     48.0    42.2     54.5      97.1   43.6      89.9
b.      Male                                             2007     58.7    67.1     76.9      97.0   70.3      93.2
6.   Primary school gross enrollment rate (%)b              c
                                                                  91.0   111.0    111.9     110.6 123.9      109.2
7.   Secondary school gross enrollment rate (%)b            d
                                                                  43.0    56.4     54.6      83.1  48.3       87.2
8.   Public education expenditure (% of GDP) b              e
                                                                   3       5.7      3.2       7.9   3.8       ...

C. Poverty Indicators
1.   Population below poverty line (international of     2004/
    $1.25 PPP per day %)                                 2005     49.6    26.2     41.6       ...     55.1        14.0
2.  Population with access to improved water
                                                         2006
    source (%)b                                                   80.0    81.0     89.0      83.0     89.0        82.0
3.  Population with access to improved sanitation
                                                         2006
    facilities (%)b                                            36.0   52.0  28.0              59.0    27.0    86.0
4.   Human development index f                           2007   0.543 0.619 0.612            0.771     0.553 0.759
a.     Rank                                              2007 146.0 132.0 134.0               95.0    144.0 102.0
5.   Poverty gap (%)                                       g   13.1   ...   10.5              ...     19.7    ...
6.   Poverty incidence                                      h
     (% below national poverty line)                              40.0    23.2     27.5     16.0     30.9         15.2
7.  Child malnutrition (% weight for age below              i
    age 5) b                                                      39.0    14.0     44.0     26.0     39.0         23.0
... = not available, BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, GDP = gross domestic product, IND = India, MLD = Maldives,
NEP = Nepal, PPP = purchasing power parity, SRI = Sri Lanka.
a
   ADB. 2009. Key Indicators. Manila.
b
   World Bank. 2009. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC.
c
   Data for India was for 2006; Bangladesh, the Maldives, and Sri Lanka for 2007; and Bhutan and Nepal, 2008.
d
   Data for Sri Lanka was for 2004; the Maldives and India, 2006; Bangladesh, 2007; and Bhutan and Nepal, 2008.
e
   Data for India was for 2005; the Maldives, 2006; Bangladesh, and Bhutan, 2007; and Nepal, 2008.
f
   United Nations Development Programme. 2009. Human Development Report. New York.
g
   Data for Nepal was for 2004; and Bangladesh and India, 2005.
h
   Data for Bangladesh and Nepal was 2005; Bhutan, 2007; India and the Maldives, 2004; and Sri Lanka 2007.
i
   Data for Bangladesh is 2005; Bhutan, 1999; India and Nepal, 2006; the Maldives, 2001; and Sri Lanka 2000.
Source: compiled by Independent Evaluation Department, Asian Development Bank.
            16        Appendix 1




                          Table A1.3: South Asia Department Countries Millennium Development Goals

Item                                      Year       BAN             BHU            IND           MLD            NEP          SRI
Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
 Proportion of population    Earliest year         66.82(1992)            ...    49.4 (1994)            ...   68.4 (1996)   15.0 (1991)
 below $1 (PPP) day          Latest year            49.6(2005)    26.2(2003)     41.6(2005)             ...   55.1 (2004)    14.0(2002)

 Population below national         Earliest year   51.0 (1996)            ...    36.0(1994)             ...   41.8 (1996)   20.0 (1991)
 poverty line                      Latest year      40.0(2005)    23.2(2007)     27.5(2004)     16.0(2005)    30.9(2004)    15.2 (2007)

 Share of poorest quintile in      Latest year      9.4 (2005)     5.4 (2003)     8.1(2005)             ...    6.1 (2004)    6.8 (2002)
 national consumption or
 income (%)
Achieve universal primary education
 Primary completion rate (%) Earliest year                  ...   81.3(1999)     62.0(1999)             ...   58.0 (1991)           ...
                             Latest year           54.8 (2005)    84.4(2005)     65.8 (2005)            ...   61.6 (2007)   93.4(2005)
Reduce child mortality
 Under 5 mortality rate (per 1990                        151.0         148.0          117.0          111.0         142.0            32.0
 1,000 live births)          2007                         70.0          84.0           72.0           30.0          55.0            21.0

 Mortality rate, infant (per       1990                  105.0          91.0           83.0           79.0          99.0            26.0
 1,000 live births)                2007                   47.0          56.0           54.0           26.0          43.0            17.0
Improve maternal health
 Maternal mortality rate (per      2000                  380.0         420.0          540.0          110.0         740.0            92.0
 1,000 live births)                2005                  570.0         440.0          450.0          120.0         830.0            58.0

Births attended by skilled         Earliest year   10.0(1994)     15.0(1994)     34.0 (1993)    90.0 (1994)    9.0(1996)    94.0 (1993)
health staff (% of total)          Latest year     18.0 (2007)    56.0 (2003)    47.0 (2006)    84.0 (2004)   19.0(2006)    99.0 (2007)

 Contraceptive prevalence          Earliest year   45.0 (1994)    19.0 (1994)    41.0 (1993)    42.0 (1999)   29.0 (1996)   66.0 (1993)
 rate (% of married women          Latest year     56.0 (2007)    31.0 (2000)    56.0 (2006)    39.0 (2004)   48.0 (2006)   68.0 (2007)
 15­49)
Ensure environmental sustainability
 Proportion of land area    1990                            6.8         64.6           21.5             3.0         33.7            36.4
 covered by forest (%)      2005                            6.7         68.0           22.8             3.0         25.4            29.9

 Proportion of terrestrial and     1990                     1.5         12.1              4.1           ...          6.8            13.0
 marine area protected (%)         2008                     1.8         24.6              4.6           ...         16.6            14.3
Develop a global partnership for development
Debt service as a percentage 1990                          34.8            ...         29.3             4.0         14.7            14.8
of exports of goods and       2006                          5.3            ...          3.7             4.8          8.7             7.0
services and net income from
abroad

... = not available, BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, IND = India, MLD = Maldives, NEP = Nepal, PPP = purchasing power parity, SRI =
Sri Lanka.
Source: ADB. 2009. Key Indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2009. 40th Edition. Manila.
                       REGIONAL COOPERATION PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY LENDING PROGRAM: PLANNED VS. ACTUAL
            Table A2.1: RCPS Lending Program: Planned vs. Actual Regional Projects and National Projects with Regional Implications
                                (Projects included in the RCPS 2006­2008 but excluding those transferred to CWRD)
                                                                               Original    Actual/
                                                                 Original       Target    Expected
 Loan                                                            Amount         Year of    Year of
  No.                 Sector/Project                 Country     ($ million)   Approval   Approval                         Actual Status
  A.      Transport and ICT
          Regional Connectivity in South Asia I        REG        220.0         2007        2012      Name changed to Regional Transport Network Project,
                                                                                                      programmed for 2012 (project preparatory TA for 2011),
                                                                                                      comprised of individual country projects for a total of
                                                                                                      $200 million.
          Road Sector Development Project              BAN        150.0         2007                  Dropped
          (Dhaka­Chittagong) Highway
          Development of Transport Corridor for        BAN        160.0         2008        2010      Currently being processed for 2010 approval for $100
          Trade Facilitation                                                                          million. Name changed to Transport Corridors Project.
          Padma Multipurpose Bridge                    BAN        250.0         2008        2010      Currently being processed for 2010 approval for a total
                                                                                                      cost of $300 million. A TA loan has been approved in
                                                                                                      2007 for $17.6 million to prepare the project design.
L2397     South Asia Subregional Economic              BAN          4.25        2008        2007      Approved during the RCPS period, 17 December 2007.
G0098     Cooperation Information Highway Project      BHU          5.85                              Renamed and approved as SASEC Information
G0099     (formerly Establishment of SASEC ICT         NEP         11.22                              Highway Project. Approved 17 December 2007. Signed
          Exchange Facilities Transport)                                                              in March 2009; not yet effective.
          Subregional Transport Connectivity           IND        250.0         2008                  Dropped according to India CSP 2006­2008, as per
                                                                                                      Government of India's request.
  B.      Energy
          Subregional Energy Trade among SASEC         REG        215.0         2008                  Dropped
          Countries
   C.     Tourism*
 L2578    SASEC Tourism Development Project            REG        100.0         2008        2009      Renamed as South Asia Tourism Infrastructure
 L2579                                                                                                Development Project. Approved on 16 November 2009,
 L2580                                                                                                for a total amount of $89.50 million.
   D.     Industry and Trade (standby)
          Private Sector Trade Creation Initiative     IND        200.0         2008                  Dropped. Renamed North Eastern States-Private
                                                                                                      Sector Trade Creation Initiative. Included as a potential
                                                                                                      India loan in the India country operations business plan




                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 2
                                                                                                      2008­2010; dropped from the 2009 CPS and the
                                                                                                      country operations business plan 2010­2012.
                                            Subtotal                    1,566.0
BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, CSP = country strategy and program, CWRD = Central and West Asia Department, ICT = information and communication
technology, IND = India, NEP = Nepal, RCPS = regional cooperation partnership strategy, REG = regional, SASEC = South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation,
TA = technical assistance.




                                                                                                                                                                  17
* Based on ADB's then existing sectoral classification. With the revised classification, this project now falls under multisector.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                                                      18
Table A2.2: RCPS Lending Program: Planned vs. Actual Regional Projects and National Projects with Regional Implications
                (2008 and 2009 loan and grant projects included in the 2008 regional operations business plan)




                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
                                                 Year of
                                                 Project
           Sector and                          Preparatory        Cost
           Project/Program Title     Country   Assistance      ($ million)                       Actual Status
     A. 2008
     Energy
      1.  Green Power                 BHU          2007              105.3   Project 37399-02, approved on 29 October 2008, for a
          Development                                                        grant amount of $26.28 million and a loan of
                                                                             $80 million, of which $29 million was Asian
                                                                             Development Fund resources and $51 million on
                                                                             Ordinary Capital resources terms
      2.   West Seti Hydroelectric    NEP          2007               45.0   Programmed for 2010, for an amount of $45 million
           Project
                        Total 2008                                   150.3
     B.    2009
     1.    North­South Fast           NEP          2006               50.0   Delayed until 2011 for an amount of $48 million
           Track Road
           Connectivity Project
     2.    Development of             BAN          2006              150.0   Transport Corridors Project, programmed for $100
           Transport Corridor for                                            million, for 2010
           Trade Facilitation
     3.    Road Network II            BHU          2008               20.0   Grant Agreement 39225-02, approved on 10 November
                                                                             2009, for an amount of $38.76 million
     Multisector
     1.    Improving Connectivity     BAN          2007               12.0   South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development Project,
           and Destination                                                   approved in November 2009, total cost of $15 million,
           Infrastructure for                                                including $3 million from Government of Bangladesh.
           Subregional Tourism        BHU          2007               22.0   Dropped
           Development                IND          2007               21.0   South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development Project,
                                                                             total cost of $28 million, including $8 million from
                                                                             Government of India
                                      NEP          2007               25.5   South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development Project,
                                                                             total cost for Nepal was $46.5 million, including $15
                                                                             million cofinancing from OPEC Fund for International
                                                                             Development
                        Total 2009                                300.5
   BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, IND = India, NEP = Nepal, OPEC = Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, RCPS = regional
   cooperation partnership strategy.
   Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                   Table A2.3: RCPS Planned vs. Actual Nonlending Projects
                                                                                   Original
                                                                        Original    Target
TA                                                                      Amount      Year of    Actual
No.                    Project Title                   Country/Region   ($'000)    Approval   Approval               Actual Status

 A.    Projects Included in RCPS 2006­2008a

6335   BIMSTEC Transport Logistics Study                 BIMSTEC           800.0    2006      14 Aug 06   Completed
                                                                                                          Amount increased to $95,000
       Development of Transport Corridor for Trade          BAN            900.0    2006      26 Jul 06   Ongoing
       Facilitation
6368   Preparing the Energy Sector Dialogue and             REG          1,000.0    2006      14 Dec 06   Ongoing
       SAARC Energy Center Capacity
       Development Project (formerly Promoting
       South Asian Economic Cooperation SAARC
       II)
6361   Managing Hazardous Wastes (formerly               BAN/BHU/          400.0    2006      12 Dec 06   Ongoing
       Review of Legislation, Policy and                 IND/NEP
       Implementation Practices on Hazardous
       Waste Management)
       South Asia Finance Ministers' Meeting                REG            400.0    2006                  Informal meetings on the sidelines of
                                                                                                          ADB annual meetings have been
                                                                                                          organized and a series of
                                                                                                          discussions is ongoing.
6302   Workshop on Proposed SAARC                           REG            150.0    2006      03 Jan 06   Completed
       Development Fund
6362   SASEC Tourism Development Project                Subregional        600.0    2006      13 Dec 06   Ongoing
                                                                                                          Amount increased to $950,000
       SASEC IV                                         Subregional        800.0    2007                  Renamed as South Asia Regional
                                                                                                          Economic Cooperation. Currently
                                                                                                          being processed for 2010 approval.
       Subregional Energy Trade Among SASEC              Subregional       800.0    2007                  Dropped
       Countries
6435   Preparing the SASEC Transport Logistics           Subregional       800.0    2007      12 Dec 07   Ongoing
       and Trade Facilitation Project (formerly




                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 2
       Subregional Transport Connectivity )
                                            Subtotal                     6,650.0

 B.    Projects not included in RCPS 2006­2008

6358   Preparing the SASEC Information Highway           BAN/BHU/          500.0              01 Dec 06
       Project                                           IND/NEP




                                                                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                      Original
                                                                          Original     Target
   TA                                                                     Amount       Year of      Actual
   No.                    Project Title                  Country/Region   ($'000)     Approval     Approval               Actual Status
  6417    Supporting Network of Research Institutes         SAARC          1,200.0                 09 Nov 07




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
          and Think Tanks in South Asia ­Phase II
  6472    Strategic Partnerships for Policy                   REG             700.0                25 Jul 08
          Development and Action to Foster Regional
          Cooperation in South Asia
  6512    Promoting South Asian Regional Economic           SAARC           1,500.0                12 Dec 08
          Cooperation II
  R295    Improving Connectivity and Destination           Subregional      2,400.0                17 Dec 08
          Management of Cultural and Natural
          Resources in the South Asia Subregion
  R336    South Asia Forum on the Impact of the             Regional          800.0                23 Dec 08
          Global Economic and Financial Crisis
                                             Subtotal                       7,100.0

   C.     OREI Regional TA Projects for South Asia

  R297    Private Sector Led Integration and Free           Regional          750.0                11 Dec 07
          Trade Agreements in South Asia
  R168    Technical Assistance for South Asian              IND, PAK          750.0                18 Aug 08
          Regional Cooperation in 2030: The Potential
          Role of India and Pakistan
                                              Subtotal                      1,500.0

   D.     Projects Financed Under the SARD
          TA 6337-REG: Development Partnership
          Program for South Asia

  6337       Study on Intraregional Trade and Investment  Regional            320.0                 5 Dec 06
             in South Asia
   6337      Regional Economics of Climate Change in      Regional            500.0                 29 Apr 09
             South Asia Part 1 -- Cleaner Technologies
             and Option
                                                 Subtotal                     820.0
a
  Included in RCSP 2006-2008, CPSs/COBPs approved between 2006-2008. Excludes projects that were transferred to Central West Department but were
originally included in the RCSP 2006-2008 pipeline.
BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, BIMSTEC = Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation, IND = India, NEP = Nepal,
RCPS = regional cooperation partnership strategy, REG = regional, SAARC = South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, SASEC = South Asia
Subregional Economic Cooperation.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                  LIST OF SUPPORTED STUDIES ON REGIONAL COOPERATION IN SOUTH ASIA

                                   Table A3.1: List of Supported Studies on Regional Cooperation in South Asia
                                                                  ADB Supported
                                                                    Regional
                                                       Year of     Cooperation
      Study                                          Completion     Program                               Funding Source
 A.   Environment
1.    SASEC Regional Air Quality Management            2008          SASEC         TA 6159-REG: South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation
                                                                                   Regional Air Quality Management
2.    Managing Hazardous Wastes                        2009          SASEC         TA 6361-REG: Managing Hazardous Wastes
 B.   Transport
3.    Subregional Corridor Operational Efficiency      2005          SASEC         TA 6112-REG: Subregional Corridor Efficiency Study in South Asia
      Study                                                                        Subregion
4.    SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport Study        2006          SAARC         TA 6187-REG: Promoting South Asian Regional Economic
                                                                                   Cooperation
5.    BIMSTEC Transport and Infrastructure             2008         BIMSTEC        TA 6335-REG: BIMSTEC Transport and Infrastructure Logistics
      Logistics Study                                                              Study
 C.   Trade
6.    Management Development and Institution           2004          SASEC         TA 6090-REG: Private Sector Cooperation in the SASEC
      Building                                                                     Subregion
7.    Cross Border Pvt Sector Cooperation in ICT       2004          SASEC         TA 6090-REG: Private Sector Cooperation in the SASEC
      Among SASEC Countries                                                        Subregion
8.    Promoting Trade in SASEC                         2004          SASEC         TA 6090-REG: Private Sector Cooperation in the SASEC
                                                                                   Subregion
9.    Quality Product Standards and Conformity         2007          SASEC         TA 36748-REG: South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation III
      Assessment
10.   Customs Procedures                               2007          SASEC         TA 36748-REG: South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation III
11.   Quantification of Benefits from Economic         2008          Regional      TA 4780-REG: Knowledge Management and Capacity
      Cooperation in South Asia                                                    Building
12.   Study on Inter-Regional Trade and Investment     2009          Regional      TA 6337-REG: Development Partnership Program for South Asia
      in South Asia
 D.   Tourism




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 3
13.   SASEC Tourism Development Plan                   2004          SASEC         TA 6362-REG: Preparing the South Asia Subregional Economic
                                                                                   Cooperation Tourism Development Project

14.   Subregional Tourism Human Resource               2007          SASEC         TA 6225-REG: SASEC Human Resource Development and
      Development Strategy and Action Plan 2006­                                   Capacity Building in the Tourism Sector
      2011




                                                                                                                                                      21
                                                                                                                                                              22
                                                                      ADB Supported
                                                                        Regional
                                                       Year of         Cooperation
        Study                                        Completion         Program                                   Funding Source




                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 3
   E.   Energy and Power
 15.    Assam Rural Electrification Program              2004              SASEC           TA 6010-REG: South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation II
        Development
 16.    SAARC Regional Energy Trade Studies              2008             SAARC            TA 6368-REG: Preparing the Energy Sector Dialogue and SAARC
                                                                                           Energy Center Capacity Development Project
   F.   Information and Communication
        Technology
 17.    ICT Development Master Plan                      2006             SASEC             TA 6232-REG: SASEC ICT Development Master Plan
 18.    SASEC Information Highway                        2007             SASEC             TA 6358-REG: Preparing the South Asia Subregional Economic
                                                                                            Cooperation Information Highway
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BIMSTEC = Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation, ICT = information and communication
technology, REG = regional, SAARC = South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, SASEC = South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                         Table A3.2: List of Supported Studies on Regional Cooperation Prepared in Collaboration
                                    with Network of Research Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia
                                                          Completion
      Study                                                 Date                       Institutes                               Funding Source
 1.   South Asian Economic Integration: SAFTA and          Sep 2006    Research and Information System for       TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Beyond                                                           Development Countries                     Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia
                                                                       Institute of Policy Studies
 2.   Structural Dimensions of Poverty in Nepal            Jul 2006    Institute for Integrated Development      TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
                                                                       Studies                                   Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

 3.   Economic and Political Empowerment of the            Sep 2006    Institute of Policy Studies               TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Poor: Country Studies of Sri Lanka                                                                         Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

 4.   Citizen's Social Charter in Nepal:                   Jul 2006    Institute for Integrated Development      TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Implementation Monitoring Report                                 Studies                                   Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

 5.   Monitoring the Implementation of the SAARC           Sep 2006    Marga Institute                           TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Social Charter in Sri Lanka                                                                                Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

 6.   Monitoring the Implementation of the SAARC           Sep 2006    Shirkat Gah                               TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Social Charter in Pakistan                                                                                 Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

 7.   National Citizen's Social Charter: Bangladesh        Sep 2006    Centre for Policy Dialogue                TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      A Reality Check                                                                                            Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

 8.   Monitoring the Citizen's Social Charter in India:    Jun 2007    Council for Social Development            TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Assessing the Status of Right to Elementary                                                                Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia
      Education and Right to Food (Mid Day Meal
      Scheme)
 9.   Assessing and Reformulating the SAARC                Jul 2008    Institute of Policy Studies               TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      Roadmap                                                                                                    Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

10.   Annual Monitoring of SAARC's policies and            May 2008    Prof. M.P. Lama                           TA 6189-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      programs                                                                                                   Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia

      Approved 2009 Think Tank Studies
      Trade and Investment




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 3
 1.   Vertical and Horizontal Industrial Integration in    Oct 2009    Institute for Policy Studies, Sri Lanka   TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      South Asia                                                                                                 Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
 2.   Liberalization of Trade in Services under            Oct 2009    Foreign Trade Institute of Pakistan       TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
      SAFTA: Prospects and Challenges for                                                                        Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
               a
      Pakistan




                                                                                                                                                               23
                                                          Completion




                                                                                                                                                              24
        Study                                               Date                    Institutes                                    Funding Source
   3.   Measuring the Barriers to Trade in Services in     Oct 2009    International Management Institute,      TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        South Asia: An Empirical Exercise                              India                                    Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
                                                                       Research and Information System for




                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 3
                                                                       Developing Countries, India
   4.   Infrastructure Development in South Asia:          Oct 2009    Indian Council for Research on           TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        Role of Foreign Direct Investment                              International Economic Relations         Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II

        Human Dimension of Regional Cooperation
   5.   Regional Consultative Process on Labor             Oct 2009    Refugee and Migratory Movements          TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        Migration from South Asia                                      Research Unit, Bangladesh                Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
   6.   Food Security in South Asia: Strategies and        Oct 2009    Pakistan Institute of Development        TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        Programs for Regional Collaboration                            Economics                                Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
        Economic and Social Impact of the
        Financial Crisis
   7.   Economic and Social Impact of Financial            Nov 2009    Pakistan Institute of Development        TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        Crisis: Protecting the Vulnerable in South Asia                Economics                                Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
   8.   Economic and Social Impact of Global               Nov 2009    Pakistan Institute of Development        TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        Financial Crisis: Implications for                             Economics                                Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia II
        Macroeconomic and Development Policies in
        South Asia
   9.   The Financial Crisis in the Gulf and its Impact    Nov 2009    Research Unit on International           TA 6417-REG: Supporting Network of Research
        on South Asian Migrant Workers                                 Migration, Ministry of Overseas Indian   Institutes and Think Tanks in South Asia
                                                                       Affairs at the Centre for Development
                                                                       Studies, Kerala, India
REG = regional, SAARC = South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation SAFTA = South Asian Free Trade Area, TA = technical assistance.
a
  Study number 2 is to be merged with study number 3.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                      TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PROJECTS COMPLETED DURING THE
                                  REGIONAL COOPERATION STRATEGY AND PROGRAM 2006­2008 PERIOD
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                            Completion Date
 TA
 No.   Title                 Amount    Approval     Effectivity   Expected      Actual        Financial   Rating              Key Lessons
6112   Subregional           250,000    2-Jul-03     2-Jul-03     31-Mar-04    30-Jun-05      28-Dec-05    GS      (i) The TA helps transport
       Corridor                                                                                                    working group members focus
       Operations                                                                                                  their efforts on a few prioritized
       Efficiency Study in                                                                                         corridors and this has resulted in
       the South Asia                                                                                              an investment project.
       Subregion                                                                                                   (ii) Because of fast evolving
                                                                                                                   regional development initiatives
                                                                                                                   under SAARC and BIMSTEC,
                                                                                                                   future TA projects for SASEC
                                                                                                                   (such as the proposed follow-up
                                                                                                                   project preparatory TA on
                                                                                                                   Transport Logistics and Trade
                                                                                                                   Facilitation) should incorporate
                                                                                                                   coordination and consultation
                                                                                                                   mechanisms among ADB-
                                                                                                                   assisted programs and activities.
                                                                                                                   This arrangement aims to avoid
                                                                                                                   a situation similar to the earlier
                                                                                                                   TA concerns raised on
                                                                                                                   overlapping scope and
                                                                                                                   responsibilities.
6131   South Asia            450,000    5-Nov-03     5-Nov-03     31-May-04    31-Mar-05      22-Sep-05     S      (i) The early involvement of
       Subregional                                                                                                 development partners (national
       Economic                                                                                                    tourism organizations,
       Cooperation                                                                                                 development agencies and
       Tourism                                                                                                     private sector), and the
       Development Plan                                                                                            distribution of lead roles to
                                                                                                                   different countries and




                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 4
                                                                                                                   organizations, have allowed
                                                                                                                   partners to take ownership of
                                                                                                                   some of the activities early on in
                                                                                                                   the process, facilitating
                                                                                                                   leadership in implementation and
                                                                                                                   reducing dependence on ADB
                                                                                                                   funding.




                                                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                          26
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                             Completion Date
 TA
 No.   Title                Amount     Approval     Effectivity   Expected        Actual       Financial   Rating              Key Lessons




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 4
                                                                                                                    (ii) The use of an action plan
                                                                                                                    matrix articulating progress by
                                                                                                                    project, responsibility, and
                                                                                                                    upcoming deadline has proven to
                                                                                                                    be an excellent tool to monitor
                                                                                                                    progress and maintain
                                                                                                                    accountability among the
                                                                                                                    partners.
6087   Small- and            750,000   19-Dec-02    24-Feb-03     31-Dec-04     31-Dec-05      31-Jul-06    PS      (i) Differences persisted
       Medium-Sized                                                                                                 throughout the duration of the
       Enterprise Growth                                                                                            regional TA over project and
       and Development                                                                                              invoice eligibility requirements,
       in the South Asia                                                                                            acceptable receipt format and
       Region                                                                                                       timing, and linkage formulations
                                                                                                                    with the Small- and Medium-
                                                                                                                    Sized Enterprises Sector
                                                                                                                    Development Program, most
                                                                                                                    likely because of lack of effective
                                                                                                                    and conclusive
                                                                                                                    dialogue/discussions between
                                                                                                                    South Asia Enterprise
                                                                                                                    Development Facility and ADB
                                                                                                                    during TA formulation.
                                                                                                                    (ii) A consensus on all the
                                                                                                                    implementation arrangements
                                                                                                                    (such as how and when receipts
                                                                                                                    should be sent, project and
                                                                                                                    invoice eligibility requirements,
                                                                                                                    etc.) should be reached between
                                                                                                                    the executing agency and ADB
                                                                                                                    before the TA is approved. This
                                                                                                                    would minimize delays in the TA
                                                                                                                    completion and ensure smoother
                                                                                                                    project implementation.
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                            Completion Date
 TA
 No.   Title                Amount     Approval     Effectivity   Expected      Actual        Financial   Rating               Key Lessons
5936   Identification and   785,000    22-Sep-00    22-Sep-00     31-Dec-01    31-Aug-04      26-Apr-05     S      (i) importance of consultation
       Prioritization of                                                                                           process to encourage more
       Subregional                                                                                                 active participation; strengthen
       Projects in South                                                                                           ownership of the SASEC
       Asia                                                                                                        program by Bangladesh, Bhutan,
                                                                                                                   India, and Nepal; and exploit
                                                                                                                   synergies between sectors; (ii)
                                                                                                                   need for longer lead time to
                                                                                                                   settle meeting schedule; (iii) start
                                                                                                                   with low risk and quick yielding
                                                                                                                   projects to build confidence in
                                                                                                                   the cooperation process; (iv)
                                                                                                                   mainstream involvement of the
                                                                                                                   private sector to ensure that their
                                                                                                                   interests and needs are
                                                                                                                   addressed in the cooperation
                                                                                                                   programs and projects of the
                                                                                                                   relevant sectors; and (v)
                                                                                                                   importance of ownership within
                                                                                                                   ADB of the SASEC program to
                                                                                                                   facilitate SASEC activities.

6010   South Asia            500,000   13-Dec-01    13-Dec-01     31-Mar-03    28-Feb-06      30-Jun-06     S      (i) Strong political will and
       Subregional                                                                                                 commitment are critical in
       Economic                                                                                                    moving regional cooperation
       Cooperation II                                                                                              forward.
                                                                                                                   (ii) Strong ownership at the
                                                                                                                   working group level facilitates
                                                                                                                   greater progress in cooperation.
                                                                                                                   To ensure such ownership, it is
                                                                                                                   important for ADB as a facilitator




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 4
                                                                                                                   to identify the common interests
                                                                                                                   and needs among the
                                                                                                                   participating countries and to
                                                                                                                   transform those quickly into
                                                                                                                   projects. (iii) Producing tangible
                                                                                                                   benefits from cooperation
                                                                                                                   activities as quickly as possible is




                                                                                                                                                          27
                                                                                                                   important in keeping the
                                                                                                                                                            28
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                              Completion Date
 TA
 No.   Title                Amount     Approval     Effectivity   Expected         Actual       Financial   Rating              Key Lessons




                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 4
                                                                                                                     momentum up for regional
                                                                                                                     cooperation among the
                                                                                                                     participating countries. To ensure
                                                                                                                     this, from the beginning, each
                                                                                                                     working group needs to set out a
                                                                                                                     clear time frame with specific
                                                                                                                     targets in the sector concerned
                                                                                                                     and monitor progress, (iv) Given
                                                                                                                     the complementarities between
                                                                                                                     some sector activities, synergies
                                                                                                                     are possible through the
                                                                                                                     coordination and cooperation
                                                                                                                     among the sector working
                                                                                                                     groups. Therefore, where
                                                                                                                     appropriate, interactions among
                                                                                                                     sector working groups should be
                                                                                                                     encouraged.

6159   South Asian           400,000   19-Dec-03    19-Dec-03     31-Jan-05      31-Dec-05      16-Jun-06     S      (i) While air quality management
       Subregional                                                                                                   is an issue of subregional
       Economic                                                                                                      importance, its success partly
       Cooperation                                                                                                   relies on actions and
       Countries for                                                                                                 commitments undertaken at
       Regional Air                                                                                                  national level. Improvements at
       Quality                                                                                                       subregional level are dependent
       Management                                                                                                    on closing the gap in the various
                                                                                                                     levels of development of air
                                                                                                                     quality monitoring and air quality
                                                                                                                     management systems among the
                                                                                                                     four countries.
                                                                                                                     (ii) Stakeholders from different
                                                                                                                     countries displayed different
                                                                                                                     levels of commitment to the
                                                                                                                     successful implementation of TA
                                                                                                                     outputs. This generally reflects
                                                                                                                     the level of priority attributed to
                                                                                                                     air quality management at
                                                                                                                     country level, even if this priority
                                                                                                                     may not always coincide with the
                                                                                                                     actual magnitude of the problem.
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                              Completion Date
 TA
 No.   Title                Amount     Approval     Effectivity   Expected         Actual       Financial   Rating               Key Lessons
                                                                                                                     (iii) Continued support to local
                                                                                                                     networks has financing
                                                                                                                     implications and requirements.
                                                                                                                     While some support may be
                                                                                                                     obtained in some instances from
                                                                                                                     the Clean Air Initiative for Asia,
                                                                                                                     alternative sources (such as
                                                                                                                     membership collection) may be
                                                                                                                     necessary.

6225   South Asia            600,000   23-Dec-04    23-Dec-04     30-Jun-06      31-Dec-07      22-Oct-08     S      (i) Experience during the
       Subregional                                                                                                   common minimum training
       Economic                                                                                                      program activities has revealed
       Cooperation                                                                                                   that national tourism
       Human Resource                                                                                                organizations have limited time
       Development and                                                                                               or resources for subregional
       Capacity Building                                                                                             activities. Inevitably, national
       in the Tourism                                                                                                priorities must take precedence.
       Sector                                                                                                        To optimize the limited resources
                                                                                                                     for concerted subregional
                                                                                                                     cooperation in tourism sector, the
                                                                                                                     intended activities should entail
                                                                                                                     well-defined and concrete
                                                                                                                     national details.
                                                                                                                     (ii) Training and workshops
                                                                                                                     provided by the TA can only
                                                                                                                     reach the field workers through
                                                                                                                     dissemination of national and
                                                                                                                     local level training programs. For
                                                                                                                     this, it is important to retain a
                                                                                                                     focal person within each national




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 4
                                                                                                                     tourism organization to ensure
                                                                                                                     the downstream training
                                                                                                                     programs continue to be
                                                                                                                     structured and implemented in
                                                                                                                     such a way as guided by the
                                                                                                                     human resource development
                                                                                                                     TA.




                                                                                                                                                          29
                                                                                                                                                         30
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                             Completion Date
 TA
 No.   Title                Amount     Approval     Effectivity   Expected        Actual       Financial   Rating               Key Lessons




                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 4
                                                                                                                    (iii) The idea of center of
                                                                                                                    excellence institutions reflecting
                                                                                                                    international best practice, as
                                                                                                                    envisaged in the TA paper, has
                                                                                                                    limited application in the
                                                                                                                    subregion, particularly in the
                                                                                                                    specialist areas of ecotourism
                                                                                                                    and Buddhist circuits, since there
                                                                                                                    is a wide disparity and capacity
                                                                                                                    constraints within existing
                                                                                                                    institutions in the subregion.

6232   South Asia            450,000   25-Feb-05    25-Feb-05     30-Nov-05     30-Nov-06      31-Aug-07     S      The key lessons identified in the
       Subregional                                                                                                  course of TA implementation
       Economic                                                                                                     include the importance of (i) a
       Cooperation                                                                                                  participatory approach involving
       Information and                                                                                              each member country's ICT
       Communication                                                                                                ministries, regulators, service
       Technology                                                                                                   providers, and service users
       Development                                                                                                  (individual and industry, urban
       Master Plan                                                                                                  and rural); (ii) a primary focus
                                                                                                                    placed on ICT in the context of
                                                                                                                    the Millennium Development
                                                                                                                    Goals, not simply with
                                                                                                                    technology catch-up; (iii) a
                                                                                                                    strategic distinction between
                                                                                                                    voice and data to avoid a tension
                                                                                                                    between what is technically
                                                                                                                    possible and what is politically
                                                                                                                    accepted; (iv) human resource
                                                                                                                    skill at various levels from the
                                                                                                                    capacity to engage in ICT
                                                                                                                    research and development to the
                                                                                                                    capacity to implement regulatory
                                                                                                                    regimes that maximize the
                                                                                                                    community and economic
                                                                                                                    benefits of ICT;
Regional Technical Assistance that Exited the Portfolio from 2006 to 2009
                                                                             Completion Date
 TA
 No.    Title               Amount     Approval     Effectivity   Expected        Actual       Financial   Rating              Key Lessons
                                                                                                                    (v) the regional ICT development
                                                                                                                    strategy being grounded within
                                                                                                                    the existing policy agenda and
                                                                                                                    aligned with the interests of the
                                                                                                                    member countries; and (vi) the
                                                                                                                    mechanism of joint supervision
                                                                                                                    and monitoring of TA
                                                                                                                    implementation through, say, the
                                                                                                                    steering committee meeting.

6299    Subregional          950,000    3-Jan-06     3-Jan-06     31-Dec-07     31-Oct-08      29-May-09     S  (i) Development, negotiation, and
        Economic                                                                                                finalization of major multilateral
        Cooperation in                                                                                          sector strategies and detailed
        South and Central                                                                                       action plans is resource-
        Asia (Phase II)                                                                                         intensive.
                                                                                                                (ii) The decision to harmonize the
                                                                                                                Central and South Asia
                                                                                                                Transport and Trade Forum and
                                                                                                                Central Asia Regional Economic
                                                                                                                Cooperation Program focused
                                                                                                                efforts to develop a regional
                                                                                                                transport and trade facilitation
                                                                                                                development strategy. The
                                                                                                                decision ensured an end to
                                                                                                                potentially duplicative efforts and
                                                                                                                effective use of ADB resources.
                                                                                                                It also strengthened Central Asia
                                                                                                                Regional Economic Cooperation
                                                                                                                as a key program in these
                                                                                                                sectors.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BIMSTEC = Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation, ICT = information and




                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 4
communication technology, SAARC = South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, SASEC = South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation, TA =
technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank.




                                                                                                                                                        31
           REGIONAL COOPERATION PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY RESULTS FRAMEWORK: PLANNED VS. ACTUAL RESULTS




                                                                                                                                                                      32
                  (Excluding Strategic Outcomes and Performance Indicators Transferred to ADB Central and West Asia Department)

ADB's Regional                                                                                       Indicators to Track




                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 5
Development Goal in South        Key Issues to Achieving the           Outcomes/Strategic          Progress Toward These
Asia                                        Goal                       Objectives of RCPS                Outcomes                          Results (2009)

Realization of South Asia's      Lack of efficient and effective   Improved transport and        Number of new                     The SASEC Corridor
full potential in economic and   regional transport connectivity   communications connectivity   subregional/regional transport    Operational Efficiency Study
social development as well as    hindering the movement of                                       projects identified and           has prioritized six transport
                                                                                                            a
the region's wider integration   goods and people                                                prioritized                       corridors; the SRMTS has
through regional/subregional/                                                                                                      identified 10 road corridors,
cross-regional cooperation       Lack of regional                                                                                  five rail corridors, and two
                                 communications connectivity                                                                       inland waterway corridors;
                                 adversely affecting business                                                                      and has developed model
                                 environment and living                                                                            cross-border transport and
                                 standard of the region                                                                            transit agreements; and the
                                                                                                                                   BTILS has identified South-to-
                                                                                                                                   Southeast Asia transport
                                                                                                                                   corridors

                                                                                                 Number of kilometers of           No transport projects
                                                                                                 transport corridors upgraded      mounted during the RCPS
                                                                                                 under SASECb                      that actually upgraded road
                                                                                                                                   corridors. National projects
                                                                                                                                   have been undertaken but the
                                                                                                                                   length of corridors upgraded
                                                                                                                                   in national projects has not
                                                                                                                                   been tracked.

                                                                                                 Number of new subregional         The ICT Development Master
                                                                                                 connectivity ICT projects         Plan includes a long list of
                                                                                                 prioritized as identified under   projects in the areas of
                                                                                                                            c
                                                                                                 SASEC ICT Master Plan             infrastructure, skills capacity,
                                                                                                                                   regulations, applications, and
                                                                                                                                   governance. The Information
                                                                                                                                   Superhighway Project is the
                                                                                                                                   first SASEC project but has
                                                                                                                                   suffered extensive startup
                                                                                                                                   delays.
ADB's Regional                                                                                 Indicators to Track
Development Goal in South   Key Issues to Achieving the         Outcomes/Strategic          Progress Toward These
Asia                                     Goal                   Objectives of RCPS                 Outcomes                        Results (2009)
                            Low intra-regional and          Improved trade facilitation   Number of trade facilitation     With ADB support, the
                            interregional trade and                                       studies undertaken under         SASEC Trade, Investment,
                            investment in South Asia                                      SASEC                            and Private Sector
                                                                                                                           Cooperation Working Group
                                                                                                                           has undertaken two studies
                                                                                                                           on streamlining of customs
                                                                                                                           procedures and
                                                                                                                           harmonization practices, and
                                                                                                                           development of
                                                                                                                           quality/product standards and
                                                                                                                           conformity assessment in
                                                                                                                           2007. ADB, in cooperation
                                                                                                                           with the United Nations
                                                                                                                           Conference on Trade and
                                                                                                                           Development, released a
                                                                                                                           Study on Quantification of
                                                                                                                           Benefits from Economic
                                                                                                                           Cooperation in South Asia,
                                                                                                                           which assessed and
                                                                                                                           quantified the benefits from
                                                                                                                           the SAFTA. In coordination
                                                                                                                           with SAARC Secretariat, ADB
                                                                                                                           has also undertaken a study
                                                                                                                           on trade in services.

                                                                                          Number of new trade              A Subregional Transport
                                                                                          facilitation projects/programs   Logistics and Trade
                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                          identified and prioritized       Facilitation project is under
                                                                                                                           preparation.

                            South Asia's rich and diverse   Increased promotion of        Financing mechanism               Financing mechanisms for
                            tourism resources have yet to   regional tourism              established to fund              joint tourism marketing are
                            be fully developed                                            subregional tourism projectse    being identified under ongoing




                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 5
                                                                                                                           ADB regional TA assistance.

                            South Asia's small share of                                   Number of new regional           South Asia Tourism
                            world tourist arrivals                                        tourism development projects     Infrastructure Development
                                                                                                                     f
                                                                                          identified and prioritized       Project was approved in
                                                                                                                           November 2009. A SASEC
                                                                                                                           tourism development plan




                                                                                                                                                            33
                                                                                                                           was completed in 2006 and
ADB's Regional                                                                                 Indicators to Track




                                                                                                                                                               34
Development Goal in South   Key Issues to Achieving the           Outcomes/Strategic         Progress Toward These
Asia                                   Goal                       Objectives of RCPS               Outcomes                          Results (2009)
                                                                                                                            identifies seven subregional
                                                                                                                            programs and 23 potential




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 5
                                                                                                                            national projects organized
                                                                                                                            around a series of tourism
                                                                                                                            circuits.

                                                                                           Number of tourist arrivals       During 2000­2007,
                                                                                           from countries in South Asia     international
                                                                                           and other regions to increase    tourist arrivals in Nepal, India
                                                                                                             g
                                                                                           from current level               (northeastern states), and
                                                                                                                            Bangladesh grew at an
                                                                                                                            average rate of 8%; and total
                                                                                                                            international arrivals were
                                                                                                                            about 5.7 million in 2007--
                                                                                                                            representing a 73% increase
                                                                                                                            from 2000.

                            Significant opportunities for     Increased cooperation for    Number of new                    Through TA 6368-REG, a
                            cooperation in joint              future energy trade within   subregional/regional projects    draft SAARC Regional Energy
                            development of energy             South Asia                   on energy trade identified and   Trade Study has been
                            resources in energy-rich                                       prioritizedh                     prepared, which identifies a
                            countries for exports to                                                                        number of potential energy
                            energy-deficient countries                                                                      trade projects. The study has
                            within South Asia and                                                                           identified investment options
                            neighboring countries                                                                           for bilateral energy
                                                                                                                            connectivity and trade,

                                                                                                                            The Green Power
                                                                                                                            Development Project (Loan
                                                                                                                            2463-BHU) is being
                                                                                                                            implemented to promote
                                                                                                                            cross-border power trade and
                                                                                                                            electricity access between
                                                                                                                            Bhutan and India.

                            Private sector is key driver of   Increased private sector     Number of private sector         ADB supported the
                            regional cooperation              participation both as an     initiatives/activities           establishment of the South
                                                              investor and a promoter of   undertaken by South Asia         Asia Business Forum in
                                                                                                               i
                                                              regional cooperation         Business Forum                   August 2002. No further
                                                              initiatives and activities                                    support was provided to the
                                                                                                                            Forum since 2005.
ADB's Regional                                                                   Indicators to Track
Development Goal in South   Key Issues to Achieving the   Outcomes/Strategic   Progress Toward These
Asia                                   Goal               Objectives of RCPS         Outcomes                  Results (2009)
                                                                                                       ADB has provided support
                                                                                                       (through OREI) to boost
                                                                                                       capacities in negotiating free
                                                                                                       trade agreements and in
                                                                                                       training private sector
                                                                                                       associations in regional
                                                                                                       cooperation. Support has also
                                                                                                       been provided to improve
                                                                                                       regional trade policies and to
                                                                                                       foster a harmonized response
                                                                                                       to the global financial crisis.

                                                                                                       Private sector involvement in
                                                                                                       SASEC activities has been
                                                                                                       encouraged. ADB supported
                                                                                                       the annual South Asia
                                                                                                       Sustainable Tourism Forum,
                                                                                                       comprising private sector
                                                                                                       representatives from selected
                                                                                                       South Asian countries and
                                                                                                       other development partners.
                                                                                                       Likewise, private telecoms
                                                                                                       operators and trade groups
                                                                                                       participated in discussions in
                                                                                                       preparing the SASEC
                                                                                                       Information Highway Project.
                                                                                                       ADB has also supported
                                                                                                       studies on Management
                                                                                                       Development and Institution
                                                                                                       Building in SASEC Countries
                                                                                                       and Cross-Border Private
                                                                                                       Sector Cooperation in ICT
                                                                                                       among SASEC participating




                                                                                                                                         Appendix 5
                                                                                                       countries.

                                                                                                       The Bhutan Green Power
                                                                                                       project was the first public­
                                                                                                       private partnership launched
                                                                                                       in the power sector of that
                                                                                                       country.




                                                                                                                                         35
ADB's Regional                                                                                           Indicators to Track




                                                                                                                                                                            36
Development Goal in South        Key Issues to Achieving the           Outcomes/Strategic              Progress Toward These
Asia                                        Goal                       Objectives of RCPS                    Outcomes                         Results (2009)
                                                                                                                                      No projects have been
                                                                                                                                      financed through ADB's




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 5
                                                                                                                                      private sector window

                                 Cross-border cooperation is        Increased knowledge-based       Number of TA projects on          TA projects on knowledge-
                                 needed to manage water             cooperation                     knowledge-based cooperation       based cooperation and
                                 resources and the                                                  identified and implemented in     capacity building were
                                 environment for improving                                          the areas of environment and      undertaken in the areas of
                                 quality of life effectively,                                       waterj                            climate change, hazardous
                                 minimizing environmental                                                                             waste management, and air
                                 costs, and promoting                                                                                 quality. Efforts were made to
                                 sustainable economic                                                                                 establish a regional air quality
                                 development, but cross-                                                                              monitoring program, and to
                                 border projects are difficult to                                                                     develop a regional hazardous
                                 identify and implement.                                                                              waste management program
                                                                                                                                      but follow-up has been
                                                                                                                                      limited. The focus of regional
                                                                                                                                      support in the environment
                                                                                                                                      has shifted to climate change,
                                                                                                                                      with a number of studies
                                                                                                                                      ongoing on mitigation and
                                                                                                                                      adaptation policies, and on
                                                                                                                                      clean energy and energy
                                                                                                                                      conservation.
ADB = Asian Development Bank; BHU = Bhutan; BTILS = BIMSTEC Transport, Infrastructure, and Logistics Study; ICT = information and communication technology; OREI =
Office of Regional Economic Integration, RCPS = regional cooperation partnership strategy; SAARC = South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation; SAFTA = South Asian
Free Trade Area; SASEC = South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation; SRMTS = SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport Study; TA = technical assistance.
a
  Subregional/regional transport projects are identified and prioritized by the Transport Working Group under SASEC, which meets at least once a year. No baseline
  available.
b
  Baseline to be established by project preparatory TA projects in transport by the end of 2006.
c
  Subregional ICT projects are identified and prioritized by the ICT Working Group under SASEC, which meets at least once a year. No baseline available.
d
  Trade facilitation projects are identified and prioritized by the Trade, Investment, and Private Sector Cooperation Working Group under SASEC and the Trade and Customs
  Working Group under Subregional Economic Cooperation in South and Central Asia (SECSCA), which meet at least once a year. No baseline available.
e
  Undertaken by the Tourism Working Group under SASEC. No baseline available.
f
  Subregional tourism projects are identified and prioritized by the Tourism Working Group under SASEC, which meets at least once a year. No baseline available.
g
   Data are obtained from the World Tourism Organization. Baseline will be established by 2006.
h
  Subregional projects are identified and prioritized by the Energy and Power Working Group under SASEC, which meets at least once a year. No baseline available.
i
  Activities will be undertaken by the participating countries of the South Asia Business Forum.
j
  Projects are identified and prioritized by the Environment Working Group under SASEC, which meets at least once a year. No baseline available.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
         REGIONAL DEPARTMENTS' RESPONSE TO THE VALIDATION REPORT


1.     Subsequent to the incorporation of inter-departmental comments, the revised final
version of the Validation Report was shared with South Asia Department (SARD) for their final
review. On 26 July 2010, the Independent Evaluation Department received the following
response (para. 2):

2.      SARD is of the view that during implementation, it became necessary to get some of the
building blocks in place that are necessary to evolve consensus on regional cooperation and
integration (RCI) in South Asia. It needs to be recognized that the Strategy took the time to
undertake flagship studies in Transport (SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport Study [SRMTS]
and BIMSTEC Transport, Infrastructure, and Logistics Study [BTILS]) and Energy (SAARC
Regional Energy Trade Study [SRETS]). The fact that SRMTS has been endorsed by SAARC,
and BTILS by BIMSTEC, and SRETS may soon receive SAARC endorsement are milestone
events. They have set the stage for developing regional energy, transport, and trade facilitation
markets. The initial outcomes can be seen in the form of Bangladesh-India transit agreement,
and in greater acceptance of regional connectivity, and trade facilitation (modernization of Land
Custom Posts is already underway). Thus, these building blocks, though not explicitly included
in the Strategy, became an essential part of implementation and for clearing the way forward.
