Validation Report




Reference Number: PCV: IND 2011-69
Project Number: 31324
Loan Number: 1968
December 2011




India: State Power Sector Reform Project




 Independent Evaluation Department
                                          ABBREVIATIONS

               ADB             ­     Asian Development Bank
               PCR             ­     project completion report
               PFC             ­     Power Finance Corporation
               R-OFAP          ­     reform-oriented operational and financial action plan
               RRP             ­     report and recommendation of the President
               SEB             ­     state electricity board


                                                NOTES

       (i)      The fiscal year (FY) of the government ends on 31 March. FY before a calendar
                year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2011 ends on 31
                March 2011.

       (ii)     In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

       (iii)    For an explanation of rating descriptions used in ADB evaluation reports, see
                ADB. 2006. Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation Reports for Public
                Sector Operations. Manila.


                                              Key Words

asian development bank, energy sector, independent evaluation department, india, lessons,
performance evaluation, power sector financing, project completion report, sector restructuring




Director General        S. Hutaserani, Officer-in-Charge, Independent Evaluation Department
                        (IED)
Director                W. Kolkma, Independent Evaluation Division 1 (IED1), IED

Team leader             K. Hewitt, Evaluation Specialist, IED 1, IED
Team members            S. Labayen, Associate Evaluation Analyst, IED1, IED
                        B. Palacios, Senior Evaluation Officer, IED 1, IED (until 15 Oct 2011)




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflicts of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this
report. To the knowledge of the management of IED, there were no conflicts of interest of the
persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                      PROJECT BASIC DATA
 Project Number:              31324            PCR Circulation Date:       Dec 2010
 Loan Number:                 1968-IND         PCR Validation Date:        Dec 2011
 Project Name:                State Power Sector Reform Project
 Country:                     India                                          Approved         Actual
 Sector:                      Energy           Total Project Costs            392.7            62.3
                                               ($ million):
 ADB Financing                ADF: 0.0         Loan ($ million):               150.0             21.5
 Approved ($ million):        OCR: 150.0       Borrower ($ million):           242.7             40.8
 ADB Financing Actual         ADF: 0.0         Beneficiaries:                    0.0              0.0
 ($ million):                 OCR: 21.5        Others:                           0.0              0.0
 Cofinancier(s):                               Total Cofinancing:                0.0              0.0
 Approval Date:               12 Dec 2002      Effectiveness Date:          10 Mar 2004     7 Apr 2004
 Signing Date:                11 Dec 2003      Completion Date:             30 Jun 2008 5 Sep 2008
                                               Closing Date:                30 Jun 2008 5 Sep 2008
 Project Officers:                             Location:                       From:            To:
                              V. R. Karbar     Headquarters                    2000            2002
                              B. Karunaratne   Headquarters                    2003            2004
                              P. B. Song       Headquarters                    2004            2004
                              T. Takano        India Resident Mission          2005            2008
 Validator(s):                P. Choynowski,   Team Leader:                K. Hewitt, Evaluation
                              Consultant                                   Specialist, IED1

                              B. Palacios,
                              Senior
                              Evaluation
                              Officer, IED1
 Quality Reviewer:            N. Bestari,        Director:                 W. Kolkma, IED1
                              Advisor, IED
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, IED1
= Independent Evaluation Division 1, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = project completion report.

                                 I.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.      Rationale

1.      India consists of 29 states and six union territories. The organization of India's power
sector is determined by the country's federal structure, and the subject of electricity is covered
under the Concurrent List in the Constitution, implying that both the central government and
state governments have the power to create legislation for the sector. Despite impressive
growth rates in generation capacity in the 1990s, India's power sector continued to suffer from
severe deficiencies. Country-designated performance targets were not achieved. Only 54.0% of
the target capacity addition under the country's Eighth Five Year Plan was put in place by the
central sector, and, during the Ninth Five Year Plan, 37.8% of the target was added by the
central sector with the private sector adding 28.8% of the target. The state sector performed
better than the country's central sector, achieving 87.9% of the target. However, these additions
to capacity were inadequate to narrow the demand­supply gap. Transmission and distribution
losses remained at 27.8% because of inadequate metering. In fact, some state electricity
boards (SEBs) reported system losses as high as 45.0%­57.0% as a result of pilferage,
tampering of meters, and overloaded distribution networks.

2.    None of the SEBs achieved the mandated minimum rate of return on net fixed assets of
3% without subsidies. Only Karnataka achieved a 3% rate of return with subsidies; all of the
2


others posted negative rates of return. The major reasons for this unsatisfactory financial
performance were the increasing gap between the cost of supply and the average tariff, as well
as the decreasing recovery rate. The poor financial performance of SEBs adversely affected
operational efficiency and led to increased system losses. With limited financial resources
available, most SEBs invested a larger proportion of their resources in generation to address
the demand­supply gap, and underinvested in transmission and distribution. This led to
inadequate distribution facilities, resulting in overloading, inadequate maintenance, high system
losses, and poor supply reliability, which in turn led to further insufficient revenues.

3.       The report and recommendation of the President (RRP)1 acknowledged the Government
of India's recognition of the problems in the sector and the need for comprehensive reforms in
the form of the draft Electricity Bill 2001. This bill consolidated previous acts relating to power
sector operations, including the setting up of independent generation, transmission, and
distribution companies as well as regulatory agencies; national and state-level power sector
planning; consumer protection and dispute resolution; and safety aspects. Other features of the
bill were (i) open access to transmission systems, (ii) compulsory metering of all consumers
within 2 years of enacting the bill, (iii) facilitating the entry of power traders, (iv) prioritizing the
use of proceeds from privatizing power sector assets, and (v) promoting more targeted,
transparent subsidies to rural and poor consumers. This bill was the government's main
initiative to reform the power sector.

4.      At the time of the project, the overall operational strategy of the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) for India consisted of supporting efforts to achieve higher sustainable economic
growth for promoting employment and reducing poverty. Its contribution to higher growth
focused on improving supply-side efficiency of the economy, especially reducing bottlenecks in
key infrastructure sectors. Emphasis was on improving the policy, institutional, and regulatory
framework to enhance the efficiency of public sector operations and to encourage private
investment. ADB's strategy also recognized the need to provide support at the state level to
maximize its development impact and to demonstrate its operations to other states. State-level
economic reforms also needed support and incentives, because states have considerable
autonomy and major legislative, administrative, and fiscal responsibilities in many economic and
social sectors.

B.        Expected Impact

5.      The project was to support reform-minded SEBs and to contribute to their financial
recovery through increased efficiency, lower transmission and distribution losses, and better
metering and collections. Healthier financial conditions of these SEBs and improved delivery of
services to consumers were expected from the project. The indirect benefits included tariff
rationalization by independent regulatory bodies, resulting in more equitable tariff levels across
consumer categories and leading to efficient allocations of financial and economic resources.
Improvements in the quality of the power supply were to enhance agricultural production and to
discourage the use of inefficient captive power generation by agricultural and certain industrial
consumers. Improvement of the financial position of utilities was to reduce the burden on state
government budgets and to enable the allocation of more budgetary resources to other needy
sectors of the economy. Tariff decisions by independent regulatory bodies and a stable power
supply were to encourage more private sector participation, both in the power sector and in


1
    ADB. 2002. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the Power
    Finance Corporation Limited, India, for the State Power Sector Reform Project. Manila.
                                                                                                   3


other parts of the economy. Outside of outcome and output information discussed below, the
RRP did not provide any additional impact, relevant baseline, or target details.

C.     Objectives or Expected Outcomes

6.        The objective of the project was to help improve the state power sector of India so that it
became financially self-sustaining and capable of adequately providing its share of services for
the country's economic and social development. The immediate objectives were to (i) promote
power sector reforms in selected states; (ii) help establish independent regulatory bodies; and
(iii) functionally unbundle the sector entities so that they became commercially and operationally
autonomous, efficient, and financially viable. To promote the achievement of these objectives,
ADB was to provide financial assistance, channeled through the Power Finance Corporation
(PFC), to selected SEBs to meet part of their financing requirements for reducing system
losses, enhancing operational flexibility and efficiency, and improving the delivery of services to
consumers.

D.     Components and Outputs

7.       The project was to finance subprojects that would improve system operations and
reduce system losses, such as rehabilitation of power transmission and distribution facilities.
Financing was also available for improving access to electricity by extending transmission and
distribution networks. Renovation and modernization of existing generating facilities that were
required to achieve compliance with environmental regulations and to improve efficiency were
also to be considered. Project outcomes included financially viable state-level power utilities that
achieved a minimum of a 3% return on net fixed assets as mandated by law, and a restructured
power sector regulated in an independent, transparent manner and in a depoliticized tariff
setting.

E.     Provision of Inputs

8.        ADB provided a loan of $150 million from its ordinary capital resources. The loan had a
20-year term, including a grace period of 5 years, with repayments linked to actual
disbursements under the loan; an interest rate determined in accordance with ADB's London
interbank offered rate (LIBOR)-based lending facility; a commitment charge of 0.75% per
annum; a front-end fee of 1.0%; and other terms and conditions outlined in the loan agreement.
PFC was to relend the proceeds of the loan to eligible subborrowers for subprojects to which
ADB had agreed. These subloans were to have a maximum maturity of 15 years, including a
grace period not exceeding 5 years and a relending rate determined in accordance with PFC's
operational policy statement and individual reform-oriented operational and financial action
plans (R-OFAPs) agreed to by the eligible subborrowers. The loan was to be used only to
finance a part or whole of the direct and estimated indirect foreign exchange components of
subprojects and was to be limited to 60% of the total subproject cost. The maximum lending
limit for any single subborrower was to be 40% of the total loan, except where a higher limit was
warranted due to special circumstances. PFC was to obtain ADB's prior approval for such
increases.

F.     Implementation Arrangements

9.      PFC was to be the executing agency for the project. Its chairperson and managing
director were to be responsible for the overall management. Day-to-day implementation of the
project was to be carried out by the relevant divisions under guidance from their respective
4


directors. Formulation and finalization of R-OFAPs, determination of maximum lending limits for
R-OFAP milestones, and monitoring of their compliance were to be the responsibility of the
Institutional Appraisal and Development Division. Appraisal and approval of subprojects and
monitoring of their implementation, including procurement activities, were to be the responsibility
of the Projects Division. The Externally Aided Projects Unit was to be responsible for assessing
the environmental and social feasibility of subprojects and monitoring the implementation of
environmental and social impact mitigation measures. The Externally Aided Projects Unit,
through its Environmental Assessment and Monitoring Cell, was also to be responsible for
monitoring resettlement preparation and implementation. The head of the unit was to be
responsible for overall coordination and execution, and for liaising between PFC and ADB.

10.     Subproject appraisal reports were to be prepared by PFC, according to the format
outlined in its Outline and Guiding Principles for Project-Loan Appraisal Reports. Approval
procedures were to follow PFC's standard practices for project appraisal and approval. Approval
of a subproject depended upon (i) meeting economic, financial, and environmental and social
acceptance criteria; and (ii) not exceeding the borrowing limit assigned to the subborrower at
that stage of the reform process. Further, each major milestone in the R-OFAP was to be linked
to a maximum borrowing limit for that milestone. Subprojects were to be approved within this
applicable borrowing limit at any given time. To raise the limit, the subborrower was to complete
the reform tasks specified for the next phase. If a particular phase of the R-OFAP was not
completed within the agreed time frame, PFC was allowed, with ADB's concurrence, to divert
loan funds to a better-performing subborrower. The maximum borrowing limit, the corresponding
R-OFAP milestone, and the time frame were to be determined at the stage of selecting the
subborrower.

11.     The first subproject for each SEB was to be submitted to ADB for review prior to
approval by PFC to ensure that ADB guidelines on procurement, environmental and social
assessment, and economic and financial analyses, as well as the terms and conditions of the
ADB loan, were followed. Thereafter, only subprojects exceeding $10 million were to require
prior review by ADB. However, irrespective of this limit, prior review by ADB was required for
financing of any subproject that either involved significant environmental impacts or
resettlement.

12.     The project was to be implemented over a period of 5 years, commencing in January
2003. The commitment period during which PFC was to continue to approve subprojects was
limited to the first 4 years. Disbursements for the approved subprojects were to continue until
the end of the fifth year.

13.     Procurement of goods and services financed under the project were to follow provisions
applicable to development finance institutions in ADB's Guidelines for Procurement. For
contracts valued at $5 million or more, subborrowers were to follow international competitive
bidding procedures. The project's loan proceeds were to be disbursed to finance eligible
subprojects in accordance with ADB's Loan Disbursement Handbook, January 2001, as
amended from time to time. For ease of loan disbursements, the borrower was allowed to set up
an imprest account with a local commercial bank acceptable to ADB in accordance with ADB's
Loan Disbursement Handbook. PFC opted for repayments linked to disbursements under the
loan in accordance with the Policy on Review of ADB's Financial Loan Products.2


2
    ADB. 2001. Review of Asian Development Bank's Financial Loan Products. Manila (R-79-01, Revision 1, Final, 19
    June).
                                                                                               5


14.    The RRP identified several risks. The main risk was the financial viability of SEBs and
hence PFC. PFC mitigated this credit risk by securing subproject loans through escrow account
arrangements and state government guarantees. In addition, PFC was to select subborrowers
based strictly on the proposed R-OFAP mechanism and to ensure timely risk control
management. PFC was also to monitor and control loan portfolio quality, its proper provisioning,
and the resulting capital adequacy in a recurrent manner.

15.     Associated with the loan were 26 covenants, which may be found in Appendix 6 of the
project completion report (PCR).3

                      II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

16.     The PCR stated that the design of the project was partly relevant. The project was
designed to promote the central government's efforts at reform in the states and to address
power sector issues through financial intermediaries like PFC. Reforms involved establishing an
independent regulatory system, functionally unbundling sector entities, improving operating
performance, reducing system losses, and improving power delivery to consumers. Assistance
to the power sector through PFC was expected to reach the many states and union territories
that needed help with reforms. At appraisal, the project was consistent with ADB's country
strategy for the power sector, which was to provide financial assistance to states that were
committed to reform and to support investments in state power development. The project was
also consistent with ADB's operating strategy for India, which sought to reduce bottlenecks in
key infrastructure and to improve the policy, institutional, and regulatory framework to increase
efficiency in the public sector and to encourage private investment. The PCR also noted that the
expected outcomes of the project were consistent with the government's policy to promote
investments and to implement reforms in the power sector, and with ADB's country strategy for
India's power sector.

17.     However, the PCR also acknowledged that the loan was poorly utilized, specifically
asserting that the power utilities would have borrowed project resources but for stringent social
and environmental requirements, and procurement compliances. These requirements and
compliances served as disincentives and generally were not in line with India's prevailing
financial institutions' loan requirements. Further, this validation finds that consultations with
SEBs and state governments should have taken place to better gauge design relevance.
Hence, this validation rates the project design less relevant.

B.        Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcomes

18.     The PCR rated the project less effective in achieving outcomes. Loan utilization was
poor, at 14.3%, and only two states (Maharashtra and West Bengal) used the ADB loan
proceeds, compared to 5 out of about 14 states identified at appraisal. Regarding the two state
participants, PFC generally complied with the 26 loan covenants, except the covenant related to
the submission of progress reports every 6 months and the covenant related to the PFC's PCR.
Also, the ADB PCR failed to discuss whether the two participating states' utilities achieved a
minimum of 3% return on net fixed assets. With all considered, this validation downgrades the
rating to ineffective.


3
    ADB. 2010. Completion Report: State Power Sector Reform Project in India. Manila.
6


C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outputs and Outcomes

19.   The PCR rated the project inefficient as the result of implementation delays, the fact that
two subprojects were still under implementation, and the small 14.3% drawing on the loan by
PFC. This validation concurs with the PCR's rating.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

20.     The PCR rated the project likely to be sustainable. The PCR stated, without proffering
any evidence that power tariffs are determined primarily on a cost-plus basis, that investments
made by subborrowers will earn adequate revenues to make the subprojects financially viable.
The PCR stated that subborrowers have the in-house capacity to operate and maintain the
subprojects to the specified standards, and the subprojects are expected to be optimally used
throughout their life because overall demand for power is expected to grow and the physical
assets created under the project will be used. It also stated that reforms implemented were also
irreversible, as they have strong support among stakeholders.

21.     However, the evidence provided by the PCR for making such statements is inadequate.
Tariffs in India are not normally cost-plus. Rather, they are heavily influenced by political
considerations, even in cases where state electricity regulatory boards have been established. If
SEBs are still not profitable, then sustainability cannot be assumed. Strong growth of electricity
demand is also not a valid indicator that subprojects financed under the project will be optimally
used. Thus, this validation downgrades the rating to less likely sustainable.

E.     Impact

22.    The PCR stated that the subprojects had positive impacts, mainly in the form of
enhancing power availability and delivery to consumers. Subprojects were designed to improve
the power availability and to enhance the transmission and distribution capability of the existing
power networks within the respective states. While their benefits to the respective states were
unquantifiable due to lack of data, the PCR concluded that subprojects enhanced the power
availability and the power delivery system to consumers in Maharashtra and West Bengal. The
PCR did not rate the impact criterion. Since the PCR provided little evidence of the project's
impact, and given the low utilization of the project loan proceeds, this validation rates the project
impact as negligible.

                       III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and the Executing Agency

23.     The PCR, while providing a lengthy discussion of PFC's overall operational and
financial performance, noted that despite PFC's involvement in the design and formulation of
the project, more than 85% of the loan was canceled. Hence, the PCR rated PFC's performance
unsatisfactory. This validation concurs with the PCR's assessment.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

24.    The PCR rated ADB's performance partly satisfactory. ADB conducted review missions
and participated in tripartite review meetings with PFC and the Department of Economic Affairs.
At the meetings, PFC maintained that the state power utilities were reluctant to borrow from
ADB's line of credit to PFC because doing so would require them to prepare various social and
                                                                                                            7


environmental reports, follow ADB's Procurement Guidelines, and obtain ADB's approval at
various stages of tendering. In the absence of additional incentives, PFC said that the state
power utilities would rather borrow from PFC's regular funds. Consequently, the Department of
Economic Affairs requested cancellation of the loan. This validation concurs with the PCR's
rating because of the serious design issues with the project.

C.        Others

25.     The PCR provided no assessment of safeguards, gender, governance, anticorruption,
fiduciary aspects, or the government's assessment of the project.

            IV.    OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.        Overall Assessment and Ratings

26.     The PCR rated the project partly successful. Although this validation concurs that the
project was less relevant and inefficient, it did not achieve expected project outcomes, and there
was insufficient evidence of sustainability. This validation's reworking of the overall rating of the
project with the downgraded effectiveness and sustainability criteria results in a value of 0.4,
which corresponds to an unsuccessful rating.

                                              Overall Ratings
                                                                    Reason for Disagreement and/or
Criteria                         PCR           IED Review                     Comments
Relevance:                  Partly relevant    Less relevant
Effectiveness in            Less effective      Ineffective     Project outcomes were not achieved.
Achieving Outcomes:
Efficiency in Achieving       Inefficient        Inefficient
Outcomes and Outputs:
Preliminary Assessment         Likely           Less likely     The PCR provided insufficient evidence of
of Sustainability:           sustainable        sustainable     sustainability.
Borrower and Executing      Unsatisfactory     Unsatisfactory
Agency:
Performance of ADB:             Partly             Partly
                             satisfactory       satisfactory
Impact:                       No rating          Negligible     The PCR provided little evidence of project
                                                                impact, and the loan utilization rate was
                                                                low.
Overall Assessment:             Partly         Unsuccessful     Ratings for effectiveness and sustainability
                              successful                        were downgraded.
Quality of PCR:                                    Partly
                                                satisfactory
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report.

B.        Identification of Lessons

27.     The PCR identified one lesson related to the design of the project, which included the
need to deal directly with beneficiary utilities and the need to foster greater ownership of the
project objectives by SEBs and state governments. This validation concurs with this lesson.
8


C.       Recommendations for Follow-Ups

28.      The PCR made no recommendations. This validation recommends that in designing
investment projects for new or restructured utilities operating in emerging power markets,
liquidity market assessment, along with an assessment of utility access to alternative liquidity
markets over the preceding 5­10 years, should be conducted to appraise a utility's real need for
specific ADB loan resources.

                       V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.       Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

29.    The RRP provided for monitoring and evaluation and required PFC to carry out project
performance monitoring and evaluation and benefit monitoring and evaluation through periodic
reviews of the subprojects in accordance with ADB's Project Performance Management
Systems Handbook.4 PFC was to compile and analyze socioeconomic and other appropriate
data such as the number of beneficiaries, tariff levels, and institutional improvements of the
borrowing entities, as well as of the subprojects concerned. The appraisal report for each
subproject and the initial social assessment reports for each state were to provide the baseline
data, which was to be updated through the periodic reviews. The PCR did not discuss
monitoring and evaluation.

B.       Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

30.      The PCR's major shortcoming was the insufficient analysis of reasons for low loan
utilization and the lessons learned from the project. There was also a lack of justification for the
effectiveness and sustainability ratings, resulting in a downgrade in the overall rating of the
project. The PCR also did not discuss benefit monitoring and evaluation, as required in the
RRP. This validation rates the PCR partly satisfactory.

C.       Data Sources for Validation

31.    Data sources included the RRP, PCR, back-to-office reports of review missions, and
other documents.

D.       Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

32.    The PCR made no recommendations regarding a project performance evaluation report.
Given the low disbursement of the loan, this validation does not foresee a need for the project to
be evaluated by the Independent Evaluation Department.




4
    ADB. 2001. Project Performance Management System Handbook. Manila.
  REGIONAL DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
                         VALIDATION REPORT


On 8 December 2011, Director, Independent Evaluation Department, Division 1 (IED1),
received the following comments from the India Resident Mission (INRM), South Asia
Department (SARD).

      We have reviewed IED's earlier draft Project Completion Report (PCR) Validation
      Report and its final draft, and have no comments.
