ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                  PPA: IND 22211




         PROJECT PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT


                      ON THE


              SECOND PORTS PROJECT
                  (Loan 1016-IND)


                         IN


                       INDIA




                    December 2001
                                     CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                               Currency Unit ­ Indian Rupee/s (Re/Rs)

             At Appraisal                 At Project Completion      At Operations Evaluation
           (February 1990)                   (September 1997)            (September 2001)

       Rs1.00 =     $0.0587                     $0.0275                      $0.0208
       $1.00 =      Rs17.03                     Rs36.41                      Rs48.01




                                           ABBREVIATIONS

                         ADB         ­    Asian Development Bank
                         DOT-AP      ­    Department of Transport, Roads and Buildings,
                                              Andhra Pradesh
                         EIRR        ­    economic internal rate of return
                         FIRR        ­    financial internal rate of return
                         JNPT        ­    Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
                         MbPT        ­    Mumbai Port Trust
                         MIS         ­    management information system
                         MOST        ­    Ministry of Surface Transport
                         OEM         ­    Operations Evaluation Mission
                         PCR         ­    project completion report
                         PIC         ­    project implementation cell
                         PPAR        ­    project performance audit report
                         TA          ­    technical assistance
                         VTMS        ­    Vessel Traffic Management System




                                                 NOTES

(i)      The fiscal year (FY) of the Government and the executing agencies ends on 31 March.
         FY before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends.

(ii)     In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                            Operations Evaluation Department, PE-584
                                      CONTENTS
                                                                      Page

BASIC DATA                                                              4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                       6
MAPS

I.     BACKGROUND                                                        9

       A.    Rationale                                                   9
       B.    Formulation                                                 9
       C.    Purpose and Outputs                                         9
       D.    Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                11
       E.    Completion and Self Evaluation                             11
       F.    Operations Evaluation                                      11

II.    PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE                          12
       A.   Formulation and Design                                      12
       B.   Achievement of Outputs                                      13
       C.   Cost and Scheduling                                         14
       D.   Procurement and Construction                                14
       E.   Organization and Management                                 15

III.   ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE                                   17
       A.   Operational Performance                                     17
       B.   Performance of the Operating Entity                         19
       C.   Financial and Economic Reevaluation                         20
       D.   Sustainability                                              22

IV.    ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS                         23
       A.   Socioeconomic Impact                                        23
       B.   Environmental Impacts                                       23
       C.   Impacts on Institutions and Policy                          24

V.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT                                               25
       A.   Relevance                                                   25
       B.   Efficacy                                                    25
       C.   Efficiency                                                  25
       D.   Sustainability                                              25
       E.   Institutional Development and Other Impacts                 26
       F.   Overall Rating                                              26
       G.   Assessment of ADB's and Executing Agencies' Performance     26

VI.    ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                           27
       A.   Key Issues for the Future                                   27
       B.   Lessons Identified                                          28
       C.   Follow-Up Actions                                           29

APPENDIXES                                                              30
                                           BASIC DATA
                                Second Ports Project (Loan 1016-IND)

PROJECT PREPARATION/INSTITUTION BUILDING

TA No.                 Name                        Type     Person-        Amount           Approval
                                                            Months          ($)               Date
1283       Operational and Financial              ADTA        38           600,000        29 March 1990
           Assistance for Bombay Ports
1284       Development of Ship Repair             ADTA         32              400,000    29 March 1990
           Facilities

KEY PROJECT DATA ($ million)

                                                            As per ADB Loan                        Actual
                                                            Documents

Total Project Cost                                                       181.0                      153.8
Foreign Exchange Cost                                                    115.5                       97.9
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization                                              129.0                      109.3
ADB Loan Amount/Cancellation                                                                         19.7

KEY DATES                                            Expected                             Actual

Fact-Finding                                                July 1988               5-23 October 1988
Appraisal                                     24 April - 12 May 1989                    2-12 May 1989
Loan Negotiations                                   24-28 July 1989              15-17 November 1989
Board Approval                                    5 September 1989                      29 March 1990
Loan Agreement                                                                         10 August 1990
Loan Effectiveness                                 8 November 1990                         5 April 1991
First Disbursement                                                                         1 June 1992
Project Completion                                   31 March 1995                 30 September 1997
Loan Closing                                     30 September 1995                     6 October 1997
Months (effectiveness to completion)                    53                                 78

ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL                                              Appraisal            PCR       PPAR
INTERNAL RATES OF RETURN (%)
Economic Internal Rate of Return
    Replacement of MbPT's Outer Lock Gate at Indira Dock                47.0             15.9      110.9
    Modernization of MbPT's Ship Repair Facilities                      22.8             14.0       11.2
    Replacement of MbPT's Pir Pau Oil Pier                              27.1             15.7       18.3
    Development of Kakinada Deepwater Port                              25.8             15.3        9.7
Financial Internal Rate of Return
    Replacement of MbPT's Outer Lock Gate at Indira Dock                 7.3              6.7       62.7
    Modernization of MbPT's Ship Repair Facilities                       7.2              4.2        4.4
    Replacement of MbPT's Pir Pau Oil Pier                              15.2              7.6        9.5
    Development of Kakinada Deepwater Port                              10.0             20.0        0.8

BORROWER                      India, acting by its President
EXECUTING AGENCIES            Mumbai Port Trust
                              Ministry of Surface Transport
                              Department of Transport, Roads and Buildings of the State of Andhra Pradesh



ADTA = advisory technical assistance, MbPT = Mumbai Port Trust, TA = technical assistance.
MISSION DATA                                                 No. of Missions         Person-Days

Fact-Finding                                                           1                   54
Appraisal                                                              1                   52
Project Administration
    Inception                                                          1                  18
    Review                                                            11                 197
    Disbursement Follow-up                                             1                   4
    Special Project Administration                                     1                   5
    Project Completion                                                 1                  51
Operations Evaluation1                                                 1                  54




1
    The Operations Evaluation Mission comprised C.C. Yu (Evaluation Specialist/Mission Leader), A. Ibrahim
    (Evaluation Specialist), and E. Laing (Consultant). The Mission visited India from 4 to 21 September 2001.
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


       The Asian Development Bank's (ADB) operational strategy in India in the late 1980s
focused on rapid industrialization and improvement of infrastructure to support industrial
development and make more efficient use of productive capacity.

        The main objective of the Project was to improve the efficiency and productivity of the
ports and shipping sector and to provide additional cargo handling and ship-repairing capacity in
order to reduce constraints on industrial and energy development. The scope of the Project was
broad and its physical components were to be located in Mumbai on the west coast and
Kakinada, a regional economic center on the east coast. The Project was to help modernize the
port and ship-repair facilities of Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT), develop Kakinada Port, and
strengthen project implementation and monitoring activities of the then Ministry of Surface
Transport (MOST). Two advisory technical assistance (TA) grants were provided in conjunction
with the Project: one for formulating an action plan for MbPT to develop a computer-based
management information system in order to improve its operational efficiency, and the other to
prepare for MOST an investment program and a study of the ship-repair subsector's
organization, institutional framework, and management and operations. The Project was
consistent with ADB's operational strategy for India at the time of appraisal.

        On 29 March 1990, the Board approved a loan of $129.0 million for the Project. The total
project cost was estimated at $181.0 million equivalent, including $115.5 million foreign
exchange cost and $65.5 million equivalent of local currency cost. ADB was to finance the entire
foreign exchange cost plus $13.5 million equivalent of the local currency cost.

        The Operations Evaluation Mission visited India in September 2001, and confirmed that
most project components were implemented as originally envisaged with the following
exceptions. A major component, improvement of MbPT's container-handling facilities (under the
modernization of MbPT's port facilities), was cancelled. The design of Kakinada Port underwent
a major change that involved relocating the proposed breakwater and berths. Part C of the
Project--strengthening the project implementation and monitoring activities of MOST--was not
implemented. The total project cost amounted to $153.8 million equivalent (15 percent below
the appraisal estimate). ADB financing amounted to $109.3 million, or 71 percent of the actual
cost. The balance of $19.7 million of the ADB loan was cancelled. The loan saving was due to
the cancellation of two project components and efficient construction. The Project was
completed in September 1997, or 2.5 years behind schedule. The delay was mainly attributable
to front-end delays in loan effectiveness and procurement, difficult geological conditions and
strikes at Mumbai Port, and the major design change for Kakinada Port.

        Despite the cancellation of the component for upgrading container-handling facilities, the
Mumbai portion has achieved most of its objectives by helping improve the efficiency and
productivity of the port through building, rehabilitating, and improving infrastructure, although
much remains to be done in terms of management and staffing. First, the replacement of the
outer lock gate at Indira Dock proved to be highly beneficial. It has contributed to a significant
increase of the total tonnage of cargoes handled at Indira Dock and the declining vessel waiting
and turnaround times at the port. Without the replacement, Indira Dock would have become
permanently tidal, preventing larger ships from entering it during low tide and, thus, incurring
economic loss. Second, the construction of the new Pir Pau Oil Pier allows MbPT to meet the
increasing demand for handling liquid cargo, i.e., petroleum products and special chemicals. Its
occupancy had reached 67 percent by FY2001, and the pier has benefited people by helping to
stabilize the costs of oil and chemical imports and make the products more widely available. As
a result of the new Pir Pau Oil Pier, MbPT's handling of specialized chemicals has increased
dramatically. Third, the Vessel Traffic Management System, developed under one of the
attached TAs and installed using ADB loan proceeds, serves both MbPT and the nearby
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust by locating and directing all the vessels that enter the ports area.
The system helps improve the operational efficiency and safety of the two ports. Finally, with
respect to modernization of ship-repair facilities, the equipment rehabilitated and installed is in
good working condition. However, the total number of vessels repaired at MbPT has not
increased as envisaged at appraisal. There is a general dissatisfaction among ship owners with
MbPT's ship-repair services. Most of the ship owners interviewed continue to send their ships to
foreign shipyards for repairing, citing reasons such as lower costs and more on-time delivery.

        For Kakinada, the construction of a deepwater port and provision of necessary
equipment was completed in a satisfactory manner. The major design change related to the
locations of the breakwater and berths was appropriate as it would allow future expansion.
However, most of the original rationale for building the deepwater port, i.e., the provision of port
services required for the development of gas-based industries and power generation, has not
been fulfilled. The objective of stimulating regional economic growth in Kakinada through the
availability of the port has not yet been fully achieved. However, the port has achieved a
substantial level of traffic, which has been growing at 50 percent per annum. The current
occupancy is 51 percent.

          The Project has been environmentally neutral. In terms of socioeconomic impacts, the
Project aimed to improve the operational efficiency of the respective ports, which has resulted in
redundant labor. In Kakinada, in order to mitigate the adverse social impacts from
unemployment, the Government of Andhra Pradesh has adopted a policy to reserve the
handling of some bulk cargoes, e.g., fertilizer, for the old harbor, where they are barged to/from
anchorages by 7,000 to 10,000 barge owners. The Project has generated positive
socioeconomic impacts in terms of contributing to local economic development and welfare. The
Mumbai port, for example, has helped ensure uninterrupted power supply in the Mumbai area
through reliable supply of imported fuel oil for power generation. Despite the attempts, through
the other attached TA, to encourage reforms to improve operational efficiency, labor policies,
and organizational and institutional arrangements in the ship-repair subsector, there has been
little progress in these areas.

        The Project was relevant in terms of conforming to the Government's goals and policy,
as well as to ADB's operational strategy at the time of appraisal. Although its relevance has
been reduced somewhat as ADB's current operational strategy places greater emphasis on
commercialization and privatization of existing port facilities, in general, the Project has been
relevant. The Mumbai portion has been efficacious as it has achieved most of its objectives. In
comparison, the Kakinada portion has been less efficacious since most of the original objectives
for building the deepwater port have not been met yet. Overall, the Project has been less
efficacious. With a combined economic internal rate of return of 45.4 percent, the Project has
generated significant economic returns to the country. The combined financial internal rate of
return (FIRR) is 13.7 percent. The Mumbai portion is generating significant financial returns with
an FIRR of 28.8 percent. However, with a low FIRR of 0.8 percent, the financial viability of
Kakinada Port is uncertain, although its traffic is increasing rapidly. The Mumbai portion was
executed in an efficient manner despite some delays. Because of the major design change, the
Kakinada portion was delayed by three years. In general, however, the Project has been
efficient. Both MbPT and the private operator of the Kakinada Port are experienced in managing
and maintaining the port facilities and equipment and, thus, the Project is likely to be
sustainable. The Project's impacts on society, environment, institutions and policies have been
minor. Overall, the Project is rated successful.
          Several key issues affect the performance of the Project and the sector in general. The
first is sector-wide and relates to operational efficiency, labor unions, and privatization. Despite
some recent improvements, MbPT's overall operational efficiency is still much behind equivalent
ports elsewhere in the world. A major commitment is required on the part of the Government to
carry out necessary sector reforms to improve the efficiency of ports in India. Second, the port
tariffs are heavily regulated. The main pricing mechanism, i.e., a "cost plus" formula, does not
encourage efficiency or competition. It not only deters foreign investments in the sector, but also
adversely affects the profitability and financial sustainability of port projects. The third issue is
the need for ADB to continue being involved in port infrastructure. Worldwide experience
indicates that certain components, such as breakwaters and dredging, are capital intensive, and
few private companies would invest in such projects even for some of the world's top ports
including Hong Kong, China; Singapore; and Rotterdam. ADB's investments in such
infrastructure will help attract additional private sector investments.

        The key lessons derived from the Project include the need for realistic traffic forecasts,
homogenous project scope and coherent project theme, and adequate quality control during
project design in case there is no project preparatory TA.
                                           I.       BACKGROUND


A.        Rationale


1.      With a vast land mass of 3.3 million square kilometers and a population of 797 million in
1988, India experienced a period of relatively rapid industrialization with annual growth rates in
the industrial sector between 7 and 9 percent during the Seventh Five-Year Plan (FY1986-
FY1990); the growth rates were anticipated to be even higher in the Eighth Five-Year Plan
period. The rapid industrialization strained India's energy supply and transportation
infrastructure. In the transport sector, inadequate capacity and substandard infrastructure led to
excessive transit delays, fuel wastage, and high operating costs. Total traffic handled by the
major ports, which accounted for 98 percent of foreign trade, grew at an average of 8 percent
during the 1980s, reaching 146 million tons in 1989, and was forecast to more than double in
the next two decades. Seaborne transport was facing several constraints, as modernization of
port and shipping facilities, including ship-repair facilities, lagged behind changes in shipping
technology and cargo-handling methods. The Government's objective in the ports and shipping
sector was to modernize and expand existing facilities in line with new technological
developments such as containerization and mechanized handling of bulk cargo. The Asian
Development Bank's (ADB) operational strategy in India in the late 1980s focused on rapid
industrialization and improvement of infrastructure to support industrial development and to
make more efficient use of productive capacity.


B.        Formulation


2.      The Project2 was formulated as the second ports project in India to be financed by ADB,
following the first one approved less than three years earlier.3 During the visit of the Country
Programming Mission to India in February 1988, the Government requested ADB assistance for
the modernization and expansion of selected ports in the context of the Government's sector
investment program under the Seventh Five-Year Plan. In March 1988, a Reconnaissance
Mission fielded by ADB recommended ADB financing for the modernization of the port and ship-
repair facilities at Mumbai and the development of deepwater facilities at Kakinada. To help
prepare the Project, the Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT) and the State Government of Andhra
Pradesh were requested to update the feasibility studies already available. A Fact-Finding
Mission visited India in October 1988 and the Appraisal Mission was fielded in May 1989. The
Board approved a loan of $129.0 million for the Project on 29 March 1990. The loan became
effective on 5 April 1991.


C.        Purpose and Outputs


3.     The Project aimed to improve the efficiency and productivity of the ports and shipping
sector and provide additional port handling and ship-repairing capacity in order to reduce
constraints on industrial and energy development. The scope of the Project was broad and the
physical components of the Project were to be located in two different cities, Mumbai on the


2
    Loan 1016-IND: Second Ports Project, for $129 million, approved on 29 March 1990.
3
    Loan 842-IND: Ports Development Project, for $130 million, approved on 24 September 1987.
west coast, and Kakinada, a regional economic center on the east coast (Map 1). The main
components of the Project as proposed were as follows:

          (i)     Part A: Modernization of MbPT's Port Facilities, which included

                  (a)      improvement of container-handling facilities;
                  (b)      replacement of Pir Pau Oil Pier;
                  (c)      replacement of the outer lock gate for Indira Dock and ancillary works;
                  (d)      replacement of a fire-fighting vessel; and
                  (e)      provision of a computer-based management information system (MIS).

          (ii)    Part B: Modernization of MbPT's Ship-Repair Facilities, which included

                  (a)      replacement of one caisson gate each of Hughes and Mereweather dry
                           docks;
                  (b)      supply, installation, and testing of needed equipment; and
                  (c)      provision of equipment, facilities, and civil works at various docks and
                           berths, and repair of existing facilities at these locations.

          (iii)   Part C: Strengthening of the Project Implementation and Monitoring
                  Activities of the Ministry of Surface Transport, for which a project
                  implementation cell (PIC) within the Ministry of Surface Transport (MOST)
                  was to be set up under the direct control of the development advisor.

          (iv)    Part D: Development of the Port of Kakinada, which included

                  (a)      construction of three deepwater berths, extension of the breakwater, and
                           dredging works; and
                  (b)      provision of ancillary facilities and services including an access road and
                           approach bridges, transit shed and administration building, fire fighting
                           equipment, water and electrical supply, navigational aids, two tugboats,
                           pilot launch, mobile cranes, and other cargo-handling and
                           communications equipment.

4.      In addition to the physical components, two advisory technical assistance (TA) grants
were provided. The first TA4 aimed to formulate an action plan to develop a Vessel Traffic
Management System (VTMS) and a computer-based MIS to enable MbPT to effectively monitor
the financial and operational performance of its assets. The second TA5 involved preparation of
an investment program for the Eighth Five-Year Plan (FY1993-FY1997)6 and a study of India's
ship-repair subsector's organization, institutional framework, and management and operations,
with a view to achieving more effective and efficient utilization of available resources and
encouraging greater participation by the private sector.




4
    TA 1283-IND: Operational and Financial Assistance for Mumbai Ports, for $600,000, approved on 29 March 1990.
5
    TA 1284-IND: Development of Ship Repair Facilities, for $400,000, approved on 29 March 1990.
6
    There was a two-year lapse between the Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plan periods due to change of the
    Government, during which an interim plan was followed while a new approach to planning was being deliberated.
D.     Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

5.      Appendix 1 breaks down costs by project component. At appraisal, the project cost was
estimated at $181.0 million equivalent, including $115.5 million foreign exchange cost and $65.5
million local cost. There was no cofinancing for the Project; ADB was to finance the entire
foreign exchange cost plus $13.5 million equivalent local cost.

6.     Three executing agencies were engaged to implement the Project. MOST was to serve
as the overall coordinating and monitoring agency of the Project's implementation, whereas
MbPT and the Department of Transport, Roads and Buildings, Andhra Pradesh (DOT-AP), were
to be responsible for implementing the respective components of the Project. A PIC within
MOST was to be set up in order to effectively manage the Project (Part C).


E.     Completion and Self Evaluation


7.       The project completion report (PCR), which was circulated on 11 December 1997,
reported that there were substantial delays (2.5 years) in implementation. One main project
component, i.e., improvement of MbPT's container-handling facilities under Part A, was
cancelled. Part C of the Project (strengthening MOST's project implementation monitoring
activities, through the PIC establishment) did not materialize. For none of the project
components did the traffic reach the level forecast as fast as projected by the appraisal report.
For the Kakinada portion (Part D), there was a major change in scope due to the modification in
the layout and design of the new deepwater port. Despite these shortcomings, the PCR rated
the Project as generally successful on the basis that (i) the recalculated economic internal rate
of return (EIRR) was above 10 percent for all quantifiable components, (ii) the Project as
implemented represented the least-cost alternative, and (iii) no major part of the Project had
failed. On the whole, the PCR was thorough in terms of evaluating the physical components of
the Project, and identified several key lessons to be learned in future port projects. However, the
PCR made no mention of the adequacy and efficacy of the two advisory TAs.


F.     Operations Evaluation


8.      This project performance audit report (PPAR) focuses on the Project's effectiveness and
efficiency in meeting its objectives. To accomplish this, the PPAR assesses various aspects of
project formulation, design, implementation, and sustainability, as well as its socioeconomic,
environmental, and institutional impacts. The assessment is based on a review of ADB
documents, discussion with ADB staff, and findings of the Operations Evaluation Mission
(OEM), which visited India in September 2001. During the visit, the OEM held discussions with
the Ministry of Shipping (formerly part of MOST), MbPT, DOT-AP, industry representatives, and
shipping companies as the ports' customers. Copies of the draft PPAR were sent to the
Government, MbPT, DOT-AP, and the concerned ADB departments for review; all comments
received have been considered in finalizing the report.
                    II.      PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE


A.        Formulation and Design


9.      The relatively fast pace of India's industrial expansion and foreign trade during the late
1980s, averaging about 8 percent per annum, strained the outdated port-handling and ship-
repairing facilities. Improving the country's small, inefficient, and labor-driven ports was
considered consistent with ADB's operational strategy in the late 1980s, which had a clear focus
on improvement of infrastructure in support of industrial development. The subsequent
economic liberalization commencing in 1991 further reinforced the need to upgrade the
country's port facilities in order to meet increasing demand from foreign trade.

10.      ADB's country operational strategy also stressed greater private sector participation in
the sector. At the time of project formulation, the issues of efficiency, productivity, and the role of
the private sector were key concerns for ADB's management and Board. It was argued that the
need for the Project itself indicated the inefficiency of the ports, which were relying on outdated
equipment. Additionally, questions arose as to why India was operating such poor equipment
even if the financial situation of the port was as good as in Mumbai, which was regarded as
relatively "cash rich". The private sector was proposed as an alternative either to operate the
ports as a whole or to undertake specific activities within a port, in the belief that the private
sector could do so in a much more efficient manner. Underinvestment and outdated equipment
was not the ports' only problem. Inefficiency in Indian ports resulted as much from overstaffing
and management problems as from the outdated equipment. There had been several studies
conducted on the issue, including an ADB TA, which was ongoing at the time of loan approval.7
Most of the recommendations from these studies had not been implemented by the Government
at the time of appraisal. The main argument in favor of government investment in ports was that
the private sector was reluctant to invest a large amount at the front end in expensive port
infrastructure. Government investment in the infrastructure would act as a catalyst in attracting
private sector participation in port services.

11.      To address the issues raised regarding efficiency and private sector participation,
preparation of an action plan was included as a loan covenant. MbPT would submit to ADB a
plan that would take into account the findings of past and ongoing TAs (e.g., footnote 6), and
take up the TA recommendations to address the inefficiencies identified. The plan would specify
a prioritized list of problem areas and appropriate time-bound actions for addressing them. The
areas included (i) the elaboration of measures that MbPT should adopt to improve the
operational efficiency of its assets, (ii) the description of parameters or productivity standards
that would be used to monitor improvements in financial and operational performance, and (iii)
the specification of the timeframe within which such improvements would be achieved. The two
attached advisory TAs were also designed to address the efficiency at MbPT and India's ship-
repairing industry (para. 4). On the other hand, the design of the physical components was done
by domestic consultants and was based on the Government's feasibility studies. As discussed
in paras. 13, 14, and 22, several design changes were made during implementation. Although
India's technical knowhow in the ports sector is among the best of all the developing member
countries, the participation of international consultants at the design stage could have helped
preclude the need for later design changes and costly delays. Additional design problems
identified included overly optimistic traffic forecasts and incoherent project themes (paras. 52
and 53).



7
    TA 1004-IND: Ports and Shipping Sector Study, for $500,000, approved on 8 July 1988.
B.             Achievement of Outputs


12.     Interviews and surveys conducted with the Ministry of Shipping and MbPT, along with
observations obtained during site visits, confirmed that the following five major components
from the original scope (para. 3) had been completed under the Mumbai portion: (i) Part A(b):
construction of the new Pir Pau Oil Pier, (ii) Part A(c): replacement of the outer lock gate in
Indira Dock and ancillary works, (iii) Part A(d): replacement of one fire-fighting vessel, (iv) Part
A(e): installation of VTMS, and (v) Part B: modernization of ship-repair facilities (Maps 2 and 3
show project locations and Appendix 2 contains project photos). Generally, the project facilities
are well maintained and adequately serve their intended purpose. An exception is the fire-
fighting vessel, which is in a poor, rusty condition and appeared to be no longer functional.
According to the MbPT officials interviewed, the reasons included lack of skilled labor to operate
the vessel and the fact that two larger fire-fighting vessels with tugging capability had been
procured and are more fully utilized. The OEM believes that availability of two larger and more
capable vessels was the dominant reason.

13.     The design of the physical components of the Project in Mumbai underwent several
changes during implementation. First, according to the PCR, the lock gate of Mereweather Dry
Dock constructed in Mumbai under the Project was not watertight because of a measurement
error. The measurements from the original gate, which were used in the design of the new gate
(without actual on-site measurements), were wrong. The problem could only be partly remedied
during construction. The OEM tried unsuccessfully to verify this with site officials interviewed,
but observed that the lock gate was in good working condition. Second, one major component--
modernization of MbPT's container-handling facilities--was cancelled. The OEM determined
that the cancellation was largely due to the Government's plan to limit MbPT's handling of
container traffic within 100,000 twenty-foot equivalent units. The rest of the container traffic was
assumed to have been diverted to the nearby newly built modern container terminal, Jawaharlal
Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), funded by the World Bank at a cost of $660 million (Map 2).8 With
hindsight, the OEM believes that the cancellation of the container component was appropriate.
Given its low operational efficiency, MbPT was unlikely to be able to compete with JNPT for
container traffic even if the container handling facilities had been upgraded as proposed.

14.     For Kakinada, construction of a deepwater port and provision of necessary equipment
under Part D was completed in a satisfactory manner, despite a major design change. The
OEM's site visit confirmed that the equipment procured under the Project was well maintained
and in excellent working condition. The original design had to be changed significantly, which
involved relocating the breakwater to an offshore site instead of extending an existing fishing
jetty, and building the berths closer to the shoreline (Map 4). According to the consulting
engineering firm appointed by the Government of Andra Pradesh for project design and
supervision, the design change was proposed by the consultants after the completion of a
questionnaire by customers of the port in 1990, which indicated a substantial increase in
expected throughput compared with that forecast in the original design in 1988. The main
advantage of the revised design is that it allows for future expansion if the need arises by virtue
of building the berths close to the shore, which ensures access to reclaimed areas for docking
and storage. The revised design also avoids potential congestion of land traffic on the approach
road. This is because, under the original design, the only link between the berths and land
transport would have been a 3.5-kilometer approach road built on top of the breakwater. The
revised design, however, involved more dredging work. Additional design changes included

8
    After a slow start, JNPT, together with its private concession holder P&O (Ports), has achieved a high growth rate
    in container traffic. At the same time, MbPT has seen its container traffic decreasing steadily. The reasons
    appeared to be multifold: in addition to MbPT's poor handling facilities, which were supposed to be upgraded under
    the Project, its low efficiency and service quality also contributed to the deteriorating traffic.
increasing the dredging depth of the turning basin and berthing areas from 10.2 to 10.5 meters,
and the dredged draft to 11.7 meters at the channel entrance.9 Finally, the planned two
tugboats became three, and all were equipped with fire-fighting facilities.

15.     The OEM regards the Government's decision to adopt the design change for Kakinada
Port as appropriate notwithstanding the fact that it resulted in delays in completion (para. 17).
The potential for adding more berths, which is possible with the current design, may be the key
to the Port being able to retrieve its investment, even though the need for additional berths may
not materialize in the short term.


C.             Cost and Scheduling


16.     As shown in Appendix 1, the actual cost as of 6 October 1997 (actual loan closing date)
was $153.8 million equivalent (or 85 percent of the estimated cost), consisting of $97.9 million in
foreign exchange and $55.9 million equivalent in local currency ($11.4 million equivalent
financed by ADB). The actual total ADB financing (including all the actual foreign exchange cost
and the portion of local cost actually financed by ADB) amounted to $109.3 million, or 71 percent
of the total actual cost. The balance of $19.7 million of the ADB loan was cancelled. The loan
saving was due to two factors: (i) the cancellation of the container-handling component for
MbPT, which accounted for about $9 million; and (ii) efficient construction, which accounted for
more than $10 million. For the development of Kakinada Port, the actual cost, including the
$12 million paid for interest during construction, was $94.9 million, or 3 percent below the
appraisal estimate of $97.4 million. Although the revised design and the associated delays
resulted in higher dredging costs and interest during construction, savings realized by
construction of a much shorter breakwater under the new design were enough to offset this.

17.     Appendix 3 provides information on the project schedule as appraised and as
implemented.10 The completion of the Project as a whole was delayed by approximately 2.5 years,
although the delay for some components reached more than three years. After two extensions,
the loan was closed on 6 October 1997, two years after the scheduled closing date. Project
implementation was adversely affected by the long period between loan approval in March 1990
and loan effectiveness in April 1991. The delay was caused by the long time taken to resolve
certain outstanding issues. Construction for both Mumbai and Kakinada portions of the Project
also experienced delays, for a variety of reasons. For example, the construction of MbPT's Pir
Pau Oil Pier was delayed due to excessively hard rock encountered and labor strikes. For the
replacement of MbPT's fire-fighting vessel, ADB's bidding procedures were quoted as the
primary reason for the delay. For Kakinada, the main reason was the change in the original
design.


D.             Procurement and Construction


18.     The civil works, goods, and equipment financed by ADB were procured in accordance
with ADB's Guidelines for Procurement. Most major equipment and civil works were procured
on the basis of international competitive bidding. These items included replacement of Pir Pau
Oil Pier, Indira Dock's outer gate, the fire-fighting vessel, computer equipment for the
computerized MIS, equipment and supplies for MbPT's ship-repair facilities, construction and
dredging, and some major equipment (three tugboats and two mobile cranes) for Kakinada Port.

9
     According to the site officials interviewed, this draft is still inadequate for some larger ships.
10
     For some components, work started before approval of the Project due to retroactive financing sanctioned by ADB.
Procurement of minor equipment and civil works was on the basis of local competitive bidding,
and included civil works relating to the construction of MbPT's ship-repair facilities as well as the
internal roads, port building, and a pilot launch for Kakinada Port. Limited quantities of
equipment, including 12 forklift trucks and other cargo-handling equipment for Kakinada Port,
were procured in accordance with international shopping procedures.

19.     Interviews and questionnaire results indicate that the executing agencies are generally
satisfied with the performance of the suppliers and the contractors, with a few exceptions. For
example, MbPT reported that the performance of the contractor for the fire-fighting system for
Pir Pau Oil Pier was unsatisfactory in terms of both delayed completion (by 15 months) and
reluctance to meet the bid specifications once the order had been secured. For Kakinada, the
executing agencies was mostly satisfied with the performance of the contractor and supplier.11
On the whole, despite the delays and minor disagreements between the executing agencies
and the contractors/suppliers, the OEM regards the quality of procurement and construction as
satisfactory.


E.           Organization and Management


20.    MOST, which was recently divided into the Ministry of Road Transport and the Ministry
of Shipping, was the overall Executing Agency for the Project. Under Part C, a PIC was
supposed to be established within three months after the loan became effective, but it did not
materialize.12 Interviews with officials at the Ministry of Shipping indicated that the Government
was "still learning" at that time. It has since recognized the importance of a project
implementation body for effective project management and subsequently established one for
other projects. Surveys conducted with MbPT and DOT-AP indicated that the two executing
agencies were satisfied with MOST's monitoring and supervision. MbPT and DOT-AP complied
with the respective loan covenants applicable up to project completion. In particular, MbPT
submitted to ADB the requisite action plan for improvement of port efficiency (para. 11). The
compliance of ADB's financial covenants by the executing agencies will be assessed in later
sections (paras. 31 and 32). Both MbPT and DOT-AP were technically experienced and
competent in implementing port projects.

21.     The consulting services required for the implementation of various project components
were engaged and financed directly by the executing agencies concerned. In the case of
Mumbai Port, the required services included preparation of detailed designs and bidding
documents, assistance in prequalification of contractors, as well as bidding and the evaluation
of bids for some major components. Supervision of construction was mostly done by MbPT
staff, except in the case of replacement of the outer lock gate for Indira Dock and the
replacement of one caisson gate each of the Hughes and Mereweather dry docks, for which
domestic consultants were engaged by MbPT to provide detailed design, assistance in the
bidding process, and construction supervision. ADB reviewed and approved the terms of
reference for all consulting services and was consulted on the shortlists of consultants. For
Kakinada Port, DOT-AP recruited domestic consultants for engineering design, bidding, and
construction supervision.




11
   However, both the contracted local and international dredging companies indicated that they have yet to receive
   the full payment from the Government of Andhra Pradesh for the work they have completed. The case is currently
   going through arbitration.
12
   The loan proceeds of $250,000 allocated for the PIC for procuring additional official equipment and supplies were
   not utilized.
22.     For all the engineering design and supervision consulting services required, it was felt
that sufficiently experienced domestic consultants were available; therefore, no international
consultants participated in the engineering design and supervision work. In hindsight, a project
preparatory TA would have been beneficial. At the very least, ADB should have hired an
independent international consultant to review all project designs, which may have avoided the
design flaws described in paras. 13-14. For the two advisory TAs, ADB recruited consultants
according to its Guidelines on the Use of Consultants. MbPT indicated that it was highly
satisfied with the consultants for TA 1283-IND (footnote 3), who worked with MbPT throughout
the process of installing the MIS; moreover, there was significant knowledge transfer between
the consultants and MbPT.
                             III.     ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE



A.            Operational Performance



         1.       Mumbai Port


23.     The primary objective of the Project with respect to MbPT was to improve its operational
efficiency. Appendix 4 provides two important indicators for port efficiency: Figures A4.1 and
A4.2 indicate that both average vessel waiting and turnaround times have fluctuated but have
been generally decreasing since FY1997 for all cargo types. However, the improvements
cannot be attributed solely to the Project; other factors, particularly changing traffic, also affect
the waiting and turnaround times.13 The following paragraphs provide an assessment of each
individual component's contribution to MbPT's improvement in efficiency.

24.      The replacement of the outer lock gate at Indira Dock proved to be justified and
successful. Indira Dock is the largest dock in the port of Mumbai. It contains about 21 berths
within the locked area and 2 berths outside. The whole dock currently handles about 12 million
tons of cargo per year. The lock gates (inner and outer) are used to maintain a water depth of
9.5 meters inside the lock. Without the locks, the water depth would be 6.5 meters at low water.
This is far below the depth necessary to accommodate most international cargo ships. The old
outer lock gate, which was built in 1922, was unreliable and required constant repairs.
According to the chief engineer at MbPT, it was no longer reparable. Without the replacement,
Indira Dock would have become permanently tidal, preventing larger ships from entering the
dock during low tide.14 The new lock gate is more reliable and has certainly contributed to the
improved vessel waiting and turnaround times. Since the lock gate's completion at the end of
1993, the total tonnage of general cargoes handled at Indira Dock increased by 44 percent from
8.8 million tons in FY1993 to 12.7 million tons in FY1997, and has remained fairly constant at 11
to 12 million tons since then. Although not all the increase is attributable to the replaced lock
gate, it has undoubtedly contributed to the improvement.

25.      The construction of the new Pir Pau Oil Pier was also one of the most needed
components. Its occupancy reached 67 percent by FY2001. The old Pir Pau Oil Pier, which was
built in 1922, could no longer meet the surging demand from specialized chemical plants, two oil
refineries, and a power plant near the oil pier for handling liquid cargo, including petroleum
products and lubricants. The new oil pier has attracted various industrial users, both private and
public, to build their own pipelines on the pier to transport petroleum products and lubricants
and specialized chemicals.15 MbPT obtains its revenue from users' annual dues plus a

13
   Decreasing traffic since FY1997 may be the most important factor for the declining vessel waiting and turnaround
   times. Total traffic at MbPT increased from 26.8 million tons in FY1992 to 33.7 million tons in FY1997, and then
   decreased to 27.1 million tons in FY2001. This roughly corresponds to the pattern of average waiting and
   turnaround times exhibited by Appendix 4. In particular, the improvement for containers cannot be attributed to the
   Project because the container component was cancelled. The declining waiting and turnaround times were most
   likely due to the loss of traffic to JNPT.
14
   Such adverse impact is best illustrated by a recent incident that left the lock gates out of service for six weeks. As a
   result, the draft of 9.5 meters at the dock could not be maintained. Many ships had to carry less cargo (in order to
   reduce the draft to that required to enter the dock), or offload part of the cargo at outer docks. This, however, would
   not be possible for larger volumes of cargo since there are only two berths outside the lock.
15
   Pir Pau Oil Pier provides 20 pipelines slots of 300 millimeter diameter equivalent. According to MbPT, there have
   been many requests for permission for laying pipelines from users, but not all of them could be accommodated.
surcharge based on the actual tonnage of liquid cargo transported. According to a shipping
company executive interviewed, the new Pir Pau Oil Pier "benefits average people on the street"
by stabilizing the costs of oil and chemical imports and making the products more widely
available. After the construction of the Pir Pau Oil Pier in early 1996, the total tonnage of
specialized chemicals handled by MbPT increased from 0.5 million tons in FY1996 to
approximately 2.5 million tons in FY2000, even though the total liquid cargoes remained
constant at 49 million tons during the same period. Most, but not all, of the chemicals were
handled by the new Pir Pau Oil Pier.

26.     Under the Project, an action plan was formulated for MbPT to develop a computer-based
MIS to enable it to effectively monitor the financial and operational performance of its assets
(para. 4). Five subsystems were recommended, including (i) Executive Information System,
(ii) VTMS, (iii) Cargo Management and Information System, (iv) Container Traffic Control
System, and (v) Accounting System. ADB financed the installation of VTMS under Part A. The
OEM confirmed that the VTMS, which consists of three radar detectors, telecommunication
equipment, and computers, is well maintained and serves both MbPT and the nearby JNPT by
locating and directing all the vessels that enter the ports area. According to site officials
interviewed, compared to the previous manual-driven procedures for directing ships, VTMS
improves both the efficiency and safety of port operations. Installation of the other subsystems
of the MIS was to be financed by MbPT. According to MbPT officials interviewed, they were
installed but not integrated.16

27.     With respect to the modernization of ship-repair facilities, the old caisson gates at the
Mereweather Dry Dock and Hughes Dry Dock were replaced. In addition, a 5-ton electric
crane and other ancillary equipment, including electrical substations, illumination equipment,
and air compressors, were installed. The OEM confirmed that the equipment is in good working
condition. At appraisal, it was envisaged that this project component would reduce service times
by over 50 percent and would attract over 70 additional vessels per annum. However, the target
has not been achieved as the actual total number of vessels serviced currently is about 70.
Interviews with various ship owners using the ship-repairing facilities showed a general
dissatisfaction with MbPT's ship-repair services.17 Most of the ship owners interviewed continue
to send their ships to foreign shipyards for repairing, citing reasons such as foreign shipyards'
lower costs, on-time delivery, and the fact that the two dry docks at MbPT are always full.18

28.      MbPT is well versed with operation and maintenance; as a result, most equipment and
facilities procured under the Project are in good working condition. An exception was noted with
the fire-fighting vessel procured by MbPT under the Project, which was in a rusty condition and
appeared to be no longer functional (para. 12).


        2.       Kakinada Port


29.     In an effort by DOT-AP to improve operational efficiency and raise additional investment,
the operation of the Kakinada Port was privatized through a concession in March of 1999.19
Information gathered from DOT-AP and the private operator of the port facilities revealed that
the berths constructed were needed and are being used. The current occupancy is 51 percent
and is increasing at the rate of 50 percent per annum.20 The port is already handling 1.8 million

16
   The OEM could not confirm this independently.
17
   Such services are often provided by private contractors using MbPT's facilities.
18
   This reflects the fact that the dry docks receive a large number of government contracts for repairing navy ships
   and that a relatively long time is required to service a ship due to low efficiency.
19
   The privatization was the Government's own initiative, not a loan covenant.
20
   The OEM estimates that the port will reach its full capacity by FY2004.
tons of cargo, mostly bulk liquid. One new product, edible oil, is handled in large volumes.
However, the original aims of the Project as stated in the appraisal report have not been
achieved. Gas-based industries have not been attracted to Kakinada as envisaged. In fact, the
gas reserves have remained largely unexploited after 10 years. It was also envisaged at
appraisal that fertilizer plants, iron and steel plants, and petroleum depots would be developed
in the area. However, many of the industries have moved to neighboring Visakhapatnam
instead, where the water is much deeper. The petroleum tanks have been built, but are not
being used, as the power plants for which they were designed have not materialized yet and are
likely to use gas instead of petroleum products once they are constructed. Despite the
discrepancy between the original aims of building the deepwater port and the port's current
achievement, the long-term goal of making Kakinada a regional growth center through the
availability of the port is very much achievable as the general macroeconomic and policy
environment improves.

30.      The OEM observed that all equipment at Kakinada Port was well maintained. In contrast
to MbPT's fire-fighting vessel, the fire-fighting facility is in an excellent condition and, according
to site officials, the staff conduct drills on a regular basis.


B.       Performance of the Operating Entity



         1.       Mumbai Port Trust


31.       Appendix 5 provides some key financial performance indicators for MbPT. Despite
some information gaps,21 it is possible to assess MbPT's overall financial performance using
available information. Table A5.1 indicates deteriorating operating returns. The operating ratio
(operating expenses as a percentage of operating revenue) increased from 57.6 percent in
FY1994 to 79.4 percent in FY2000, although it is still below the ADB-covenanted level of
80 percent.22 The returns on net fixed asset also declined, from 76.4 percent in FY1994 to
16.6 percent in FY2000. The decrease is attributable to two factors. First, the net income
decreased steadily over the period, due to declining operating revenue caused mostly by
falling cargo revenue (e.g., container traffic lost to JNPT), but also rapidly increasing operating
expenses, e.g., staff remuneration. Second, as shown in Table A5.3, MbPT's net fixed assets
in operation increased almost threefold over the six-year period through accelerated
investments. Table A5.2 indicates that MbPT is highly liquid, with a cash balance of Rs3.85 billion
at the end of FY2000. The self-financing ratio in FY1994 and FY1995 was above 150 percent.23
Finally, Table A5.3 indicates that the current ratio (current assets as a percentage of current
liabilities) was close to 300 percent. Overall, MbPT is in a healthy position in terms of cash
flow. However, its operating returns have been deteriorating due to unchecked operating
expenses and slow traffic (revenue) increases. Furthermore, MbPT appears to increasingly
rely on nonoperating revenue, which was nearly the same as operating revenue in FY2000
(Table A5.1). Although the nonoperating revenue--including railway earnings, estate rental,
and finance income--contributes to the seemingly healthy cash flow, it casts some doubt on
MbPT's long-term sustainability in port services.


21
   The OEM tried unsuccessfully to obtain additional information from MbPT.
22
   Compliance with ADB's other financial loan covenant, internal cash generation of not less than 1.2 times the debt-
   service requirements, cannot be assessed due to lack of information.
23
   It was argued during project formulation that self-financing ratio was not an appropriate indicator for a relatively
   cash-rich enterprise like MbPT, and the return on fixed assets would be more appropriate. It is the OEM's view that
   the two indicators capture different aspects of the financial performance and should be used as such.
        2.       Kakinada Port


32.     Under the concession agreement between the Government of Andhra Pradesh and
the concessionaire, the Government receives from the private operator a minimum
guaranteed amount each year plus an additional share of profit based on a pre-agreed
formula while DOT-AP continues to be responsible for paying back ADB loans and other
debts.24 The private operating company is in its third year of operation. In FY2000, it made an
operating profit of Rs42.8 million. However, after a payment of the minimum guaranteed
amount of Rs110 million to the Government, it incurred a net loss of Rs67.2 million. The main
reason for the poor financial performance is the port's low occupancy, currently at 51 percent,
and the fact that most cargoes handled at the port are liquid, for which handling fees are low.
The financial performance of the private operator is expected to improve in coming years, as
the traffic has been growing at 50 percent per annum (para. 29) and there is likely to be more
dry cargoes coming due to the operator's targeted marketing efforts. Detailed financial
statements for the private operator were unavailable.


C.           Financial and Economic Reevaluation


33.     Appendix 6 provides the recalculated financial internal rates of return (FIRRs) and
EIRRs for four quantifiable components of the Project using updated information, i.e., the outer
lock of Indira Dock, Pir Pau Oil Pier, ship-repair facilities, and Kakinada Port. For both the
financial and economic reevaluation, all costs and benefits are denominated in US dollars at
2001 constant prices.25 As summarized in the following table, the recalculated FIRRs are 0.8
percent for Kakinada, 4.4 percent for ship repair, 9.5 percent for Pir Pau Oil Pier, and 62.7
percent for Indira Dock. Despite the low return for ship repair, the FIRR for the three Mumbai
components combined is 28.8 percent, much higher than the weighted average cost of capital
for the Mumbai portion, i.e., 4.6 percent in real terms. In comparison, the FIRR of 0.8 percent for
Kakinada is lower than the weighted average cost of capital at 4.4 percent in real terms,
indicating a potentially low financial sustainability and efficiency of Kakinada Port (paras. 35 and
45). As discussed in Appendix 6, many project benefits identified in the appraisal and project
completion reports either did not materialize or were incorrectly estimated. As a result, the types
of financial benefit or revenue used in the PPAR in many cases are considerably different from
those used in the appraisal and project completion reports. For example, for replacement of the
outer lock gate of Indira Dock, the PCR assumed that the old lock gate could be maintained
indefinitely. Therefore, the main financial benefit of replacing the old lock gate with a new one
was the avoidance of operation and maintenance cost associated with the old gate. However,
MbPT confirmed that the old gate was in too dilapidated a condition to be continuously repaired,
and would not have been reliable enough even after a major overhaul. Furthermore, the cost
avoidance was greatly overestimated by both the appraisal and project completion reports since
the operational cost with the new lock gate is approximately the same as the old one, and the
maintenance cost saved with the new lock gate is only a fraction of the total cost. In the PPAR,

24
   The financial loan covenants for Kakinada Port Trust were the same as those for MbPT, i.e., operating ratio lower
   than 80 percent after FY1995, and internal cash generation not less than 1.2 times the debt-service requirements.
   Compliance is not assessed as Kakinada Port Trust no longer exists as a commercial entity after the privatization
   of its operations.
25
   The US dollar is used because 71 percent of the Project was financed in foreign exchange through the ADB loan,
   and there is often a considerable amount of foreign exchange transactions and price quoting in the port sector.
the financial benefit of replacing the lock gate was estimated as the portion of the port revenues
retained (net of expenditure), which would have been lost if the port became tidal.

                       Summary of Financial and Economic Reevaluation (%)

                   Indira          Pir Pau                             Mumbai                             All
 Item               Dock           Oil Pier       Ship Repair         Combined        Kakinada         Combined

 FIRR               62.7         9.5               4.4                    28.8             0.8            13.7
 EIRR              110.9               18.3           11.2                65.2             9.7            45.4

EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR = financial internal rate of return.

34.     While the FIRRs indicate costs and returns to the executing agencies, the EIRRs
measure the costs and benefits from the country's point of view. The types of benefits brought
to the society by Indira Dock, Pir Pau Oil Pier, and Kakinada are mostly from cost savings
compared to using other more expensive transport modes (Appendix 6). In other words, if the
project components were not built, barge or road transport would have to be used to transport
the same types and amounts of cargoes. An exception is Mumbai ship-repair facilities, for which
the alternative is to send ships to foreign shipyards for repair. In this case, any amount of money
spent in foreign shipyards is a net loss to the Indian economy. Therefore, the economic benefit
of modernization of the ship-repair facilities is the total avoidance of the costs of using foreign
ship yards,26 which was estimated at 10 percent less than the relatively expensive MbPT dry
docks based on interviews with ship owners. In estimating the economic costs, duties and taxes
are deducted and nontradable local currency costs are converted to border prices using a
0.9 standard conversion factor. In addition, for Mumbai ship repair, a conversion factor of 0.6 is
used to derive the shadow price of labor. Shadow pricing the labor cost for ship repair is
deemed appropriate because, compared to the other three components (activities), ship
repairing is relatively labor intensive. The recalculated EIRRs range from 9.7 percent for
Kakinada to 110.9 percent for Indira Dock, indicating varying but generally high economic
returns to the country. Despite the errors identified in both appraisal and PCR estimates of
FIRRs and EIRRs27 (Appendix 6), the recalculated FIRRs and EIRRs, except those for Indira
Dock for which different estimation methodologies were used, are all lower than the appraisal
estimates, partly reflecting the less-than-expected traffic and other project benefits. Finally, the
above table shows the combined FIRR and EIRR estimates for all four components, i.e.,
13.7 percent and 45.4 percent, respectively. In particular, the high aggregated EIRR indicates
major economic returns of the Project to the country.




26
   The main economic benefit, as stated in the appraisal report, was to be the avoided "steaming cost" associated
   with extra fuels and time consumption when sending ships to foreign shipyards, typically in the People's Republic
   of China, Singapore, and the Middle East. However, the OEM learned that most ship owners arrange their ships for
   repairing when the ships are in those regions, thus incurring little additional cost. The savings from lower prices
   and timely delivery of foreign shipyards are often more than enough to offset any additional steaming costs.
27
   For example, in estimating the EIRR, the capital cost for Indira Dock was included three times in the appraisal
   report for unknown reasons. In PCR, the Indira Dock was assumed to have a residual value of 10 times the original
   cost after 20 years operation. There are other similar unexplainable anomalies in the appraisal and project
   completion calculations, which in combination have cast great doubt on the overall validity of the estimates.
D.     Sustainability

35.    The Project's financial sustainability depends on continued demand for cargo-handling
services in Mumbai and Kakinada. In Mumbai, MbPT is facing increasing competition from
JNPT. However, since the container-handling component of the Project was cancelled, the
competition does not affect the sustainability of the Project as implemented. Moreover, MbPT
has a large hinterland and is well positioned and equipped to handle general cargo. For
Kakinada, with the low FIRR at 0.8 percent, questions arise as to whether there will be enough
funds available for continued operation, maintenance, and growth requirements. The OEM
observed that the private operator invested in operation and maintenance, and the port's traffic
was growing rapidly. The Government of Andhra Pradesh is determined to make Kakinada a
regional economic center and a deepwater port is essential in its long-term plan, known as
Vision 2020.

36.      The Project's sustainability also depends on the capability of MbPT and the private
operator of Kakinada Port to operate and maintain the facilities. Site visits to both ports
confirmed that the facilities are generally well maintained. An exception was noted with the rusty
fire-fighting vessel (para. 12). In sum, the Project is likely to be sustainable.
                      IV.      ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS


A.         Socioeconomic Impact


37.      Socioeconomic impacts, or lack thereof, of the Project may be assessed in light of local
unemployment vis-à-vis redundant work force. Both the Mumbai and Kakinada portions of the
Project aimed to improve the operational efficiency of the respective ports. Improvements in
efficiency, however, often result in redundant labor. For Kakinada Port, in order to mitigate the
adverse social impacts from potentially increasing unemployment, DOT-AP has adopted an
explicit policy to reserve the handling of some bulk cargoes, e.g., fertilizer, for the old harbor,
where they are barged to/from anchorages. Although these outdated operations impede
improvement of Kakinada Port's overall operational efficiency and reduce the financial viability
of the new deepwater port built under the Project, they employ about 7,000 to 10,000 people.
Excess labor is also clearly evident at MbPT. Under the Project, MbPT has been covenanted to
take measures to gradually improve port efficiency (para. 11). It reduced its total number of
employees from 31,000 in 1989 to 24,000 in 2000 (still much higher than equivalent ports
elsewhere in the world), mostly through early retirement schemes. In both cases, the Project
helped reduce the need for labor, but social considerations prompted the Government to adopt
a protective policy, which may be suboptimal from a long-term point of view but is deemed
necessary in the short term.

38.    The Project has generated some positive socioeconomic impacts, as well. The Kakinada
Port was built to stimulate economic development that would benefit the entire region, even
though this objective has not been fully realized based on interviews with local industrial
representatives and on the OEM's own observations (para. 29). The Government of Andhra
Pradesh is renewing efforts through its long-term plan (para. 35). The Mumbai Port has also
benefited "average people on the street" by stabilizing the costs of imports, and making the
imported products more widely available, and by ensuring uninterrupted power in the Mumbai
area through the reliable supply of imported fuel oil for power generation.28

B.         Environmental Impacts


39.     The Project has been environmentally neutral in that the operations of the facilities built
under it did not involve significant environmental impacts. During implementation, minor impacts
on the local marine environment may have been caused, such as those associated with
dredging. Compared to the old Pir Pau Oil Pier, the liquid handling facilities at the new Pir Pau
Oil Pier are much safer to operate which minimize the chances for potential oil and chemical
spills--so far no such incidents have been reported. The MbPT officials interviewed, however,
reported that the Pir Pau area is heavily polluted, mostly caused by the power plant, refineries,
and chemical plants in the surrounding area, not directly by Pir Pau Oil Pier itself.




28
     Several interviewees pointed out that Mumbai served by the power plant near Pir Pau Oil Pier, which depends on
     the new pier for its supply of low sulfur high stock fuel oil, enjoys reliable power supply in contrast to the frequent
     outages in the rest of the country.
C.         Impacts on Institutions and Policy

40.     The Project aimed to achieve positive impacts on institutional development and policy
through advisory TAs, loan covenants, and a project component targeting the implementation
capacity of MOST. Under TA 1284-IND (footnote 4), the consultants developed an investment
program and a strategy for institutional and organizational reforms in the ship-repair subsector
with a particular view to achieving more effective and efficient use of available resources and
encouraging greater private sector participation. The Ministry of Shipping officials interviewed
claimed no knowledge of the TA. However, according to the consultants who carried out the TA,
the final report was well received by the then MOST, which actively participated in formulating
the investment program and strategy. Two tripartite meetings were held. The Government
required the rewriting of part of the final report to reflect new legislation and investment
proposals made by the Government. Nevertheless, implementation of the TA recommendations
and the investment program was slow and unsuccessful.29 In general, the ship-repair sector in
India remains uncompetitive compared with that of other countries in the region. In 1991, the
total ship-repair turnover was about $25 million equivalent, and another $50 million was spent
on repairing Indian-flagged ships in foreign shipyards. According to the officials interviewed, the
current amount spent in foreign shipyards is likely much higher as even more Indian ships
choose to go abroad for lower costs and quicker delivery.

41.     The Project aimed to improve MOST's project implementation and monitoring capacities
by allocating loan proceeds for establishing a PIC, which had not materialized by the time of
project completion but was established subsequently for other projects (para. 20). For MbPT,
TA 1283-IND (footnote 3) provided assistance in formulating an action plan for implementing a
computerized MIS to improve its operational and financial efficiency. The MIS, particularly
VTMS, has been installed and has achieved its design purpose (para. 26). Finally, in
compliance with a loan covenant, MbPT submitted a draft action plan to ADB outlining key
actions to be taken to improve port efficiency (para. 11). The draft plan could not be located at
either ADB or MbPT. As discussed in para. 37, the operational efficiency of MbPT, measured
by productivity per employee, has improved, but still remains low compared with that of similar
ports elsewhere in the world. Policymaking regarding staff levels remains with the Government
rather than with any individual port trusts.




29
     For example, the TA recommended privatization of several major shipyards and the addition of more ship-repair
     capacity. Most recommendations were not followed. For two shipyards, the privatization took place but later on
     proved unsuccessful for reasons such as the slow increase of the Indian fleet and financial disputes between the
     concessionaire and the Government.
                               V.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT

A.     Relevance


42.     The Project was relevant in terms of its conformity to the Government's goals and policy,
as well as to ADB's country operational strategy at the time of appraisal, which focused on rapid
industrialization and improvement of infrastructure in support of industrial development and a
more efficient use of productive capacity. The current ADB operational strategy for India's port
sector places greater emphasis on commercialization and privatization of existing port facilities
and on supporting reforms to enhance private sector involvement in rehabilitating, modernizing,
and upgrading such facilities to improve their productivity and utilization, as well as in
developing new ports. This has somewhat reduced the relevance of the Project in today's policy
context. However, overall the Project has been relevant.


B.     Efficacy


43.     The Mumbai portion has achieved most of its objectives by improving the efficiency and
productivity of the port through building, rehabilitating, and improving infrastructure, although
much remains to be done in terms of management and staffing. In general, the Mumbai portion
has been efficacious. The Kakinada Port has been less efficacious as most of the original
objectives for building the deepwater port were not met and the goal of stimulating regional
economic growth in Kakinada through the availability of the port has not yet been fully achieved.
Although the port's occupancy has reached 51 percent and is growing rapidly, overall, the
Project is judged to have been less efficacious.


C.     Efficiency


44.     With a combined EIRR for all four components of 45.4 percent, the Project has
generated significant economic returns to the country. The combined FIRR is 13.7 percent. The
Mumbai portion is generating significant financial returns with an FIRR of 28.8 percent.
However, with an FIRR of 0.8 percent below its weighted average cost of capital of 4.4 percent,
the financial viability of Kakinada Port is uncertain, although the port's traffic is increasing
rapidly. The Mumbai portion was executed in an efficient manner with no major cost overrun,
despite some delays and cancellation of a major component. The Kakinada portion underwent a
major design change and was delayed by three years. In general, however, the Project has
been efficient.


D.     Sustainability


45.      There is likely to be continued demand for cargo-handling services by MbPT by virtue of
its superb location. MbPT is financially strong and has adequate operation and maintenance
capability. Although the current cash flow situation for Kakinada Port is not as strong as for
MbPT, the private operator is committed to and has a proven record in operation and
maintenance. The long-term financial performance of the port is expected to improve as traffic
increases. The Government of Andhra Pradesh's long-term plan to turn Kakinada into a regional
economic center should also improve the prospect for Kakinada Port. Overall, the Project is
likely to be sustainable.
E.     Institutional Development and Other Impacts


46.      The PIC to be established within MOST to supervise the implementation of the Project
did not materialize, but such a cell was subsequently established for other projects. As
covenanted, MbPT submitted a draft action plan to ADB outlining key actions to be taken to
improve port efficiency, but the plan could not be located at ADB or MbPT. However, it is
evident that although some progress has been made in operational efficiency improvement,
much remains to be done. The advisory TA provided for developing a computerized MIS
achieved its purpose of improving MbPT's operational and financial efficiency. In contrast, the
advisory TA for the development of India's ship-repair capacities was less successful as the
implementation of its recommendations proved to be slow and inconsequential. The country's
ship-repair subsector remains uncompetitive. The Project is environmentally neutral and its
socioeconomic impacts have been moderate. In sum, the Project has had little impact on
institutions, the environment, or the society.

F.     Overall Rating


47.    In view of the varied but generally positive achievements of different components of the
Project as assessed against the five rating criteria, the Project is judged overall to be
successful.


G.     Assessment of ADB and Executing Agencies' Performance


48.     A total of 11 loan review and 3 other missions were fielded by ADB during project
implementation; the executing agencies are generally satisfied with the support provided by
ADB. In particular, MbPT is highly appreciative of ADB's assistance in resolving various issues
pertaining to ADB guidelines and procedures, and reviewing and approving design changes. In
hindsight, however, ADB's performance could have been better. Formulation of the Project was
based on forecasts of traffic that proved to be overoptimistic (para. 52). The Project appeared to
have been formulated by putting together a series of unrelated subprojects without a central
theme (para. 53). ADB could have avoided some of the problems by hiring an independent
instructional consultant to review the design before proceeding with implementation (para. 22).
Most policy reforms and institutional development components of the Project were not
implemented, for which ADB and the Government jointly bear responsibility. The performance of
the executing agencies was generally satisfactory in terms of implementing the Project's
physical components.
                   VI.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS


A.     Key Issues for the Future



       1.      Operational Efficiency, Staff Level, and Private Sector Participation


49.     The issue of operational efficiency and staff levels is sector-wide, beyond any single port
trust or company, and is more political than economic. For MbPT, despite the significant
reduction in the work force, the total number of employees is still too high relative to its total
throughput, resulting in high operating expenses. To a certain extent, this was to be expected
as India is a labor-surplus economy, and labor-intensive production techniques should be
encouraged. Progress in privatization has been limited. Tenders have been issued to privatize
MbPT's container-handling facilities, but so far there has been very little interest generated.
Ship-repairing facilities, though leased out to private contractors, have had low profitability and
service quality. One of the main reasons for MbPT's relatively slow pace in privatization and
efficiency improvement is its large cash balance (para. 31), which obviates a potential key
incentive to privatize, i.e., the need to raise capital for investment. In contrast, the operation of
the Kakinada Port was successfully privatized in March 1998 by DOT-AP in order to improve
efficiency and attract additional investment from the private operator. Although the additional
investment has not yet materialized, the port is well maintained and managed. There is a strong
need for political commitment on the part of the Government to carry out necessary sector
reforms to improve its efficiency.
           2.       Port Tariff Structure and Financial Sustainability of Ports


50.      The tariffs for 13 major ports in India, including Mumbai Port, are regulated by the Tariff
Authority for Major Ports, which was set up in 1997 through an amendment of the Major Port
Trusts Act of 1963. Tariffs for "other ports", including Kakinada Port, although not regulated,
often need to be aligned with those of the major ports in order to be competitive. The tariff
authority determines the prices using a "cost plus" formula, which allows the ports to recover
their investment plus a "reasonable" return. The disadvantage of such a pricing mechanism is
that it does not encourage competition and efficiency since it guarantees a return on capital
investment regardless of its efficiency.30 The tariff authority official interviewed indicated that
they will gradually move from the current cost-based pricing model to a performance-based
model. However, it is imperative for the Government to deregulate tariffs if India intends to move
to increasingly market-based and commercialized port operation. Overly regulated prices not
only deter foreign investment in the sector, but also adversely affect the financial sustainability
of port trusts and companies. Kakinada Port's financial sustainability is affected partly by its low
tariffs. For MbPT, although the overall financial performance is sound, the share of port
operations in its total revenue has been steadily declining (para. 31). Deregulated port tariffs are
essential to encourage competition and improve ports' profitability.


           3.       ADB Involvement in the Ports Sector


51.     The need for ADB to be involved in port infrastructure has been questioned, in India and
elsewhere. It is argued that the private sector can take over responsibility for construction. In
practice, the private sector has not invested much in India so far. Costs of port construction in
India are high by international standards, while tariffs are low. There is therefore a problem with
the financial sustainability of new ports. The main deterrents are the high costs of dredging,
breakwaters, and other basic infrastructure. In fact, few of the world's top ports get private
investment in these areas. Most of the world's top ports (e.g., Hong Kong, China; Singapore;
Rotterdam; Hamburg; and Antwerp) still use public rather than private funds for dredging. Many
also build berths with public funds, although a rising proportion is being built by shipping lines or
international terminal operators. In light of these considerations, ADB's continued investments in
ports infrastructure, in addition to continued involvement in sector reforms (para. 55), are
warranted, and would help attract private investment.


B.         Lessons Identified



           1.       Overoptimistic Traffic Forecasting


52.     The traffic forecasts at appraisal proved overly optimistic. For Mumbai, large increases in
petroleum traffic were predicted, while in practice such traffic has fallen; and the Kakinada
forecasts were also too high, mainly because the assumed development of natural gas-based
industries never materialized. Economic forecasting is admittedly very difficult, and it is hard to
30
     In fact, a case recently reported in the local press shows that the current tariff structure may even encourage
     inefficiency. According to the press article, published on 13 September 2001, Kolkata Port Trust refused to adopt a
     tariff authority ruling that required the port not to cut a vessel-related charge set in 1996.
pinpoint specific lessons. One central point, however, is that Indian project plans are often
unreliable. Typically, several locations compete for one potential investment. Many projects are
cancelled; most of those that eventually go ahead are delayed by bureaucracy; and in the end
they go to only one of the competing locations. The tendency of overoptimism in traffic
forecasting should be factored in when formulating future projects in India.


       2.      Need for Coherent Project Themes


53.    The Project consisted of a mix of unrelated subprojects and did not have a homogenous
scope or a coherent theme. The Project was put together at a time when ADB was just about to
complete a detailed port sector study (footnote 6). The study correctly forecast that traffic
generally was rising very fast and identified the need for new capacity in detail at all major and
minor ports. There was also a general acceptance of the need for radical reform in the Indian
ports sector at that time. Efficiency in India's ports, measured in total throughput handled per
employee, was well below international standards for reasons that were familiar elsewhere in
the world: the ports were overstaffed, controlled by State monopolies, and in need of
competition and private operators. This knowledge should have provided a useful guide for
devising a comprehensive project based on, first, the facilities that would need to be built during
the 1990s and, second, reforms to significantly increase productivity of the existing facilities.
The nature of the required reforms was very clear from experience in other countries.


       3.      Project Design and Quality Control


54.     No project preparatory TA was provided. The project formulation and design relied on
the executing agencies' own feasibility studies. While India's technical knowhow in the design
and implementation of port projects is undoubtedly among the strongest of ADB's developing
member countries, foreign expertise would have been beneficial for a sector that was, and still
is, experiencing fast technological changes. At the very least, ADB should have better ensured
the quality of project design by hiring an independent international consultant to review all
project designs (paras. 22 and 48); this might have helped avoid the long delays for Kakinada
Port.


C.     Follow-Up Actions


55.    No particular follow-up actions are needed for the Project. However, in view of the widely
perceived urgency for fundamental reforms in the ports sector, it is imperative for ADB to
continue to engage the Government in policy dialogue regarding private sector participation,
operational efficiency, and labor and tariff issues.
                              APPENDIXES




                                                        Cited on
Number                    Title                Page   (page, para.)

1        Appraisal Cost Estimates and Actual   20         2,5
         Project Costs

2        Project Photos                        21         4,12

3        Implementation Schedule               24         6,17

4        Mumbai Vessel Waiting and             25         8,23
         Turnaround Times

5        Financial Statements                  26        10,31

6        Reevaluation of Financial and         29        11,33
         Economic Internal Rates of Return
                                           APPRAISAL COST ESTIMATES AND ACTUAL PROJECT COSTS
                                                                ($ million)

                                                                                             Appraisal Estimate                   Actual Cost             Deviation
Component                                                                                   FX        LC        Total     FX            LC       Total      (%)

Part A: Modernization of MbPT's Port Facilities                                           33.850      22.850    56.700   21.974       19.398     41.372      (27.0)
(i) Improving container-handling facilities                                                5.250       3.700     8.950    0.000        0.000      0.000     (100.0)
(ii) Replacement of Pir Pau oil pier                                                      17.600       9.400    27.000   14.898       11.803     26.701       (1.1)
(iii) Replacement of outer lock gate for Indira Dock and ancillary works                   3.200       4.550     7.750    1.904        4.418      6.322      (18.4)
(iv) Replacement of fire-fighting vessel                                                   2.300       0.000     2.300    1.193        0.575      1.768      (23.1)
(v) Installation of computerized management information system                             5.500       5.200    10.700    3.979        2.602      6.581      (38.5)
Part B: Modernization of MbPT's Ship Repair Facilities                                     9.750       4.650    14.400    4.524        4.686      9.210      (36.0)
(i) Replacement of caisson gates: Hughes and Mereweather dry docks                         2.348       1.511     3.859    1.221        2.343      3.564       (7.6)
(ii) Supply, installation, and testing of equipment for Hughes and                         5.641       1.395     7.036    2.106        0.000      2.106      (70.1)
       Mereweather dry docks etc.
(iii) Civil works relating to the construction, reconstuction, and repair of
       ship repair facilities at Hughes and Mereweather dry docks, etc.                    1.761       1.744     3.505    1.197        2.343      3.540         1.0
            Subtotal - MbPT (Part A + Part B)                                             43.600      27.500    71.100   26.498       24.084     50.582      (28.9)
Part C: Strengthening of MOST's Project Implementation
            Monitoring Activities - Office Equipment and Stationery                        0.030       0.300     0.330    0.000        0.000      0.000     (100.0)
Part D: Development of Kakinada Port                                                      57.300      30.800    88.100   56.847       25.683     82.530       (6.3)
(i) Construction of three deepwater berths, etc.                                          17.686      10.115    27.801   17.239       10.313     27.552       (0.9)
(ii) Construction of the breakwater and associated dredging and filling works             25.570      14.125    39.695   25.318        9.371     34.689      (12.6)
(iii) Dredging of the access channel, the turning basin, and berthing areas                4.392       2.070     6.462    5.473        2.880      8.353        29.3
(iv) Construction of the internal roads and port buildings and the provision of
        fire-fighting, water supply, communication, and electrical facilities              3.992       3.705     7.697    1.378        2.494      3.872      (49.7)
(v) Procurement of two tugboats (actual costs include 1 pilot launch)                      4.999       0.000     4.999    6.791        0.443      7.234       44.7
(vi) Procurement of a pilot launch                                                         0.005       0.000     0.005    0.000        0.000      0.000     (100.0)
(vii) Procurement of two mobile cranes, 15 and 35 tons capacity                            0.606       0.785     1.391    0.433        0.082      0.515      (63.0)
(viii) Procurement of two forklift trucks and other cargo-handling equipment               0.050       0.000     0.050    0.215        0.100      0.315       530.0
Interest During Construction-MbPT                                                          7.100       5.020    12.120    6.558        1.711      8.269      (31.8)
Interest During Construction-MOST                                                          0.070       0.000     0.070    0.009        0.000      0.009      (87.1)
Interest During Construction-Kakinada Port                                                 7.400       1.900     9.300    8.003        4.401     12.404        33.4




                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 1
             Total                                                                      115.500       65.520   181.020   97.915       55.879    153.794      (15.0)

FX = foreign exchange, LC = local currency, MbPT = Mumbai Port Trust, MOST = Ministry of Surface Transport.
                                                         PROJECT PHOTOS




Photo 1: Outer Lock Gate of Indira Dock (Mumbai)                   Photo 2 : Caisson Gate at Hughes Dry Dock (Mumbai)




Photo 3: Caisson Gate at Mereweather Dry Dock (Mumbai)             Photo 4: Crane at Hughes Dry Dock (Mumbai)
Photo 5: Fire-fighting vessel procured - in rusty condition (Mumbai)    Photo 6: Pir Pau Oil Pier (Mumbai)




    Photo 7: Pipelines on Pir Pau built by industrial users (Mumbai)   Photo 8: VTMS control room (Mumbai)
Photo 9: Tugging boats and pilot launcher procured (Kakinada)      Photo 10: Cranes and forklifter procured (Kakinada)




Photo 11: General cargo berths (Kakinada)                       Photo 12: Well-maintained fire-fighting facilities (Kakinada)
                                                                                                      Appendix 3


                                                          IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE

Task Name                                                 1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996    1997

A. Mumbai Port Trust
  1. Construction of Pir Pau Jetty


  2. Dredging Works


  3. Ancillary Works


    a. Replacement of Lock Gate and Ancillary
         Facilities


    b. Replacement of Fire-Fighting Vessel


    c. Installation of Management Information
         System/Vessel Traffic Management System


  4. Replacement of Caisson Gates


  5. Procurement of Equipment and Civil Works


B. Kakinada Port
  1. Construction of Berths


  2. Construction of Breakwater


  3. Dredging Works


  4. Internal Road, Buildings, and Ancillary Facilities


  5. Procurement of Tugs and Launch


  6. Procurement of Cargo-Handling Equipment


C. Management Information System Study and
   Ship Repair Sector Study


                           Appraisal Schedule
                           Actual Accomplishment
                                                                                                      Appendix 4


           MUMBAI VESSEL WAITING AND TURNAROUND TIMES

                              Figure A4.1: Average Waiting Time


10.00
 9.00
 8.00
 7.00
                                                                                      General Cargo
 6.00
                                                                                      Containers
 5.00                                                                                 Dry Bulk
 4.00                                                                                 Liquid Bulk
 3.00
 2.00
 1.00
 0.00
         1990

                1991

                       1992

                              1993

                                     1994

                                            1995

                                                   1996

                                                          1997

                                                                 1998

                                                                        1999

                                                                               2000
                                     Fiscal Year




                         Figure A4.2: Average Turnaround Time



 45.00
 40.00
 35.00
 30.00                                                                                  General Cargo
 25.00                                                                                  Containers
                                                                                        Dry Bulk
 20.00
                                                                                        Liquid Bulk
 15.00
 10.00
  5.00
  0.00


                                        Fiscal Year
                                                                                                 Appendix 5, page 1


                                          FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

                             Table A5.1: Income Statement: Mumbai Port Trust
                                               (Rs million)

                                                                    Fiscal Year Ending
Item                                        1994       1995        1996       1997       1998        1999     2000

A. Operating Revenue
   Vessels                               1,011.5    1,057.4     1,362.0    1,336.2     1,631.1    1,668.0   1,627.6
   Cargo                                 2,961.0    3,496.8     4,231.8    4,357.0     4,023.7    3,924.5   3,268.3
   Other                                   194.3      197.2       225.0      232.6       409.0      480.6     430.8

          Total                          4,166.8    4,751.4     5,818.8    5,925.8     6,063.8    6,073.1   5,326.7

B. Operating Expenses
   Staff Remuneration                    1,067.7    1,428.4     1,501.9    1,707.2     1,801.4    1,986.9   1,860.3
   Administration                          467.2      568.7       654.3      681.7       766.3      869.1     861.4
   Operation and Maintenance               734.3      869.9       839.2    1,164.9     1,117.2    1,212.1   1,205.3
   Depreciation                            130.2      139.2       140.5      190.5       267.5      275.9     300.8

          Total                          2,399.4    3,006.2     3,135.9    3,744.3     3,952.4    4,343.9   4,227.8

C. Operating Income                      1,767.4    1,745.2     2,682.9    2,181.5     2,111.4    1,729.2   1,098.9
   Nonoperating Revenue                    681.4      833.7     1,005.5      959.4       788.2      790.1   1,011.2
   Nonoperating Expense                    668.3    1,145.2     1,145.0    1,221.7     1,163.7    1,442.8   1,276.0
   Interest Expense                         42.8       42.8        39.4       45.3        48.7       51.5      65.4

D. Net Income before Tax                 1,780.5    1,391.0     2,543.4    1,919.2     1,735.9    1,076.5    834.1
   Provision for Tax                     (713.0)    (573.0)         0.0        0.0         0.0        0.0      0.0
   Net Income after Tax                  1,067.5      818.0     2,543.4    1,919.2     1,735.9    1,076.5    834.1
   Operating Ratio (%)                      57.6       63.3        53.9       63.2        65.2       71.5     79.4
   Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)           76.4       84.7        88.0       58.4        49.9       37.7     16.6

Operating Ratio = operating expenses (including depreciation) as a percentage of operating revenue.
Return on Net Fixed Assets = operating income as a percentage of average net fixed assets in operations.
Source: Mumbai Port Trust.
                                                                                                Appendix 5, page 2


                           Table A5.2: Sources and Uses of Funds: Mumbai Port Trust
                                                  (Rs million)

                                                                          Fiscal Year Ending
Item                                               1994       1995       1996       1997       1998       1999       2000

A. Sources
   Net Income before tax                        1,780.5    1,391.0    2,543.4    1,919.2    1,735.9    1,076.5      834.1
   Interest Long-Term Debt                        468.8      639.2      658.1      846.3    1,165.7    1,166.6    1,214.6
   Depreciation                                   132.0      139.2      140.9      204.9      273.1      300.0      337.9
      Total Internal                            2,381.3    2,169.4    3,342.4    2,970.4    3,174.7    2,543.1    2,386.6
   Long-Term Borrowings                         1,705.5    2,087.1    2,501.4    3,421.8    3,594.7    4,035.5    4,191.0
   Government Contrbution                          15.3       23.1       24.4        0.0        3.1       64.9        0.0
   Net Pension Funds and Other                  1,057.5    1,632.4    1,551.8    1,928.3    1,780.5    1,864.5    2,416.4

          Total                                 5,159.6    5,912.0    7,420.0    8,320.5    8,553.0    8,508.0    8,994.0

B. Applications
   Capital Expenditure                            501.4      523.7      491.1      894.1      775.3      658.7    2,255.4
   Change Working Capital                          20.9        3.8        0.0        6.2        0.0       10.6        0.0
   Investments and Other                        3,769.4    4,349.1    5,463.8    6,105.4    6,607.7    6,477.3    4,685.0
   Pension Funds and Other                        675.7      600.0      667.3      737.4      874.1      842.4    1,048.6

          Total                                 4,967.4    5,476.6    6,622.2    7,743.1    8,257.1    7,989.0    7,989.0

C. Surplus (Deficit) for Year                     192.2      435.4      797.8      577.4      295.9      519.0    1,005.0
D. Cash Balance Year Start                         28.0      220.2      655.6    1,453.4    2,030.8    2,326.7    2,845.7
E. Cash Balance End of Year (before tax)          220.2      655.6    1,453.4    2,030.8    2,326.7    2,845.7    3,850.7
   Self-Financing Ratio (%)                        217        151           ­          ­          ­          ­          ­
   Debt Service Coverage Ratio                        ­          ­          ­          ­          ­          ­          ­

­ = not available.
Self-Financing Ratio = internal cash generation (less debt service and net change in working capital) as a ratio of capital
expenditure.
Debt Service Coverage Ratio = internal cash generation expressed as a ratio of total debt service requirements.
Source: Mumbai Port Trust.
                                                                                                     Appendix 5, page 3


                                       Table A5.3: Balance Sheet: Mumbai Port Trust
                                                        (Rs million)

                                                                                   Fiscal Year Ending
Item                                                          1994     1995      1996      1997      1998      1999      2000

A. Current Assets
   Cash and Deposits                                          110.9     601.5     651.4     726.7     920.1     979.6   1,016.1
   Accounts Receivable                                      3,249.9   3,830.3   4,363.9   5,104.5   5,542.9   5,975.7   6,359.6
   Inventories                                                145.5     149.3     124.5     130.8      99.6     110.2     106.2
   Other                                                    1,348.7   1,825.5   2,618.0   3,196.2   3,491.7   3,998.9   4,971.1

           Subtotal (A)                                     4,855.0   6,406.6   7,757.8   9,158.2 10,054.3 11,064.4 12,453.0

B. Fixed Assets (F.A.)
   Gross F.A. in Operation                                  3,895.1   4,415.7 4,891.6 5,768.7 6,536.3 7,147.4 9,370.0
   Accumulated Depreciation                                 1,581.3   1,717.4 1,843.2 2,031.1 2,301.2 2,554.8 2,765.3
   Net F.A. in Operation                                    2,313.8   2,698.3 3,048.4 3,737.6 4,235.1 4,592.6 6,604.7
   Work-In-Progress                                         7,089.8   8,914.1 11,052.2 13,548.6 16,470.8 18,973.9 20,068.8

           Subtotal (B)                                     9,403.6 11,612.4 14,100.6 17,286.2 20,705.9 23,566.5 26,673.5

C. Other Assets
   Retirement Fund                                          2,797.1   3,528.8   4,480.8 5,680.9 7,130.4 8,878.3 10,217.9
   Investments and Other Assets                             7,289.6   8,013.0   9,808.7 11,400.9 13,005.6 14,704.3 16,584.3

           Total (A+B+C)                                   24,345.3 29,560.8 36,147.9 43,526.2 50,896.2 58,213.5 65,928.7

D. Current Liabilities
   Accounts Payable                                           889.3   1,234.7   1,507.0   2,012.5   2,327.1   2,317.0   2,405.9
   Other Current Liabilities                                  752.0   1,068.8   1,261.0   1,360.6   1,351.6   1,741.1   2,040.8

           Total                                            1,641.3   2,303.5   2,768.0   3,373.1   3,678.7   4,058.1   4,446.7

E. Long-Term Liabilities
   Long-Term Debt                                           2,662.1   3,215.4   3,711.8   4,346.1   4,706.0   5,058.7 5,437.3
   Retirement Fund                                          2,866.6   3,733.0   4,739.6   5,994.8   7,492.6   9,249.2 10,790.2

           Total                                            5,528.7   6,948.4   8,451.4 10,340.9 12,198.6 14,307.9 16,227.5

F. Equity
   Government Contribution and Capital Reserve              2,313.8 2,698.3 3,048.4 3,737.6 4,235.1 4,545.6 6,604.7
   Revenue Reserves                                        14,861.5 17,610.6 21,880.1 26,074.6 30,783.8 35,301.9 38,649.8

           Total                                           17,175.3 20,308.9 24,928.5 29,812.2 35,018.9 39,847.5 45,254.5

    Total Liabilities and Equity                           24,345.3 29,560.8 36,147.9 43,526.2 50,896.2 58,213.5 65,928.7
    Current Ratio (%)                                         295.8    278.1    280.3    271.5    273.3    272.7    280.1

Current Ratio = ratio of current assets to current liabilities.
Source: Mumbai Port Trust.
                                                                               Appendix 6, page 1



                      REEVALUATION OF FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC
                            INTERNAL RATES OF RETURN

A.     General

1.      This appendix presents both financial and economic reevaluation of the Project. The
reevaluation was carried out on an incremental basis in terms of with- and without-Project
scenarios. Wherever appropriate, comparisons will be made with the appraisal report and
projection completion report (PCR) in terms of methods used, and in most cases such methods
are different. All prices and costs are expressed in the third quarter 2001 constant United States
dollar values. The costs and benefits incurred before 2001 were adjusted using the average
exchange rates of the year when the costs occurred and international inflation rates over the
period (1.5 percent average). In estimating financial costs, interest paid during construction was
deducted. In estimating the economic costs, duties and taxes were deducted and nontradable
local currency costs were converted to border prices using a 0.90 standard conversion factor. In
addition, as labor costs form a significant portion of the overall operation and maintenance
costs, a conversion factor of 0.6 was used to derive the shadow price of the labor costs from
wages.

2.     Table A6.1 provides the traffic (revenue) estimates for the four quantifiable components,
which have been used in the subsequent recalculation of financial internal rates of return
(FIRRs) and economic internal rates of return (EIRRs). The estimates include the actual and
forecast traffic and revenue based on information provided by the executing agencies.

B.     Replacement of the Outer Lock Gate at Indira Dock

       1.      Appraisal and PCR Approach

3.      The appraisal report correctly identified the main benefit: avoiding the reversion of Indira
Dock to a tidal dock without the project. However, the specific nature of the benefit proved in
retrospect to be different from that assumed at appraisal. The report assumed that most of the
ships would wait for an average of five hours for high tides on which to enter and leave the
dock, sitting on the bottom when the tide was out. However, shipping companies confirmed that
they would rarely allow their ships to do this in Indira Dock, which has a hard floor; and in
practice it virtually did not occur during a six-week period in which the lock gates were not used
in May-July 2001.

4.        The main benefit identified by the PCR was different from that in the appraisal report. It
also proved to be incorrect. The report assumed that the old lock gates could be maintained
indefinitely. The main costs of this option would have been regular overhauls every 10 years
and the cost of vessel delays during these overhauls. The benefit was the avoidance of these
costs. The engineering department of the Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT), however, considers that
continued maintenance of the old dock would not have been an option. The old lock was built in
1922 and its last major repair was in 1977. It was in too dilapidated and unreliable a condition,
leaking continually into the dock. In other words, even with another major overhaul, it would not
have functioned properly and would still adversely affect the dock's operation, for which high
reliability is necessary. A replacement in this case was not only the least-cost option but also the
only viable option without affecting traffic. Furthermore, the cost avoidance was greatly
overestimated by both the appraisal and project completion reports since the operational cost
                                                                                               Appendix 6, page 2


with the new lock gate is approximately the same as that for the old one. With the new lock,
operation costs would not have been saved as assumed in the PCR calculation.

           2.       Project Performance Audit Report Assumptions

5.      A guide to the actual consequences of losing the lock gate were observable when bad
weather damaged the protective storm gates in May 2001, leaving the port tidal for six weeks.
The main response was for the owners to lighten the ships before they came into the dock--by
discharging cargo at the two berths outside, which have depths of 9.1-9.7 meters, or by
reorganizing schedules so that the ships reached Mumbai with a lighter load. These solutions
would not be sustainable on a long-term basis, as there are only two berths outside the lock. In
practice, based on actual port statistics and interviews, the consequences of the dock becoming
tidal were estimated as follows:1

           (i)      30 percent of the ships calling at Indira would be unaffected as they are small
                    enough to enter with 6.5 meters of water;
           (ii)     30 percent would discharge to barges, at an additional cost of about US$5 per
                    ton;
           (iii)    20 percent would come in smaller ships, incurring diseconomies of size (It is not
                    possible to calculate these diseconomies but they are unlikely to be less than $5
                    per ton); and
           (iv)     20 percent of the traffic would no longer call at Mumbai, because a water depth
                    of 6.5 meters is too low for international shipping.2

           3.       Recalculated FIRR

6.       The main financial benefit of replacing the lock gate would be the retention of port
revenues (net of expenditure), which would have been lost if the port became tidal. They are
estimated from the ports' accounts at about $5 per ton. On the assumption that about 20 percent
of the traffic (Table A6.1) would be lost, the FIRR is estimated at 62.7 percent (Table A6.2).

           4.       Recalculated EIRR

7.     The economic benefits are calculated in Table A6.3 on the assumption that the costs
associated with the last three consequences mentioned (lighterage/double handling,
diseconomies of size and diversion of ships to other ports) would all amount to at least $5 per
ton. Even on this relatively conservative assumption, the EIRR is recalculated at 110.9 percent.

C.         Pir Pau Oil Pier

           1.       Appraisal and PCR Approach

8.         The appraisal report gave the following reasons for building a new Pir Pau terminal:

           (i)      the old Pir Pau terminal was in a dilapidated condition, having been built in 1922;

1
     These estimates represent the "best guess", which were partly based on the actual traffic increase as shown in
     Table A6.1. After the completion of the lock gate in 1993, the total cargo handled at Indira Dock increased by
     44 percent from FY1993 to FY1997, although other factors have undoubtedly contributed to the increase.
2
     Twenty percent of the traffic was estimated to no longer call at MbPT and would have had to find an alternative
     port. One option would have been to build general cargo berths at the nearby Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, the cost
     of which would likely be much higher than the current option.
                                                                                               Appendix 6, page 3


          (ii)     it could only take small tankers, up to 5,000 dead weight tons;
          (iii)    it had a high rate of siltation; and
          (iv)     it had a capacity of only 500,000 tons per year. (In fact it handled 1 million tons in
                   FY1996, although at a very high occupancy rate of 83 percent, entailing long
                   queues).

9.       The benefits identified by the appraisal report were (i) savings in ship service time with a
new, more efficient terminal; (ii) savings in waiting time with reduced berth occupancy (less
busy); and (iii) economies of size with larger ships. These benefits are fairly standard in
economic evaluation in ports, and would have been reasonable if they had been applied to the
right set of berths. However, the appraisal report calculated them on the assumption that Pir
Pau Oil Pier handled the same petroleum oils and lubricants products as are handled at
MbPT's four other petroleum berths at Jawaharlal Deep. The appraisal report forecast steady
growth in traffic, and concluded that the five berths combined (J1, J2, J3, and J4 and the Pir
Pau old terminal) would reach full capacity by the mid-1990s--and therefore that a new Pir Pau
Oil Pier was justified. In the event, petroleum traffic fell, and there is now surplus capacity at the
existing petroleum oils and lubricants berths. On the approach adopted by the appraisal report,
it is clear that in retrospect the justification would have proved weak.

          2.       Project Performance Audit Report Assumptions

10.     Despite being called petroleum oils and lubricants berth, new Pir Pau Oil Pier has
become a specialized berth for chemicals and specific types of petroleum products that cannot
be handled elsewhere. The pipelines from the berth go to nine chemical and other relatively
specialized plants. Without the project, 2 million tons would have had to find other ways of
reaching the chemical and other plants. The most likely solution would have been lighterage,
which is still very common in India. The costs of the double handling, additional ship time for
handling at anchorage and barging to shore are lower for bulk liquids than for general cargo,
and are estimated at around $2.5 per ton.3

          3.       Recalculated FIRR

11.      The FIRR calculation assumes that the capacity of the new Pir Pau berth is about 2
million tons4 (it is already handling 1.8 million tons at 67 percent occupancy), and the revenue to
MbPT is about $1.5 per ton. On this basis the FIRR is calculated at 9.5 percent (Table A6.4).

          4.       Recalculated EIRR

12.    On basis of cost savings from lighterage required without the Project, the EIRR is
recalculated at 18.3 percent (Table A6.5).

D.        Modernization of MbPT's Ship Repair Facilities

13.     The MbPT ship-repair facilities would have been unable to continue functioning without
the civil works--especially the replacement of the caisson gates, which were leaking. The
repairs allowed the dry docks to continue to provide services, giving MbPT an income of $1.4
3
    This includes foreign ships as well, because it is the Indian customers/importers who are paying the full cost of
    shipping. Most Pir Pau chemical/petroleum tankers are hired on charters. The Indian importer would have to pay
    for the double handling and lighterage, and would also have to pay for chartering the ships for extra days spent at
    anchorage.
4
    Calculation of maximum capacity is generally based on less than 100 percent occupancy to avoid long queues.
                                                                              Appendix 6, page 4


million in FY2001. Ship repairing services provided by private contractors using MbPT's facilities
bring the total value of the MbPT dry dock services up to about $2 million per annum. The
occupancy of the facilities over the last three years has averaged over 85 percent.

       1.      Appraisal and PCR Approach

14.     The main financial benefit of the rehabilitation identified by the appraisal and project
completion reports was a large reduction in operation and maintenance costs. This is
questionable for three reasons. First, they estimated the saving at around $1.1 million per
annum, which appears too high (Total expenditure in FY2001 was only $0.7 million). Second,
the approach effectively assumed that the benefit of reduced operation and maintenance costs
would still be valid even if the dry docks had no business. Third, the port engineers confirmed
that the investments in replacement of the dock gates and additional civil work were a
precondition for continued operation. Furthermore, the appraisal report made the assumptions
that the repairs to the dry docks could reduce service times by over 50 percent, and could
attract over 70 more vessels per annum. These assumptions were not supported by any
background data and proved to be overoptimistic. In practice the total number of vessels
serviced has fluctuated around an average of about 70.

15.     The main economic benefit identified by the appraisal and project completion reports
was the avoidance of the cost of steaming to a foreign port for repairs. Shipping lines
interviewed, however, confirmed that they would not generally incur costs of this type. In
practice, they select repair sites in areas they already visit to pick up or unload cargo. No
significant additional costs are incurred travelling to the repair site.

       2.      Project Performance Audit Report Assumptions

16.     The project performance audit report assumes that the main financial benefit is the net
revenues to MbPT from the dry dock services that were able to continue because of the related
project component. The main economic benefit of the project component to the Indian economy,
confirmed by shipping lines, is in fact the avoidance of the cost of using foreign repair yards.

       3.      Recalculated FIRR

17.    The net revenues to MbPT from the dry dock services was calculated as $0.77 million
(revenues of $1.44 million minus expenditure of $0.77 million) in FY2001. On this basis the
FIRR is recalculated at 4.4 percent (Table A6.6)

       4.      Recalculated EIRR

18.     The avoidance of the cost of using foreign repair yards is estimated at about $1.9 million
in FY2001--i.e., about 10 percent less than the relatively expensive MbPT dry docks (based on
interviews with ship owners), whose main customers are the navy and port craft rather than
commercial ships. The net benefit is calculated by subtracting expenditure from revenues, using
an opportunity cost for labor of 0.6. The EIRR recalculated on this basis is 11.2 percent
(Table A6.7).
                                                                                Appendix 6, page 5


E.     Kakinada Port

       1.      Appraisal and PCR Approach

19.   The main reasons as stated in the appraisal report for building a deepwater port at
Kakinada were as follows:

       (i)     to realize the potential for gas based industries;
       (ii)    to serve fertilizer plants, iron and steel plants, and petroleum depots that were
               planned for the area;
       (iii)   to reduce pressures on Visakhapatnam Port; and
       (iv)    to create a regional growth center at Kakinada.

20.      Traffic was forecast on this basis at 2.5 million tons in 1995 and 2.8 million tons in 2000.
Over half of the forecast consisted of dry cargo, especially iron products and fertilizers. The dry
cargo, however, has not materialized. Gas-based industries have not been attracted to
Kakinada. In fact the gas reserves have remained largely unexploited, as the companies that
have been exploring offshore are currently more interested in oil than gas. Consequently the
fertilizer and iron/steel plants that were planned for the area have not come to the port. An iron
plant, which was built during the 1990s, eventually went to Visakhapatnam, where the water
depth at the port is much greater. Nor has Kakinada Port "relieved" Visakhapatnam Port; on the
contrary, Visakhapatnam Port regards Kakinada Port more as a minor competitor. In fact, a new
relief port is now being planned at Gangavaram, only 15 kilometers from Visakhapatnam.
Furthermore, it has not been possible to attract cargo away from the old shallow draft harbor, as
envisaged at appraisal, where agricultural and other dry cargoes are barged to and from
anchorages. The Government of Andhra Pradesh has an explicit policy of reserving the cargo
for the old port as these outdated operations employ 7,000 to 10,000 people. The main
economic benefits presented in the appraisal report were avoidance of high handling costs and
extended ship time at anchorage for iron pellets, sponge iron, and fertilizers. These benefits,
however, are no longer applicable in the absence of such traffic.

21.      Despite the underachievement of the original forecast, the new port's traffic reached 1.8
million tons in FY2001. The vast majority consists of liquids. They include the phosphoric acid,
ammonia, and petroleum products that were forecast in the appraisal report, but also a new
product: edible oil. The edible oil, imported in processed form from Malaysia, was previously
handled by Visakhapatnam Port. With the completion of the Kakinada Port, the private importer
built a storage tank about three kilometers from the port and a pipeline linking it with the port;
the oil is for subsequent distribution in the hinterland of Kakinada. The overall traffic of Kakinada
Port has grown by over 50 percent per annum in the first four years of its operation. It is
assumed to reach the capacity of the port, estimated at 3 million tons, in FY2004.

       2.      Project Performance Audit Report Assumptions

22.     The main financial benefit of the project component is the revenues from the liquid
cargoes. The main economic benefit is savings in road transport costs from Visakhapatnam to
the final consumers in the Kakinada region.
                                                                                 Appendix 6, page 6


       3.      Recalculated FIRR

23.      The FIRR for Kakinada port was recalculated at 0.8 percent (Table A6.8). The revenues
are low because almost all the cargo is liquid, for which handling is fast and labor free. The total
revenues from cargo handling and ship services averaged just under $2 per ton in FY2001. The
long-term FIRR for the port is likely to be higher for two reasons. First, the next berths to be built
will not have to bear the costs of the channel (dredging) and breakwater. Second, it is likely that
the port will attract some dry cargo in the future, and revenues for dry cargoes are greater than
for liquids.

       4.      Recalculated EIRR

24.     It was confirmed in interviews with the fertilizer importers and others that the inland
transport cost savings, compared to using Visakhapatnam Port and then road transport to the
final consumers in the Kakinada region, was on average approximately $6 per ton for the main
cargoes. The exception was petroleum products, which appeared to be more expensive to
transport from Visakhapatnam by sea than by road. Consequently the $6 per ton transport
saving was applied to only 80 percent of the cargo. On this basis the EIRR was recalculated at
9.7 percent (Table A6.9).
                                                                                     Appendix 6, page 7


                          Table A6.1: Traffic and Revenue Forecast

                       Indira Dock         Pir Pau Oil Pier      Ship Repair          Kakinada
                                     a                    b                   c                    d
Fiscal               Cargo Handled         Cargo Handled         Revenues          Cargo Handled
Year                  (million tons)          (`000 tons)         ($ million)       (million tons)

1992        Actual          7.4                    ­                   ­                   ­
1993        Actual          8.8                    ­                   ­                   ­
1994        Actual         10.7                    ­                   ­                   ­
1995        Actual         11.7                    ­                   ­                   ­
1996        Actual         12.1                  0.40                1.03                  ­
1997        Actual         12.7                  1.16                1.18                  ­
1998        Actual         12.0                  1.61                0.80                 0.5
1999        Actual         11.5                  1.87                1.07                 1.1
2000        Actual         11.0                  1.81                1.16                 1.5
2001                       11.0                  2.00                1.44                 1.8
2002                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 2.2
2003                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 2.6
2004                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2005                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2006                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2007                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2008                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2009                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2010                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2011                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2012                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2013                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2014                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2015                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2016                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2017                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2018                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2019                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0
2020                       11.0                  2.00                1.70                 3.0

­ = not applicable.
a
  Forecast assumes dock remains locked. Without locks, a 20 percent decline is assumed.
b
  Capacity of New Pir Pau based on actual productivity of 6,900 tons/day in fiscal year 2001, and
  occupancy of 80 percent.
c
  Revenues from ship repairing for Mumbai Port Trust, rather than tonnage or number of vessels repaired,
  are used because the revenues are not proportional to the tonnage or number of vessels repaired.
d
  The capacity of the port is estimated at 3 million tons at the current three berths.
                                                                     Appendix 6, page 8


        Table A6.2: Financial Internal Rate of Return
                     Mumbai Port Trust
                     Indira Lock Gates
                          ($ million)

 Fiscal         Capital      Operations                         Net
                                    a                     b
 Year            Cost          M&R            Revenues         Benefit

 1991            1.253                                         (1.253)
 1992            1.121                                         (1.121)
 1993            1.227                                         (1.227)
 1994            0.848                                         (0.848)
 1995            1.053                                         (1.053)
 1996                            0.400           12.571        12.171
 1997                            0.400           13.176        12.776
 1998                            0.410           12.808        12.398
 1999                            0.407           12.128        11.721
 2000                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2001                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2002                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2003                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2004                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2005                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2006                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2007                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2008                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2009                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2010                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2011                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2012                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2013                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2014                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2015                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2016                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2017                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2018                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2019                            0.385           11.000        10.615
 2020           (1.572)          0.385           11.000        12.187

                    Financial Internal Rate of Return          62.7%


M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
a
  Ten percent of capital costs.
b
  Avoidance of loss of port revenue estimated at $5 per ton for 20 percent
  of traffic.
                                                                             Appendix 6, page 9


             Table A6.3: Economic Internal Rate of Return
                          Mumbai Port Trust
                          Indira Lock Gates
                               ($ million)

 Fiscal         Capital        Operations                           Net
                                                            a
 Year            Cost            M&R            Revenues           Benefit

 1991            1.139                                             (1.139)
 1992            1.019                                             (1.019)
 1993            1.116                                             (1.116)
 1994            0.771                                             (0.771)
 1995            0.957                                             (0.957)
 1996                             0.328           44.000           43.672
 1997                             0.328           46.116           45.788
 1998                             0.336           44.828           44.492
 1999                             0.333           42.450           42.117
 2000                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2001                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2002                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2003                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2004                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2005                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2006                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2007                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2008                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2009                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2010                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2011                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2012                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2013                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2014                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2015                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2016                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2017                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2018                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2019                             0.315           38.500           38.185
 2020           (1.429)           0.315           38.500           39.614

                     Economic Internal Rate of Return              110.9%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
a
  Avoidance of Indira Dock becoming a tidal dock. The consequences of it
  becoming tidal are assumed to be as follows:
  (i) 30 percent of the ships would be unaffected as they are small enough to
        enter at 6.5 meters;
  (ii) 30 percent of the ships would lighten their loads at anchorage in order to
        reduce draft;
  (iii) 20 percent of the cargo would come in smaller ships, giving
        diseconomies of size; and
  (iv) 20 percent of the ships would no longer call, going elsewhere.
                                                               Appendix 6, page 10


          Table A6.4: Financial Internal Rate of Return
                       Mumbai Port Trust
                       Pi Pau Oil Terminal
                            ($ million)

 Fiscal       Capital    Operations                   Net
 Year          Cost        M&R          Revenues     Benefit

 1991          1.253                                 (1.253)
 1992          2.616                                 (2.616)
 1993          5.032                                 (5.032)
 1994          4.727                                 (4.727)
 1995          3.392                                 (3.392)
 1996          3.203        0.062         0.624      (2.641)
 1997          0.114        0.181         1.810       1.515
 1998                       0.258         2.576       2.318
 1999                       0.297         2.966       2.669
 2000                       0.272         2.715       2.443
 2001                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2002                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2003                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2004                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2005                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2006                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2007                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2008                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2009                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2010                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2011                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2012                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2013                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2014                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2015                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2016                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2017                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2018                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2019                       0.300         3.000       2.700
 2020          (5.811)      0.300         3.000       8.511

                 Financial Internal Rate of Return    9.5%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
                                                                  Appendix 6, page 11


         Table A6.5: Economic Internal Rate of Return
                       Mumbai Port Trust
                      Pir Pau Oil Terminal
                            ($ million)

Fiscal       Capital    Operations                       Net
                                                   a
Year          Cost        M&R           Revenues        Benefit

1991          1.139                                     (1.139)
1992          2.378                                     (2.378)
1993          4.575                                     (4.575)
1994          4.297                                     (4.297)
1995          3.084                                     (3.084)
1996          2.911        0.034           1.177        (1.768)
1997          0.104        0.098           0.972         0.770
1998                       0.139           1.994         1.855
1999                       0.160           3.007         2.847
2000                       0.147           2.437         2.290
2001                       0.162           3.459         3.297
2002                       0.162           4.694         4.532
2003                       0.162           5.408         5.246
2004                       0.162           6.192         6.030
2005                       0.162           7.055         6.893
2006                       0.162           8.005         7.843
2007                       0.162           9.049         8.887
2008                       0.162          10.198        10.036
2009                       0.162          11.461        11.299
2010                       0.162          12.851        12.689
2011                       0.162          13.616        13.454
2012                       0.162          14.418        14.256
2013                       0.162          15.261        15.099
2014                       0.162          16.146        15.984
2015                       0.162          17.075        16.913
2016                       0.162          18.051        17.889
2017                       0.162          19.076        18.914
2018                       0.162          20.151        19.989
2019                       0.162          21.281        21.119
2020         (5.282)       0.162          22.466        27.586

              Economic Internal Rate of Return          18.3%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
a
  Represents avoidance of cost of handling at anchorage. Effective
  economic capacity of the new Pir Pau terminal is 2 million tons.
                                                              Appendix 6, page 12


         Table A6.6: Financial Internal Rate of Return
                      Mumbai Port Trust
        Modernization of Mumbai Ship Repair Facilities
                          ($ million)

 Fiscal       Capital     Operations                   Net
 Year          Cost         M&R         Revenues      Benefit

 1991          0.125                                  (0.125)
 1992          0.249                                  (0.249)
 1993          0.246                                  (0.246)
 1994          0.364                                  (0.364)
 1995          0.234                                  (0.234)
 1996          6.863                                  (6.863)
 1997          2.288         1.242        1.228       (2.302)
 1998                        0.962        0.851       (0.111)
 1999                        1.008        1.134        0.126
 2900                        0.813        1.162        0.349
 2001                        0.772        1.443        0.671
 2002                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2003                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2004                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2005                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2006                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2007                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2008                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2009                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2010                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2011                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2012                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2013                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2014                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2015                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2016                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2017                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2018                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2019                        0.851        1.702        0.851
 2020         (2.309)        0.851        1.702        3.160

                  Financial Internal Rate of Return    4.4%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
                                                                 Appendix 6, page 13


        Table A6.7: Economic Internal Rate of Return
                     Mumbai Port Trust
       Modernization of Mumbai Ship Repair Facilities
                         ($ million)

 Fiscal        Capital      Operations                        Net
                                                         a
 Year           Cost          M&R            Revenues        Benefit

 1991           0.114                                        (0.114)
 1992           0.226                                        (0.226)
 1993           0.223                                        (0.223)
 1994           0.330                                        (0.330)
 1995           0.213                                        (0.213)
 1996           6.239                                        (6.239)
 1997           2.080          1.118             1.657       (1.541)
 1998                          0.866             1.148        0.282
 1999                          0.907             1.530        0.623
 2000                          0.732             1.569        0.837
 2001                          0.695             1.947        1.252
 2002                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2003                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2004                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2005                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2006                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2007                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2008                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2009                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2010                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2011                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2012                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2013                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2014                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2015                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2016                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2017                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2018                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2019                          0.766             2.298        1.532
 2020          (2.693)         0.766             2.298        4.225

                   Economic Internal Rate of Return          11.2%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
a
  Avoidance of the cost of using foreign repair yards.
                                                                 Appendix 6, page 14


          Table A6.8: Financial Internal Rate of Return
                      Kakinada Port Trust
                         Kakinada Port
                           ($ million)

 Fiscal       Capital     Operations                    Net
 Year          Cost         M&R         Revenues       Benefit

 1993          0.223                                    (0.223)
 1994          9.696                                    (9.696)
 1995         16.590                                   (16.590)
 1996         51.471                                   (51.471)
 1997          8.689                                    (8.689)
 1998                        1.280         1.007        (0.273)
 1999                        1.375         2.197         0.822
 2000                        1.426         2.833         1.407
 2001                        1.500         3.400         1.900
 2002                        1.600         4.080         2.480
 2003                        1.700         4.896         3.196
 2004                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2005                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2006                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2007                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2008                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2009                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2010                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2011                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2012                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2013                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2014                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2015                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2016                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2017                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2018                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2019                        1.800         5.667         3.867
 2020        (23.558)        1.800         5.667        27.425

                   Financial Internal Rate of Return    0.8%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
                                                                    Appendix 6, page 15


          Table A6.9: Economic Internal Rate of Return
                       Kakinada Port Trust
                         Kakinada Port
                            ($ million)

 Fiscal       Capital     Operations                         Net
                                                       a
 Year          Cost         M&R            Revenues         Benefit

 1993          0.201                                         (0.201)
 1994          8.726                                         (8.726)
 1995         14.931                                        (14.931)
 1996         46.324                                        (46.324)
 1997          7.817                                         (7.817)
 1998                         1.152            2.560          1.408
 1999                         1.237            5.583          4.346
 2000                         1.283            7.200          5.917
 2001                         1.350            8.640          7.290
 2002                         1.440           10.368          8.928
 2003                         1.530           12.442         10.912
 2004                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2005                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2006                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2007                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2008                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2009                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2010                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2011                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2012                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2013                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2014                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2015                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2016                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2017                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2018                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2019                         1.620           14.400         12.780
 2020         (22.286)        1.620           14.400         35.066

                  Economic Internal Rate of Return           9.7%

M&R = maintenance and rehabilitation.
a
  Avoidance of inland transport costs from Visakhapatnam.
