Validation Report




Reference Number: PCV: IND 2008­13
Project Number: 29250
Loan Number: 1747
July 2008




India: Surat-Manor Tollway Project




Operations Evaluation Department
                                   ABBREVIATIONS

           ADB           ­     Asian Development Bank
           ADF           ­     Asian Development Fund
           EIRR          ­     economic internal rate of return
           FIRR          ­     financial internal rate of return
           NH            ­     national highway
           NHAI          ­     National Highways Authority of India
           O&M           ­     operation and maintenance
           OCR           ­     ordinary capital resources
           PCR           ­     project completion report
           RRP           ­     report and recommendation of the President
           TA            ­     technical assistance




                                           NOTE
                         In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

                                       Key Words
india, adb, asian development bank, roads, lessons, operations evaluation department,
performance evaluation




Director           R.B. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2, Operations Evaluation
                   Department (OED)

Team leader        N. Singru, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
Team members       R. Lumain, Senior Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 2,
                   OED
                   C. Roldan, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation
                   Division 2, OED
                             PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT VALIDATION

A. Basic Project Data                             PCR Validation Date:
Project and Loan/          29250                                                          Approved         Actual
Grant Number:              1747-IND
Project Name:              Surat­Manor            Total Project Costs ($ million):           280.00        246.79
                           Tollway Project
Country:                   India                  Loan/Grant ($ million):                    180.00        149.75
Sector(s):                 Transport/Roads        Total Cofinancing ($ million):
                           and Highways
ADB Financing              ADF:                   Borrower ($ million):                    100.00          88.52
($ million):               OCR: 180.00            Beneficiaries ($ million):
Cofinanciers:                                     Others ($ million):
Approval Date:             27 Jul 2000            Effectiveness Date:                  3 Jan 2001    8 Nov 2000
Signing Date:              5 Oct 2000             Closing Date:                        30 Sep 2004 30 Sep 2005
Project Officers:          Name:                  Designation:                             From            To
                           P. Vallely             Transport Specialist, IWTC               2000           2001
                           N. Patel               Principal Project Management             2002           2002
                                                   Specialist, SARD
                           A. Akanda              Principal Transport Specialist, INRM     2002           2005
                           A. K. Motwani          Project Implementation Officer           2005           2006
                                                   (Transport), INRM
                           S. Tsukada             Principal Transport Specialist, INRM     2005           2006
Evaluator:                 T. F. Jones            Director:                               R. B. Adhikari, OED2
Quality Control            N. Singru, OED2
Reviewer:

B. Project Description (summarized from the report and recommendation of the President)

   (i)       Rationale. The western transport corridor, comprising national highway (NH) 8 and NH4 connecting
             Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore and Chennai is the busiest corridor in India; this is particularly true of the
             528 kilometer (km) section between Ahmedabad and Mumbai, where the corridor passes through an
             industrial belt with connections to several major west coast ports. A portion (348 km) of the
             Ahmedabad to Mumbai section was widened to a four-lane standard, while the remaining
             approximately 180 km section (between Surat and Manor) formed a severe bottleneck, hindering the
             efficient movement of goods and passengers between the industrial heartland of Gujarat and west
             coast ports (including Mumbai). The scale of the overall highway improvement program and
             associated high costs made the Government conscious of the need to mobilize private financing to
             develop the highway system. The private sector had taken up projects with relatively short payback
             periods, such as bridges and bypasses, but delayed assuming the higher capital costs and risks
             associated with financing long stretches of interurban highways until the correct environment and
             incentives were in place, and a long-term debt market was developed. These requirements were
             addressed separately, with private participation introduced through commercialization of the
             operation and maintenance (O&M) of the completed project facility. The Project was designed to be
             publicly funded but privately operated and maintained under a toll concession. The project O&M
             concession to the private sector was intended to serve as a model for use on other highway sections
             that are improved to the four-lane standard. The Asian Development Bank's (ADB's) involvement with
             the Project was also intended to provide an opportunity to advance policy dialogue with the
             Government on road sector reform issues, including the commercialization of O&M.

   (ii)      Objectives or expected outcomes. The objectives of the Project were to remove capacity
             constraints and improve road safety on critical sections of the western transport corridor connecting
             Delhi to Mumbai, with the completed project highway operated and maintained by the private
  2


           sector through a toll concession. The commercialization of O&M of the project highway represents
           a significant step in increasing private participation in national highway development in India. The
           Project included the following: (a) the widening to four lanes (including strengthening of the existing
           two-lane pavement) of about 180 km on NH8 between Surat and Manor, (b) consulting services for
           construction supervision of road improvement, and (c) consulting services for the development of
           private participation and toll operations. In urban areas, the Project was to provide a six-lane divided
           highway with service roads. The design of the highway was based on a design speed of 100 km/hr,
           reduced to 80 km/hour in limited sections. The pavement traffic loading was derived from traffic
           projections and field investigation conducted during the feasibility study for the Project. The proposed
           design was based on the concept of staged construction, with an initial pavement life of 10 years to be
           extended to 20 years through overlay of the pavement after the 10th year. Safety issues were
           addressed in the design through design standards, road stripping, road signing, and the use of service
           roads in urban areas. Four toll plazas--using a barrier-type open toll collection system--were slated for
           construction at locations that would avoid disruption to local traffic between urban centers and ensure
           the capture of long-haul traffic, because of significant time and distance penalties along alternate
           routes. The design of the highway pavement was in accordance with international design guidelines. A
           further design review was slated to be carried out by the supervision consultants in relation to updated
           traffic and loading factors prior to the commencement of road improvements.

           The project design included consulting services for construction supervision of the highway
           improvements, and to assist the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) in its effort to promote
           private participation in the development of national highways and for backstop services relating to
           toll operations. The demonstration process for private participation requires a broad range of
           studies covering project feasibility, financing modalities, the legal framework, risk allocation, and
           institutional reform. ADB technical assistance (TA) that was then ongoing focused on developing a
           demonstration project and took the lead in this effort, but required supplementation through other
           studies and institutional reform measures to ensure the sustainability of private participation in
           highways (construction, maintenance, and operation). The application of tolls to additional sections
           of the national highway following improvement to a four-lane standard necessitated review and
           restructuring of toll rates, and establishment of proper regulatory mechanisms. Assistance was also
           projected to be required to prepare the O&M concession agreement for the completed project
           highway.

   (iii)   Components. The Project comprised (a) the widening to four lanes (including the strengthening of
           the existing two-lane pavement) of about 180 km on NH8 between Surat and Manor, (b) consulting
           services for construction supervision of road improvements, and (c) consulting services for the
           development of private participation and toll operations.

   (iv)    Outputs. The road works envisioned at appraisal were completed. Additionally, works constituting
           flyovers, underpasses, overpasses, and additional service roads were undertaken using loan
           savings. A toll system study and a comprehensive O&M concession study were carried out under
           the Project. A road safety audit covering about 2,800 km of the national highway and expressway
           sections was carried out and suggestions made for improvement of the Indian road safety
           guidelines and codes.


C. Evaluation of Design and Implementation (PCR assessment and validation)

   (i)     Relevance of design and formulation. The Project was assessed at appraisal as being highly
           relevant and consistent with the Government's National Highway Development Plan and ADB's
           country strategy and program for India, and remains so at completion.

   (ii)    Components: Outputs and costs by component as envisioned during appraisal as
           compared to actual costs and achievement of outputs; reasons for any deviation.
                                                                                                                                          3



                                             Project Cost at Appraisal and Actual
                                                                                                                 a
                                                             Appraisal Estimate                        Actual                     Actual/
                                                                 ($ million)                          ($ million)                Appraisal
  Item                                                  Foreign     Local      Total          Foreign    Local          Total      (%)
  A. Base Cost
  1. Right-of-Way                                              0.0         12.0        12.0          0.0        7.7        7.7         64.3
       Civil Works
       a. Section I                                           51.3         29.2        80.5        63.2       36.4        99.6       123.7
       b. Section II                                          28.6         17.3        45.9        36.6       21.0        57.7       125.6
       c. Section III                                         34.1         20.0        54.1        36.8       21.1        57.9       107.1
  2. Consultant Services
       a. Construction Supervision                            10.0          2.5        12.5          7.7        0.0        7.7         61.4
                                                     b
  3. Private Participation and Tolling Operations             10.0          2.0        12.0          2.5        0.0        2.5         21.2
  4. Project Management                                        0.0          1.0         1.0          0.0        2.3        2.3       227.0
          Subtotal (A)                                       134.0         84.0       218.0       146.9       88.5       235.4       108.0
  B. Contingencies
  1. Physical Contingency                                     13.5          7.5        21.0          0.0        0.0        0.0          0.0
  2. Price Contingency                                        15.1          8.5        23.6          0.0        0.0        0.0          0.0
          Subtotal (B)                                        28.6         16.0        44.6          0.0        0.0        0.0          0.0
  C. Interest During Construction                             17.4          0.0        17.4        11.4         0.0       11.4         65.6
             Total (A+B+C)                                   180.0       100.0        280.0       158.3       88.5       246.8         88.1
a
    Includes cost of additional works and price escalation.
b
    Capacity building for private participation and tolling operations (e.g., preparation of private participation framework, preparation of
    model concession agreements, and review of toll operations).
Sources: Asian Development Bank and National Highways Authority of India.

            The total contract value for all civil works contracts at the time of award was $130 million equivalent,
            compared with an appraisal estimate of about $180 million. The lower-than-estimated cost arose from
            (a) the increased competition among contractors, (b) a decline in the value of the Indian rupee against
            the US dollar, and (c) overestimation at appraisal. Additional works on the project road to improve road
            safety and remove capacity constraints (at an estimated cost of $66.8 million, with ADB financing of
            $44.5 million) were approved, utilizing some of the loan surplus and implementing the works as part of
            the Project. Consulting services upon completion of the Project totaled $10.2 million or about half the
            appraisal estimate. The project completion report (PCR) attributes this to appraisal overestimation but it
            is likely there were two other reasons: (a) the consultants were understaffed, either in terms of skills
            mix, time (person-months) or both; and (b) the devaluation of the Indian rupee. Interest during
            construction was significantly lower than the appraisal estimate, mainly because the loan was
            transformed from a pool-based to a London interbank offered rate-based loan.

 (iii)      Project cost, disbursements, borrower contribution, and conformance to schedule (as
            relevant to project performance). At appraisal, the total cost project cost was estimated at
            $280 million equivalent, comprising $180 million in foreign exchange and $100 million in local cost.
            The ADB loan of $180 million was to finance the entire foreign exchange cost. At completion, the
            project cost was $246.8 million equivalent, with a foreign exchange cost of $158.3 million.

            The loan approved by ADB on 27 July 2000 was provided from ADB's ordinary capital resources,
            determined in accordance with ADB's pool-based variable lending rate for US dollar loans. The
            borrower was NHAI. The amended and restated loan agreement to switch from a pool-based to
            London interbank offered rate-based loan was signed on 4 July 2002 and made effective on
            25 July 2002. Disbursements totaled $149.749 million out of the $180 million available, with
            $30.251 million cancelled in two stages as loan savings. The report and recommendation of the
            President (RRP) did not did not include a disbursement schedule. Disbursement projections were
            made annually. Except in 2001, disbursements generally followed the annual forecasts.

            Overall, implementation was delayed by 1 year, due mainly to slow approval of variations and the
            additional works.
  4


   (iv)    Implementation arrangements, conditions and covenants, and related technical assistance.
           The implementation arrangements envisaged at appraisal were adhered to and were found to be
           adequate by the PCR mission. No improvements to these arrangements were cited or
           recommended by the PCR mission.

   (v)     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency. NHAI was both the Borrower and the
           Executing Agency (EA). Its overall performance in both roles was considered satisfactory.
           Preconstruction activities were undertaken so that the construction sites could be turned over to
           the contractors shortly after contract approval. The PCR does not mention that NHAI had roughly
           2 years to prepare for implementation, due to the delay between project preparation and loan
           effectiveness. Had the loan been approved shortly after appraisal, it is doubtful the NHAI would
           have been so well prepared.

           The NHAI project team provided strong management and problem solving capabilities, and the civil
           works were completed expeditiously. However, according to the PCR, NHAI delayed the initiation
           and award of contracts for sector studies, and advance action for procurement was approved
           before appraisal. Major variations were considerably delayed, mainly by central government
           agencies, regardless of the obvious beneficial effects of the proposed work. These delays could
           help explain the poor performance of the foreign contractor.

   (vi)    Performance of the Asian Development Bank. The PCR states that ADB's performance was
           satisfactory. This is evidenced by the successful and relatively timely completion of a well-
           designed project. Ten missions related to project implementation and/or administration were
           fielded after project appraisal, in addition to the PCR review mission. Project administration was
           delegated to the India Resident Mission (INRM) on 1 January 2003, about 2.5 years after loan
           approval.

D. Evaluation of Performance (PCR assessment and validation)

   (i)     Relevance. The Project was rated "highly relevant" by the PCR mission as it was consistent with
           the National Highway Development Plan and ADB's country strategy and program for India. This is
           clear from the very high traffic volumes on the project road and the clear need for capacity
           improvements. Also, the sector studies financed under the loan were appropriate to the needs of
           NHAI at the time, and assisted with private sector participation, tolling, O&M, and road safety. This
           evaluator agrees with the PCR rating. The project design was comprehensive and involved not
           only a large road improvement component but also several institutional initiatives. These aspects
           were well covered and explained in the RRP and PCR and the Project's goals were achieved.
           Overall, the design was good and appears to have been effective in implementation. No significant
           issues need to be highlighted.

   (ii)    Effectiveness in achieving outcome. The PCR rated the Project "effective", and this rating
           clearly was and remains appropriate. The only significant issues are the lack of measures to
           control axle loadings and thus reduce road deterioration, and the mixture of local, slow-moving
           traffic on the tollway, which raises safety and maintenance issues. The segregation of slow and
           fast moving traffic has been largely addressed through construction of service roads and six-lane
           stretches in urban and congested areas. Service roads are normally provided on both sides of a
           high speed road, and may cover only about 25% of road length. While provision of such service
           roads is an effective way of segregating local and through traffic, it cannot be assumed that slow
           traffic will always stay within paved shoulders. Where appropriate, the use of barrier separation of
           slow and fast moving traffic may be considered. Axle load control and proper maintenance of the
           highway facility are reportedly being adequately addressed by a model concession agreement
           covering expansion of roadways to six lanes, tolling, and highway O&M, under a long-term private
           sector concession.

   (iii)   Efficiency in achieving outcome and outputs. The PCR rated the Project "highly efficient."
           Given the very high traffic volumes, the high economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is expected
                                                                                                            5


           (the appraisal EIRR was 25%, while the PCR found the EIRR to be 32%). With widening to six
           lanes, efficiency can be maintained.

   (iv)    Preliminary assessment of sustainability. Sustainability is rated "most likely", as a private sector
           concessionaire will be responsible for road maintenance, funded by the collected tolls or through
           negative viability gap funding. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) was lower than appraisal
           (9.6% as opposed to 14.2%). The meaning of the FIRR is difficult to judge as the PCR does not
           mention the weighted average cost of capital. Nevertheless, for this type of project, an FIRR of
           9.6% is generally acceptable and an indicator of sustainability.

   (v)     Impact (both intended and unintended). Several environmental impacts were identified by the
           summary initial environmental examination, and these were properly addressed during
           preconstruction and construction. This Project introduced a new but probably very effective
           scheme (pre-afforestation) to ensure that negative effects were corrected before they occur, by
           planting replacement and compensatory trees before any existing trees were cut down. The PCR
           draws the erroneous conclusion that trees and brush in the right-of-way and median reduce noise
           pollution. Many studies have shown that these have no significant effect on nearby areas.

           The rehabilitation and resettlement of project-effected persons was undertaken by NHAI in
           accordance with the resettlement action plan, and with the assistance of a qualified
           nongovernment organization. A verification survey 3 years after appraisal identified a significantly
           higher number of project affected-persons than originally envisioned. There is some difficulty
           finding certain parties due compensation, but the funds are available once they are found.

E. Overall Assessment, Lessons, and Recommendations (validation of PCR assessment)

   (i)     Overall assessment. The Project is rated "highly successful". It achieved more than its objectives,
           due to adequate time to complete necessary preconstruction activities, and appropriate use of
           some loan savings. A considerable amount was cancelled, but the cancellation would not have
           been necessary if a sector approach had been followed; the sector approach has subsequently
           been introduced. Policy and institutional issues have been appropriately addressed and have been
           largely instituted.

   (ii)    Lessons. The PCR correctly identified a number of lessons, including the poor performance of the
           foreign lead contractor firm(s). This is a common problem. Foreign firms are often brought into the
           prequalification process to augment the qualifications of the local contractor. The PCR states that
           prequalification standards have been strengthened to avoid such situations in the future, and this is
           a good response to an important lesson. This validation suggests the following lesson in addition to
           those listed in the PCR. Most projects of this type have overly optimistic implementation schedules.
           In the case of this Project, the EA had plenty of time to undertake the preconstruction phase,
           because loans to India were not being approved until about 2 years after appraisal. If the Project
           had been approved shortly after appraisal, the Project would most likely have experienced
           considerable delays. This Project can serve as an example of the need for more realistic
           implementation schedules.

   (iii)   Recommendations. This Project provides a good example of allowing adequate time for
           preconstruction activities such as land acquisition, resettlement and advance procurement. Such
           activities should be included in a realistic implementation schedule.

F. Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization (PCR assessment and validation)

   NHAI, with the assistance of the supervision consultants, were tasked with carrying out performance
   monitoring and evaluation under the Project. Key indicators agreed upon by NHAI and ADB will be used
   as baseline data in these activities. The PCR concluded that this was complied with. A benefit monitoring
   and evaluation report containing key indicators was submitted in 2002. The project benefits were included
   by NHAI in their PCR.
     6



G. Other (e.g., safeguards, including governance and anticorruption; fiduciary aspects; Government
   assessment of the Project, as applicable) (PCR assessment and validation)

     Safeguards were complied with. Fiduciary aspects appear to have been well handled.

H. Ratings:                                        PCR             OED Review               Reason for
                                                                                     Disagreement/Comments
Relevance:                                  Highly relevant     Highly relevant
Effectiveness in Achieving Outcome:         Effective           Effective
Efficiency in Achieving Outcome and         Highly efficient    Highly efficient
Outputs:
Preliminary Assessment of                   Most likely         Most likely
Sustainability:
Borrower and EA:                            Satisfactory        Satisfactory
Performance of ADB:                         Satisfactory        Satisfactory
Impact:                                     Positive            Positive
Overall Assessment:                         Highly successful   Highly successful
Quality of PCR:                                                 Satisfactory

I.   Comments on PCR Quality. The PCR is well written. However, the PCR was found to be silent on the
     weighted average cost of capital in the financial evaluation, which could have been improved.

J. Recommendation for OED Follow-Up

     No follow-up action required.

K. Data Sources for Validation

     (i)     PCR, RRP, legal documents, Government's PCR;
     (ii)    Management review meeting and staff review committee documents and summary record of
             discussion of ADB's Board of Directors;
     (iii)   Board reports and other progress reports;
     (iv)    project administration memorandum and list of archived documents;
     (v)     supervision reports, including most recent midterm review or progress reports, back-to-office report
             of PCR Mission, etc.; and
     (vi)    OED evaluations of previous projects, including PCR reviews.
   REGIONAL DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
                          VALIDATION REPORT


On 21 April 2008, Director, OED2, Operations Evaluation Department (OED), received the
following comments from the India Resident Mission, South Asia Department.

We have reviewed OED's earlier draft Project Completion Report (PCR) Validation Report
circulated to us on 19 October 2007, 27 November 2007, and its final draft sent to us for review
on 15 April 2008. We appreciate that the comments we made to OED on the earlier drafts have
been adequately incorporated in the final draft. Therefore, we have no formal comment to make
on the final draft.
