Validation Report




Reference Number: PCV: IND 2011-71
Project Number: 36318
Loan Numbers: 2036 and 2037
December 2011




India: Assam Power Sector Development Program




 Independent Evaluation Department
                                         ABBREVIATIONS

            ADB               ­     Asian Development Bank
            AERC              ­     Assam Electricity Regulatory Board
            ASEB              ­     Assam State Electricity Board
            EIRR              ­     economic internal rate of return
            FIRR              ­     financial internal rate of return
            GOA               ­     Government of Assam
            IED               ­     Independent Evaluation Department
            PCR               ­     program completion report
            RRP               ­     report and recommendation of the President
            SDP               ­     sector development program

                                               NOTES

           (i)     The fiscal year (FY) of the government ends on 31 March. FY before a
                   calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends, e.g., FY2011
                   ends on 31 March 2011.
           (ii)    In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
           (iii)   For an explanation of rating descriptions used in ADB evaluation reports, see
                   ADB. 2006. Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation Reports for
                   Public Sector Operations. Manila.


                                             Key Words

asian development bank, energy sector, independent evaluation department, india, lessons,
performance evaluation, project completion report, rural electrification, sector restructuring



Director General      S. Hutaserani, Officer-in-Charge, Independent Evaluation Department
                      (IED)
Director              W. Kolkma, Independent Evaluation Division 1 (IED1), IED

Team leader           K. Hewitt, Evaluation Specialist, IED1, IED
Team members          S. Labayen, Associate Evaluation Analyst, IED1, IED
                      B. Palacios, Senior Evaluation Officer, IED1, IED (until 15 October 2011)



The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of the management of IED, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                        PROGRAM BASIC DATA
Project Number:          36318               PCR Circulation Date:              November 2010
Loan/Grant Number:       2036-IND            PCR Validation Date:               December 2011
                         2037-IND
Program Name:            Assam Power Sector Development Program
Country:                 India                                                   Approved           Actual
Sector(s):               Energy              Total Project Costs                   393.5             469.6
                                             ($ million):
ADB Financing            ADF:     0.0        Loan/Grant ($ million):               250.0            250.0
Approved ($ million):    OCR: 250.0          Borrower ($ million):                 116.5            159.8
ADB Financing            ADF:     0.0        Beneficiaries:                          0.0              0.0
Actual ($ million):      OCR: 250.0          Others ($ million):                    27.0             59.8
Cofinancier(s):                              Total Cofinancing:                      0.0              0.0
Approval Date:           10 Dec 2003         Effectiveness Date:               12 Dec 2003      12 Dec 2003
Signing Date:            11 Dec 2003              Completion Date:
                                                        L2036                  30 Jun 2005      28 Jun 2005
                                                        L2037                  30 Jun 2007      11 Jun 2009
                                                  Closing Date:
                                                        L2036                  30 Jun 2005    28 Jun 2005
                                                        L2037                  30 Jun 2007    11 Jun 2009
Project Officers:                                 Location:                        From              To
                         T. Kimura                          HQ                     2003            2004
                         T. Takano                          HQ                     2004            2006
                         K. Ogino                           HQ                     2004            2006
                         K. Takebayashi                     HQ                     2006            2008
                         A. Guha                          INRM                     2009            2010
Validator(s):            B. Palacios              Team Leader:                 K. Hewitt
                         Senior Evaluation                                     Evaluation Specialist, IED1
                         Officer, IED1

                         P. Choynowski
                         Consultant
Quality Reviewer:        N. Bestari               Director:                    Walter Kolkma, IED1
                         Advisor, IED
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, HQ = ADB headquarters, IED = Independent
 Evaluation Department, IED1 = Independent Evaluation Division 1, IND = India, INRM = India Resident Mission,
 OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = program completion report.

                                   I.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.     Rationale

1.     In 2002, Assam's per capita income of $212 was less than two-thirds of the national
average, with 36% of households living below the poverty line, compared to the national
average of 26%. Electricity was supplied to only 950,000 households (out of 4.5 million). Assam
was endowed with natural resources, but its industry had declined because of power sector
constraints in generation, transmission, and distribution. The lack of reliable power eroded
Assam's competitiveness and prevented it from attracting investment. The power sector's
demands on the state budget resulted in allocation of public funds away from social sectors,
such as education and health.
2


2.      The Government of Assam (GOA) was unable to fund all the investments required for
delivering reliable power. Consequently, it decided to restructure the power sector to increase
its operational efficiency, delivery, and self-financing capability. In 2003, GOA committed to: (i)
providing an appropriate legal framework for reform; (ii) unbundling the Assam State Electricity
Board (ASEB) into corporatized functional companies; and (iii) strengthening the tariff setting
and regulatory capacity. Pro-poor growth was the main strategic pillar for reducing poverty in the
country strategy and program for 2003­2006 of the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The
strategy supported the Government of India's high-growth agenda of fiscal consolidation, private
sector development, and infrastructure development. The power sector was a major component
of infrastructure in a region where poverty was higher than the national average.

B.       Expected Impact

3.      The Assam Sector Development Program (SDP), a mixed-modality program combining
policy-based program restructuring assistance with investments, was designed to establish a
financially self-sufficient power sector to contribute to the economic development of Assam
through reliable electricity supply and sustainable tariffs. Together with tariff rationalization,
efficiency improvements from project investment, and budgetary support, the SDP was to
ensure the financial soundness of the successor companies of ASEB and reduce the financial
burden of GOA to meet deficits in the power sector. With assistance under the SDP, the power
sector was expected to break even in FY2006/07.

C.       Objectives or Expected Outcomes

4.       The SDP's program component aimed to support reforms and restructure the state's
power sector through (i) strengthening the functions and capacity of the Assam Electricity
Regulatory Commission (AERC); (ii) developing policies for implementing sector reforms; (iii)
restructuring ASEB; and (iv) reforming power tariffs. SDP's objectives under its investment
component aimed to (i) improve system capacity and efficiency by improving the transmission
and distribution system; (ii) increase revenues by introducing a revenue management system;
and (iii) increase electricity access in rural areas. Specific SDP outcomes included: (i) functional
unbundling and corporatization of ASEB by March 2004; (ii) establishment of an independent
statutory regulatory authority; (iii) sector companies to break even by FY2007 and post net
profits by FY2011; (iv) at least 75% cost recovery, from an approximate base of 55%, achieved
by FY2007; (v) no load shedding by FY2007; (vi) transmission and distribution losses reduced
from 41% to 25% by FY2007; (vii) network to supply power for peak load by 2006; (viii)
transmission and distribution system able to handle peak demand by 2007; (ix) all villages
electrified by 2007; (x) 100% consumer metering by 2007; and (xi) 100% energy audit by
September 2004.

D.       Components and Outputs

5.      Under the program component, GOA was to fulfill the conditions in the SDP's policy
matrix, found in paragraphs 44 and 45 of the report and recommendation of the President
(RRP).1 The project component comprised the following: Part A (Improvement of Transmission
System) included (i) construction of 44 kilometers (km) of 220-kilovolt (kV) double circuit
transmission lines and 505 km of 132 kV transmission lines; (ii) construction of new or
augmentation of the existing 220/132 kV and 13 132/33 kV substations together with capacitors;

1
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance Grants to India for the Assam Power Sector Development Program. Manila.
                                                                                               3


and (iii) improvement of a supervisory control and data acquisition system for the transmission
network. Part B (Improvement of Distribution System) comprised (i) replacement of 33 and 11
kV lines with high-capacity conductors; (ii) construction of additional 33/11 kV substations and
augmentation and renovation of 33/11 kV and 11/0.4 kV substations; (iii) construction of 33 and
11 kV lines associated with new substations; and (iv) installation of energy audit meters. Part C
(Intensification of Rural Electrification) comprised (i) renovation of distribution transformers
(11/0.4 kV) and associated 11 kV lines and low-tension lines, covering about 1,200 villages; and
(ii) augmentation of 23 33/11 kV substations. Part D (Revenue Management System) comprised
a computer billing system for 14 distribution circles and 790,000 meters for unmetered
registered consumers and replacement of electromechanical meters and defective meters. Part
E (Consulting Services) was to engage three international consulting firms for (i) project
implementation support, (ii) systems study, and (iii) program implementation support.

E.     Provision of Inputs

6.     The program component of the SDP was $150 million and was financed from ADB's
ordinary capital resources (OCR). The counterpart funds generated from loan proceeds were to
be transferred from the government to GOA to support the financial restructuring of ASEB and
adjustment costs associated with the program. The government was to bear the foreign
exchange risk.

7.      The cost of the project component was estimated at $243.5 million, of which $105.8
million (44%) was the foreign exchange cost and $137.7 million equivalent (56%) the local
currency cost. The cost estimate included physical and price contingencies, a front-end fee,
interest during construction, and commitment charges. ADB was to provide a loan of $100
million from its OCR. The loan proceeds were to be transferred by the government to GOA as
90% grant and 10% loan. GOA was in turn to make the 90% grant portion of the loan amount
available to ASEB on a grant basis; relend 50% of the balance at an interest rate of 10.5% with
a term of 20 years, including a grace period of 5 years; and relend the other 50% of the balance
at an interest rate of 10.5% with a term of 20 years. The government was to bear the foreign
exchange risk. ADB was to cover the foreign exchange cost of $98.2 million. The government
was to meet the balance of the foreign exchange cost ($7.6 million). The local currency cost
was to be met by ADB ($1.8 million), the government ($108.9 million), and GOA and ASEB
($27.0 million).

F.     Implementation Arrangements

8.      The executing agencies for the program component were GOA's finance and power
departments. A steering committee for power sector reform, chaired by the chief secretary, was
to maintain strategic and program overview of the reform process to ensure effective use of
resources and to establish priorities. GOA was also to establish a strategic policy unit, with
responsibility for daily implementation of the program under guidance of the reform steering
committee, to define the critical path for reform and prepare an implementation plan and review
mechanisms. The program component loan was to be released in two tranches of $90 million
and $60 million, based on the fulfillment of conditions in the policy matrix. The tranches were
expected to be released in December 2003 and in December 2004. ASEB, or its successor
companies together with the power department, was to implement the project component. A
project management unit was be established in ASEB as a holding company, headed by a
senior ASEB officer along with a sufficient number of engineers on full-time assignment to
supervise day-to-day project implementation. After unbundling, the project management unit
4


was to continue in ASEB as a holding company. The project component was to begin in March
2004 and be completed in December 2006.

9.      For the program component, disbursements were to go to the government in accordance
with ADB's Simplification of Disbursement Procedures and Related Requirements for Program
Loans.2 The proceeds were to finance the full foreign exchange costs (excluding local duties
and taxes) of imports produced in and procured from ADB's member countries, other than those
specified in the list of ineligible items and imports financed by other bilateral and multilateral
sources. ADB-financed goods and services under the project component were to be procured in
accordance with ADB's Guidelines for Procurement. ADB funds were not to be used to finance
local costs. Since the disbursements under the project component were mainly for the supply of
goods and international consulting services, ADB's commitment letter and direct payment
procedures were to be used in accordance with ADB's Loan Disbursement Handbook, January
2001 and Interim Guidelines for Disbursement Operations, LIBOR-based Loan Projects.3

10.      Three technical assistance grants, financed by the Government of the United Kingdom
and administered by ADB, supported the implementation of the program component and
included (i) reorganization of ASEB ($1,000,000), (ii) institutional development for rural
electrification ($400,000), and (iii) policy and legal support for power sector reforms ($100,000).

11.       The RRP identified several risks. The first was GOA's commitment to reform, including
increasing tariffs at the initial stage of the reform process when no significant performance
improvement had yet been achieved, and resistance to giving more autonomy to a regulator and
utilities by vested interests. To mitigate this risk, SDP was designed to accelerate the reform
program and make the most of key policy decisions within the first year. A second risk was that
regulations would not be sufficiently distanced from policy-making and regulatory action and
would not be made on the basis of a commercial principle and without political interference. To
avoid a compromise of independence, SDP required GOA to provide AERC with sufficient
resources to make it fully operational before major regulatory issues emerged. A third risk was
that GOA's financial burden would increase and jeopardize its finances if efficiency
improvements of the sector did not take place as expected. To mitigate this risk, ADB committed
to long-term interventions in the reforms, including support for their public resource
management. A final risk was employees' work culture and lack of performance accountability in
a more autonomous environment. To mitigate this risk, SDP supported implementation of a
human resource development strategy and capacity building through consulting services.

12.     Associated with the loans for the SDP were 24 policy measure covenants (in Appendix
11 of the project completion report [PCR]).4

                      II.     EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

13.     The PCR stated that the design of the SDP was highly relevant vis-à-vis the sector
objectives of the government and GOA, and ADB's country and sector strategies for India.
Since initiating power sector reforms in the early 1990s, state policy reforms had been on the

2
    ADB. 1998. Simplification of Disbursement Procedures and Related Requirements for Program Loans. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2002. Interim Guidelines for Disbursement Operations, LIBOR-Based Loan Products. Manila.
4
    ADB. 2010. Completion Report: Assam Power Sector Development Program in India. Manila.
                                                                                             5


government's agenda. The power sector in Assam had deteriorated to such an extent that it
seriously limited economic growth and ASEB was unable to improve the power supply because
of the state's poor financial condition and weak regulatory environment. GOA embarked on
policy reforms and investments aimed at strengthening the power system, enhancing energy
efficiency, and developing renewable energy. At appraisal, SDP modality was considered best
suited for supporting the initiatives by GOA and ASEB. At completion, ADB's strategy for the
power sector in India was consistent with India's 11th Five-Year Plan, aimed at developing
infrastructure for economic growth and poverty reduction. The SDP should continue to be
relevant because of greater demand and scope for transmission and distribution efficiency
improvements and operational efficiencies. Validation finds that the design was too ambitious,
covering too many objectives at one time and aiming to solve all of GOA's power sector
problems in one endeavor. Validation further finds that the design would have been more
relevant had focus been given to a few core areas rather than the multifaceted, all-
encompassing design submitted for approval. With this, validation finds the design relevant.

B.     Effectiveness in Achieving Program Outcomes

14.     The PCR rated the SDP efficacious in achieving outcomes and outputs. Ten of the 24
policy measure covenants were met before loan effectiveness. The PCR noted that ASEB and
GOA were generally in compliance with the remaining covenants. The PCR stated that the
program component achieved its immediate objectives of (i) developing a policy and regulatory
framework for organized growth of the sector by providing support for the implementation of
legislated reforms (the Electricity Act was enacted, ASEB was unbundled, and new companies
started functioning on 31 May 2005); (ii) establishing a competitive environment to promote
efficiency gains and loss reduction (AERC was made functional in 2004; AERC fixed targets for
reducing system losses); and (iii) improving the sector's financial viability (the financial
restructuring plan was prepared in 2003 and completed in 2008).

15.     While several highly ambitious outcomes in the RRP's program framework were not
achieved (no load shedding by FY2007, 100% village electrification, and system losses reduced
to 25%) the PCR notes that the SDP contributed to (i) the reduction of serious peak power
shortages from 18% to 10%; (ii) the improvement of village electrification from 58% in 2003 to
77% in 2008; and (iii) the reduction of transmission and distribution losses from 38.9% in 2004
to 29.61% in 2008. The PCR also explained that ASEB still retains the investment planning and
financial management function of the companies although it unbundled as scheduled under the
SDP. The PCR notes that the companies are partially autonomous, with operations under a
centralized cash-flow system. Despite the lack of full autonomy for the companies, the PCR
demonstrated that ASEB's losses after tax were reduced from Rs10,880 million in 2004 to
Rs4,280 million in 2009. These significant improvements are the result of the SDP and original
objectives are likely to be attained. Validation concurs with the PCR's effective rating.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outputs and Outcomes

16.    The PCR notes that policy milestones of the program component were implemented
close to target dates, GOA and ASEB were pursuing program reforms, all components were
operating from the commissioning date, and the SDP was implemented efficiently.

17.    The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of all relevant components was reevaluated
at more than 12%. Details of the methodology and assumptions were in Appendix 12 of the
PCR. The EIRR calculation for parts A and B valued the economic benefits "at the differential
6


between willingness to pay and the average tariff." This is incorrect because the main economic
benefit arising from these subcomponents is savings from technical system losses, the energy
of which is presumed to be sold, and therefore should be valued at willingness to pay.
Nontechnical system loss reductions should not be included because their reduction results only
in a transfer of economic benefit from consumer to producer. As electricity demand grows,
incremental power consumption should have been valued in terms of resource cost savings
(displacement of other energy sources) and willingness to pay (electricity that would otherwise
not have been consumed). Furthermore, Table A12.6 of the PCR indicated that operating and
maintenance (O&M) costs were not deducted from the economic benefit stream. For Part C, the
rural electrification component, the PCR did not discuss methodology and assumptions.
Nonetheless, in applying the same RRP methodology in parts A, B, and C, with an EIRR of
19.7% for parts A and B, and an EIRR of 47% for Part C, the corrected EIRR would most likely
be above the 12% threshold because, while cost would increase slightly to include O&M,
corrected benefits would be significantly higher, incorporating full marginal pricing as compared
to the PCR calculated difference between marginal and average pricing. Hence, validation
concurs with the PCR's efficient rating.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

18.      The PCR rated SDP sustainability likely because of (i) GOA's commitment to
implementing the program, financially supporting the sector through timely payments of
subsidies and subventions, and supporting the power utilities; (ii) greater corporate efficiency of
the utilities; and (iii) the effective functioning of AERC. The design of all components and the
technology adopted were robust and suitable, and the regulatory regime and increased energy
demand ensure that funds to operate the system will be available in the future. The power
demand in Assam was projected to grow substantially, ensuring the full use of SDP
investments. While the PCR discussed the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) incorrectly
under its efficiency section, its FIRR calculation in excess of the weighted average cost of
capital demonstrates the financial viability of SDP resources. Hence, validation concurs with the
PCR's likely sustainable rating.

E.     Impact

19.     While the PCR does not provide relevant impact ratings, it did note that with successful
outcomes of the program and project components, long-term impacts are likely to be achieved.
Validation agrees, and finds that the PCR showed significant initial impacts under the SDP,
including, among other things, Assam's distribution services breaking even in FY2008, reducing
GOA's financial burden to meet power-sector deficits; increased annual per capita consumption
of power from 175 kilowatts (kWh) in 2005 to 210 kWh in 2009; and job creation. The PCR
stated that most potential impacts were considered environmentally beneficial and that
compensation was paid to people affected by the project. With this, validation rates SDP's
impact as significant.

                       III.   OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and the Executing Agency

20.     The PCR stated that the performance of the borrower and executing agency was
satisfactory. GOA's finance and power departments were the executing agencies for the
program component, and ASEB was the executing agency for the project component. The
                                                                                                         7


finance department and the borrower ensured that GOA took the necessary measures to fulfill
the tranche conditions. All project components were completed, although there was an overrun
of about 24 months due to construction delays. ASEB satisfactorily demonstrated its capacity to
plan and carry out engineering, procurement, and construction according to approved standards
and to the satisfaction of ADB. Validation concurs with the PCR's satisfactory rating.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

21.     The PCR rated ADB's performance satisfactory. ADB monitored the SDP closely and
regularly, and provided guidance on project management. ADB fielded 15 supervisory missions
under the SDP. It acted promptly on proposals for change in scope, cancellations, reallocations,
and extension of the loan closing date. ADB's performance in jointly administering the SDP with
the borrower was satisfactory. Validation concurs with the PCR's rating.

C.     Others

22.     The PCR noted that ASEB carefully chose the routes for power lines, to avoid
encroachment; that 825 persons were affected by project component activities; and that funds
for acquisition and resettlement were appropriately deposited. The PCR did not discuss
monitoring verification of the resettlement plan as called for in the RRP; instead, it noted that
local officials, community leaders, and groups held public consultations and awareness building
about resettlement. SDP was gender neutral with regard to beneficiaries.

         IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Overall Assessment and Ratings

23.     The PCR rated the SDP successful. Overall, validation also assesses the SDP as
successful. The SDP was consistent with ADB's country and sector strategies and with ASEB's
objectives of developing a transmission and distribution network capable of providing power
reliably. Important milestones were achieved. ASEB was unbundled, AERC was made
functional in 2004, and 99% cost recovery was reached in 2007.

                                            Overall Ratings
Criteria                       PCR            IED Review        Reason for Disagreement/Comments
Relevance:                Highly relevant       Relevant     Validation finds that the design would have
                                                             been more relevant had focus been given
                                                             to a few core areas rather than the
                                                             multifaceted, all-encompassing design
                                                             submitted for approval. With this, validation
                                                             finds the design relevant.
Effectiveness in             Effective         Effective
Achieving Outcomes:
Efficiency in Achieving      Efficient         Efficient
Outcomes and Outputs:
Preliminary Assessment       Likely             Likely
of Sustainability:         sustainable        sustainable
Borrower and Executing     Satisfactory       Satisfactory
Agency:
Performance of ADB:        Satisfactory       Satisfactory
Impact:                     No rating         Significant    The PCR revealed significant initial impacts
                                                             under the SDP.
8


Criteria                        PCR            IED Review       Reason for Disagreement/Comments
Overall Assessment:           Successful        Successful
Quality of PCR:                                Satisfactory
    ADB = Asian Development Bank, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, IED = Independent Evaluation
    Department, PCR = program completion report, SDP = sector development program.

B.        Identification of Lessons

24.     The PCR identified three lessons regarding the ability of power sector institutions in
Assam to undertake large investment projects; take advance action to resolve land issues and
other statutory hurdles; and address counterpart funding issues before project implementation.
Validation concurs with these lessons.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Ups

25.    The PCR recommended the development of efficient management systems in ASEB
and its successor companies and that AERC be more proactive in monitoring sector
performance and set targets annually to improve performance and ensure periodic tariff
adjustments. Validation concurs with these recommendations.

                       V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.        Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

26.     The RRP stated that, within 3 months of loan effectiveness, ASEB was to set up a
benefit monitoring unit within the project management unit to monitor and evaluate the scope,
implementation arrangements, and progress of SDP achievement in accordance with ADB's
Project Performance Management System Handbook.5. The quarterly reporting was to include
socioeconomic and poverty indicators, reflecting the impacts of the policy and the project
components on end-consumers, particularly those living below the poverty line. The PCR did
not discuss the benefit monitoring unit.

B.        Comments on Program Completion Report Quality

27.     While the PCR did not discuss the benefit monitoring unit, its quality, consistency,
assumption plausibility, quality of lessons, and clarity were satisfactory. Overall, the PCR was
satisfactory.

C.        Data Sources for Validation

28.    Data sources included the RRP, PCR, government's PCR, back-to-office reports of
review missions, and other documents.

D.        Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-up

29.    The PCR recommended that a program performance evaluation report be prepared in
2012. Validation agrees.




5
    ADB. 2001. Project Performance Management System Handbook. Manila.
  REGIONAL DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE PROGRAM COMPLETION REPORT
                          VALIDATION REPORT


On 6 December 2011, Director, Independent Evaluation Department, Division 1 (IED1),
received the following comments from the Energy Division (SAEN), South Asia Department
(SARD).

      SAEN reviewed the initial and final draft of the Project Completion Report
      Validation Report and agrees with the overall assessment and finding except the
      observation appeared in para 17. We clarify that the approach for EIRR
      calculation applied in the Project Completion Report is in practice in many other
      ADB funded power sector improvement projects.
