ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                    SST: STU 2001-12




               SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY


                          ON


          SELECTED ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK




                      October 2001
                   ABBREVIATIONS


ADB          ­       Asian Development Bank
ESW          ­       economic and sector work
TA           ­       technical assistance




                          NOTE

         In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


      Operations Evaluation Department, SS­46
                                         CONTENTS

                                                        Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                        ii

I.     INTRODUCTION                                      1

       A.    Background                                  1
       B.    Objective of the Study                      2

II.    EVALUATION FRAMEWORK                              2

       A.    Approach to Evaluation                      2
       B.    Evaluation Design                           3

III.   FINDINGS                                          4

       A.    Overall Assessment of ESW Efforts at ADB     4
       B.    Selected ESW                                 6
       C.    Conclusions                                 12

IV.    THE WAY FORWARD: MANAGEMENT OF ESW                12

       A.    Strategic Management                        13
       B.    Improving Internal Systems for ESW          14

APPENDIXES                                               16
                                        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       Economic and sector work (ESW) is a crucial input in the development process because it
provides important analytical links to transform the overall development strategy of the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) into operational programs. Unlike in other aid agencies, ADB's ESW is not a
separate product or service (such as technical assistance [TA] or lending) and is not recognized as
such either within ADB or externally. ESW at ADB is not defined formally: activities are classified as
ESW depending on the functional tasks of various studies.

        ADB has been concerned about the effectiveness of its ESW program. This evaluation study
(the study) was requested by the Audit Committee of the Board and the programs departments. Its
objective is to provide a systematic and rigorous assessment of ESW efforts within ADB. The study
focused on trying to identify existing constraints and to suggest ways to make ESW an effective
instrument at ADB.

       The study design is based on a cluster evaluation approach and covers 50 ESW activities in
four countries--India, Philippines, Samoa, and Vanuatu--undertaken during 1995-2000. The countries
and individual ESW activities for evaluation were selected in consultation with the programs
departments. The sample includes studies on poverty assessment, sector analysis, public expenditure
reviews and public sector resource management issues, capacity assessments, and institutional
development. The approach to evaluation was participatory and involved stakeholder participation at all
stages: study design, data collection, analysis and feedback, and evaluation results.

         Monitoring and evaluation structures to track ESW within ADB are not in place and, as a result,
even data on the overall cost of ESW, outputs, or impacts are not readily available. There have been
several attempts to improve the internal processes of ESW, but lack of centralized data on ESW
activities has led to two common perceptions within ADB. First, staff resources are a binding constraint
on generating effective ESW outcomes. Second, focus on lending operations has resulted in ESW
being assigned relatively low priority in the work program of operational departments.

       Although the availability of data on ADB-wide ESW efforts is still a problem, the study concludes
that ESW activities do absorb significant resources: about 5-6 percent of professional staff time is
devoted to ESW activities. In addition, direct staff consultant inputs of $3 million-$5 million and
anywhere between $30 million and $50 million of TA resources are used for ESW tasks per year.

        The effectiveness of ESW is difficult to quantify because of its diffused and long-term effects on
the quality of ADB's operations. Standard output measures such as publications or consultative
workshops cannot capture the overall impacts of ESW. Stakeholders' perceptions of ESW quality are
generally positive. ADB's efforts are rated by them as the same or better than those of other aid
agencies. The study concludes that the overall quality of ESW is good when it directly supports projects
and programs, and variable in other cases. ESW activities generate reports, but most of these remain
invisible to the larger development community. Linkages of ESW with ADB's operations are not always
well documented.

        The key challenge is to mainstream ESW within ADB by changing the focus from inputs to
results. It is possible to enhance value addition from ESW at ADB as well to increase the visibility of
ADB's efforts--and thereby to engage the larger development community in ADB's operations--without
significantly increasing resources for ESW. Good ESW should provide quality support to operations,
and also do much more. ESW could be used effectively to involve governments and other development
partners to further policy reform processes in a country, generate debate, help create ownership, share
knowledge about regional best practices, carry out information benchmarking, and be a vehicle for
deepening partnerships. This will require a strategic approach to the management of ESW in the future.
         To enhance the overall effect on the ground of ADB's ESW activities, accountability for results
has to be addressed. There is a need to increase the level of managerial attention to these activities,
which will help generate the required incentives to mainstream ESW at ADB. From a currently
undefined activity, ESW has to become a separate nonlending service just like TA. Screening and
quality control processes are needed to reduce fragmentation and waste of resources. A number of
process changes are suggested to make ESW an effective instrument. This can be done as part of the
ongoing reorganization through some simple but important changes in procedures. The study has
identified five steps for changing the management of ESW in the medium term:

       (i)     Definition. The first step is to define ESW as a separate nonlending service in the
               Operations Manual and other ADB documents.

       (ii)    Tracking System. A system of tracking is required to monitor resource use for and
               results of ESW activities. Budget codes are needed to track such activities on a central
               basis. An abbreviation could be introduced to distinguish ESW as a separate nonlending
               activity even if it continues to be funded through a variety of sources.

       (iii)   Internal Processes. The third step will be to introduce internal processes that will
               enhance the overall quality of ESW activities. Simple processes for planning, screening,
               implementation, monitoring, reporting, and self-evaluation need to be introduced. A
               concept paper for each proposed ESW will facilitate planning and screening. With a
               tracking system in place, periodic reports on the status of ESW can be generated to
               monitor implementation. Inclusion of ESW in the Annual Report on Loan and Technical
               Assistance Portfolio Performance would be a good starting point. Tighter cost controls
               and higher performance standards for consultants are required to make ESW cost
               effective. Self-evaluation and client feedback about final outputs should also be instituted
               for ESW activities. These internal processes for management of ESW will help to
               institutionalize accountability for results. Greater staff involvement will help to enhance
               the overall quality of ESW.

       (iv)    Dissemination Strategy. ADB needs to have a strategy to use the vast amount of
               knowledge generated through ESW activities. This will require streamlining processes
               for publication, making available resources for editing, providing staff incentives, and
               recognizing staff efforts in publication. Shifting emphasis from inputs to results,
               continuous dialogue with development communities, and an effective dissemination
               strategy are required to enhance the visibility of ESW and its overall value addition. ESW
               activities need to be planned and implemented as a vehicle to engage governments and
               other development partners in making ADB's operations more effective.

       (v)     Change Agent. Finally, the proposed changes will require a change agent. A small
               group can be given a time-bound action program to mainstream ESW in ADB's
               development agenda.
                                                   I.       INTRODUCTION


A.        Background

1.      Economic and sector work (ESW) is a crucial input in the process of development because it
provides important analytical links to transform the overall development strategy of the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) into operational programs. Unlike in other aid agencies, ADB's ESW is not a
separate product or service and is not recognized as such either within ADB or externally. ESW at ADB
is not defined formally:1 activities are classified as ESW depending on the functional tasks of various
studies. There are no unique processes for ESW: activities follow different processes depending on the
source of funds. ESW can be funded at ADB through technical assistance (TA) resources (i.e., small-
scale TAs, advisory TA, project preparatory TA, or regional TA) and/or non-TA resources (staff or staff
consultants).

2.        Though questions relating to ADB's approach to ESW had begun to be raised in the context of
the changing development mandate of ADB since 1987, it was the medium-term strategic framework
1994-1997 that introduced ESW in the context of country programming.2 The chronology of ADB's
major internal efforts at putting in place a system for ESW is given in Appendix 1. Even though for a
short while ESW activities were listed separately from other TAs in country programming documents,
this initiative was not followed up by systems to identify and monitor ESW as a separate product. As a
result, ADB does not have a central system of information on inputs, costs, and outputs of ESW; these
activities continue to be planned, implemented, and monitored at the individual department level.
Unless the ESW is implemented through TA resources, individual proposals are not screened, and
processes are not monitored.3

3.      There have been concerns about the effectiveness of ESW at all levels within ADB. No
systematic assessment or formal evaluation of ESW has so far been done covering its planning,
implementation, quality, impacts, and usefulness. Past efforts aimed at enhancing the quality of
projects or redesigning business processes faced difficulties of getting adequate data and information
to identify the constraints facing ESW.

4.      The 1994 Report of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality4 emphasized the role of ESW
in determining the overall quality of projects at entry and concluded, "While ESW is undertaken for each
developing member country periodically, the inputs invested in these exercises are modest, and their
results do not always link up closely with mainstream ADB operations in the country concerned." The
1999 Report on the Redesign of ADB's Operational Business Processes,5 in its assessment of progress
made since 1994, also concluded, "Unfortunately, competing demands on limited staff resources have
led to ESW being assigned a relatively low priority in the work programs of operational departments."


1
    An interdepartmental working group for Region West defined ESW in 1999 as follows: "ESW is a deliberate stand-alone
    effort which deals with broad and specific economic and sector issues. Economic work will cover mainly macroeconomic
    issues, country strategy studies, or special studies that cut across sectors. Sector work will cover issues which are technical,
    financial, economic, institutional, social or managerial in nature. ESW will be based on a body of primary and secondary
    data researched in the field or at desk. ESW will be set in a medium-to-long-term context and aim to contribute to (i) deeper
    understanding of economic and sector issues, and (ii) the fashioning of appropriate strategies and instruments to strengthen
    economic management and sector capacities." This definition is too broad, as almost everything other than lending could
    be included as ESW. Also, this definition was not discussed or adopted ADB-wide.
2
    ADB. 1994. Medium-Term Strategic Framework 1994-1997. Manila: ADB.
3
    ADB's Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance Portfolio Performance does not include or monitor ESW as a
    separate product.
4
    ADB. 1994. Report of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality. Manila: ADB.
5
    Strategy and Policy Department. 1999. Draft Report on the Redesign of ADB's Operational Business Processes. ADB,
    Manila.
The overall perception within ADB so far has been that ESW is not effective because of staff resource
constraints and the incentive structure.

5.      The new staff instructions on country programming place ESW at the center of a country's
overall analytical framework. The country documents are now required to list ADB's ESW program, and
also that of other aid agencies, for the next three years. Review20016 also formed a focus group on
ESW, and its report, currently under consideration, makes several recommendations.7 The
reorganization proposal under consideration emphasizes the importance of ESW in ADB's operations
and places responsibility for coordination and quality enhancement with a new department for regional
and sustainable development.

B.        Objective of the Study

6.      Like most international agencies, ADB has been concerned with the effectiveness of its various
instruments. This special evaluation study (the study)8 is demand driven, having been requested by the
Audit Committee of the Board and the programs departments. The main purpose of this study is to
provide a systematic and rigorous assessment of ADB's ESW efforts. The majority of stakeholders who
requested this evaluation wanted the study to focus on country-level ESW activities. It therefore does
not include knowledge products such as Asian Development Outlook, or those studies undertaken
through regional TA. It examines the overall planning, implementation, relevance, quality, impacts, and
usefulness of selected ESW. The scope of the study does not include identification of long-term
impacts of ESW on ADB's overall performance in delivering other linked products.




6
    Initiated in January 2001 to review the existing organizational structure of ADB to effectively deliver its new strategic
    agenda.
7
    The evaluation team shared its initial findings with the Working Group on Review2001.
8
    The study was undertaken by R. Nangia, Senior Evaluation Specialist, with assistance from A. Anabo, Evaluation Analyst,
    and M. G. de Sagon, consultant.
                                           II.       EVALUATION FRAMEWORK

7.      The study attempted to identify generic characteristics of ESW selected from four countries: one
large, one medium sized, and two small. The final selection of countries was done in consultation with
the programs departments. It was decided to include India as a representative large country in Region
West. Besides, ESW in India is focused at the state level, and it was easier to compare ADB's ESW
with similar efforts by other funding agencies active in the field. The Philippines was selected as a
medium-sized country in Region East. Vanuatu and Samoa were selected for three reasons. First,
since 1992, a series of comprehensive country economic reports designed to help both policy
formulation by governments in the Pacific region and the external assistance programs has been
prepared. ESW has been an important activity of ADB in this region for long time. Second, the Office of
Pacific Operations has a different organizational structure from the rest of ADB, and ESW activities are
supposed to have been mainstreamed in most operations. Finally, unlike for other countries, a number
of ESW reports dealing with the Pacific region have been published.9 It was, therefore, considered
important to compare ESW activities in these countries with the others.

A.       Approach to Evaluation

8.       It is very difficult to design an appropriate methodology for such a study given that there are only
limited internal processes that track ESW centrally in ADB at present. Though it is possible to assess
impacts, the traditional evaluation method, with its emphasis on accountability following predetermined
criteria, will result only in broad and general conclusions regarding the overall performance of ESW.
This study, therefore, was selected as an ideal case for adopting the participatory approach so that the
evaluation could focus on learning lessons. This approach also supported the active involvement of
those with a stake in the ESW to identify existing constraints to making it effective. The study involved
stakeholder participation at all stages: study design, data collection, analysis and feedback, and
evaluation results.

9.     A thematic cluster evaluation approach was adopted for the study.10 Cluster evaluation is a kind
of program evaluation of individual activities with different objectives, but all aimed to achieve the same
goal. This type of evaluation is concerned about three aspects: What happened? Why? and What is
needed to achieve the goal? Most of the selected ESW activities had different objectives, and, despite
the fact that the activities and outputs were quite diverse, they all aimed to promote the process of
development in the four countries and to assist ADB in this task. Since the study is forward looking with
the aim of improving ESW activities at ADB, a major part of the evaluation effort was spent reviewing
the experience of other aid agencies to identify processes and issues crucial for the management of
ESW.

B.       Evaluation Design

10.     The study design used multiple evaluation instruments: literature surveys, desk reviews,
interviews, questionnaires, and feedback sessions with governments and ADB. The first step was to
conduct a desk review of country planning documents, country strategies, ESW files, budget
documents, and accomplishment reports of departments during 1995-2001.11 The evaluation team
prepared an inventory of all ESW listed in such annual accomplishment reports for the four selected

9
   Since 1995, economic reports have been published as the Pacific Island Economic Report Series.
10
   Cluster evaluation was selected because it is constructive, using aggregate information to identify common themes. The
   overall approach of such evaluation is holistic, and emphasis is on "improving" rather than "proving." It is also different from
   evaluations that have controlled experimentation.
11
   Following a staff instruction, all country programming documents began listing ESW activities separately in 1995. However,
   this was short-lived, because new formats for country documents removed the table requiring listing of ESW activities.
countries during 1995-2000. This was not an easy task, because there were no consistent data on
ESW activities.12

11.     Based on the review of these documents and on detailed discussions with the programs
departments, a sample of 50 ESW activities was selected in the four countries for detailed review and
evaluation. The sample is representative of typical ESW undertaken in country level operations. It
includes a mix of 20 TA-funded and                                                                    30
non-TA-funded ESW activities. The                      Figure 1: Stakeholder Interviews
sample comprises 24 ESW activities                                                                     in
India, 11 in the Philippines, 7 in           ADB Staff
Samoa, and 8 in Vanuatu. The
selected ESW activities include
varied tasks, some of which were           Cons ultants
internally focused (such as the
country economic review) and the         Developm ent
others for external users. The             Partners
sample includes studies over a large      Governm ent
number of sectors, macroeconomic            O fficials
analyses, studies on poverty, and                                                                    the
design of policy reforms--all during                     0     20    40     60       80   100 120 1995-
2000. Appendix 2 lists the selected                                 Num ber of Interviews         ESW,
year of completion, type of funding, Source: Staff.                                               direct
input (in terms of money and time),                                                                 and
deliverables. Data on duration or delays are not available.

12.     Field visits to India, Philippines, Samoa, and Vanuatu were organized to hold interviews with
government officials, the private sector, the larger development community, and other stakeholders. As
far as possible, individual interviews were held with stakeholders using a structured interview guide
including both open-ended and closed questions to probe for information, opinions, and experiences
and to seek suggestions for improvements.

13.     The interviews focused on all important aspects of the evaluation: general awareness of ADB's
ESW efforts, internal government processes to plan and screen the ESW efforts of external agencies,
the relevance of ESW to the country's development agenda, linkages with ADB operations, usefulness
of ESW outputs, overall quality, timeliness, and impacts. The evaluation team met with
185 stakeholders. Efforts were made to trace the officials and consultants involved with the selected
ESW activities so as to obtain feedback on the types of consultative processes adopted, and on quality
control mechanisms for screening, monitoring, and implementation. Figure 1 indicates the interview
distribution across different categories of stakeholders.

14.     The individual interviews were followed with detailed questionnaires to all agencies and
individuals involved with specific ESW planning and implementation in order to cover additional process
issues such as ownership, initial conditions, overall environment for reforms, implementation and
monitoring processes, perceptions about ESW outputs, quality, timeliness, relevance, comparative
assessment with other similar products, impacts, and performance of consultants including client
orientation. Detailed interviews and responses to questionnaires have formed the basis for the findings


12
     Titles of studies listed in accomplishment reports were at variance with those listed in the country planning documents and
     the information system on consultants. Some TAs carried out more ESW activities than others and so individual advisory
     and project preparatory TA reports had to be examined to decide whether the TA scope included ESW activities. Most
     departments did not have files on ESW activities. Though country planning documents had lists of ESW activities for some
     years, these were not identified in the mission work and hardly ever mentioned in the aide memoires of discussions with
     stakeholders. Some country planning documents repeated the same issues that needed to be covered under ESW year
     after year.
reported in Chapter III. These initial findings were discussed in feedback sessions with important
stakeholders in the field and with the governments.

                                                       III.      FINDINGS


A.         Overall Assessment of ESW Efforts at ADB


           1.        Inputs for ESW

15.      Cost. The evaluation team attempted to analyze ADB-wide quantitative data on costs and staff
time spent on ESW. As mentioned earlier, data on ESW, number of studies undertaken, number of
studies completed, time lapsed, and resources spent on ESW has been very weak. Individual
departments report expenditures on ESW, but this also includes costs of other operational support
activities and, therefore, overestimates expenditures for ESW. The amounts involved at aggregate
levels are significant. Table 1 provides the only cost data that are available--annual expenditures on
staff consultants hired by all departments for ESW. There has been a major increase in these
expenditures in the last few years. It is difficult to determine whether this is due to the 1998 crisis
situation or the new emphasis on governance and poverty.

                            Table 1: Direct Expenditure on Staff Consultants for ESW

                 Year                          Amount (in $'000)                  Percentage Increase Over 1996
                 1996                                  1,373                                       --
                 1997                                  1,198                                     (12%)
                 1998                                  3,104                                     126%
                 1999                                  3,925                                     186%
                 2000                                  4,540                                     231%
-- = no data available, ESW = economic and sector work.
Sources: Departmental budget documents from 1995 to 2000, and staff.

16.     Staff Time. Table 2 provides a summary of data for broad classification of direct staff-years
distributed by different activities. The share of staff-years spent on ESW declined in the last two years.13
There was a modest increase in total staff-years, but most of it was towards new lending and other
operational activities.




13
     Given lack of data, it is difficult to confirm whether reduction in staff inputs for ESW activities was largely compensated for
     by increased consulting inputs.
                                 Table 2: Indicative Total Staff-Years by Activitya

 Activity                                         1996           1997            1998            1999           2000
 Portfolio Management                            227.3          229.3            229.2          231.4          235.8
 New Lending                                     184.3          185.0            190.6          186.8          204.0
 Other Operational Activities                     50.6           50.1             61.3           73.3           91.1
 Operations Evaluation                            13.4           14.2             13.5           15.1           14.5
 Research                                         11.1            9.8             12.4           12.1           12.5
 Financial Activities                             44.8           46.2             43.7           35.0           35.0
 Legal Activities                                  4.6            4.7              4.6            7.0            5.5
 General Support                                  93.9           91.8             87.7           93.4           93.9
 ESW                                              40.6           42.4             43.0           38.2           34.9
                    Total                        670.5          673.6            685.9          692.5          727.3
 ESW As a Percentage of the Total                  6.1%            6.3%             6.3%           5.5%           4.8%
ESW = economic and sector work.
a
  Relates to professional staff.
Sources: Budget, Personnel and Management Systems Department; and staff.

17.      Although it is difficult to present accurate data on past costs of ESW activities at the ADB-wide
level, the conclusion may be drawn that about 5-6 percent of staff time and about $3 million-$5 million
of direct consultant inputs are devoted to ESW activities. In addition, anywhere between $30 million and
$50 million of advisory and project preparatory TA resources are used to support ESW tasks.14 The
total cost of ESW in ADB seems to be in a similar order of magnitude as that of the World Bank.15

         2.       Outputs of ESW

18.    Data on outputs of ESW are even more difficult to be aggregated, because the annual report
formats for departmental accomplishments have been changing and there are variations in reporting
across departments.16 During the last few years, the Agriculture and Social Sectors Departments (East)
and (West) have consistently distinguished between TA-funded and non-TA-funded ESW, and have
reported the number of ESW activities initiated and completed every year. Other departments have not
reported on the number of ESW activities completed, but instead have described ESW qualitatively.17
Table 3 provides data on different types of ESW outputs completed during 1996-2000, indicating the
number of publications derived from ESW activities.




14
   Data collected by the Strategy and Policy Department recently from all departments on ESW activities indicate that in 1999,
   $42.3 million of TA resources supported ongoing ESW activities.
15
   Though considerably lower than in the early 1980s and 1990s, the World Bank has a budget allocation of $80 million to
   support an annual ESW program of about 350 activities. The budget allocation includes direct costs--salaries, benefits,
   travel, and consultants' fees--and indirect costs such as those for office space, electricity, and institutional support services.
16
   The evaluation team spent 75 person-days on tracing documents and collating information on ESW activities. This
   accounted for almost one third of the total evaluation time.
17
   Often the titles of the studies reported as completed were at variance with country planning documents. In some cases, the
   same studies were reported to have been completed in more than one year.
                                              Table 3: Outputs of ESW

Item                                                                  1996      1997     1998      1999     2000
EDRC Studies and Research Papers                                       56        69      109       129      130
Publications
  Sectoral Publications                                                 4        11        15        11        5
  Operational Strategies and Policies                                   5         5        12        18       14
  Environmental and Social Sector Papers                               15        28        18        21       14
  Country Planning and Strategy Documents
      Country Assistance Plans                                         30        31        32        33       31
      Country Economic Reviews                                         19        20        15        21       22
      Country Operational Strategies                                    8         2         4         6        4
      Others (poverty assessments, partnership agreements)              0         0         0         0       10
EDRC = Economics and Development Resource Center, ESW = economic and sector work.
Sources: Budget, Personnel and Management Systems Department; and staff.

19.    In addition, ESW activities also lead to strengthening the quality of projects and operational
programs at the country level. There are no standard measures, and the study has not attempted to
estimate these types of outputs.

B.      Selected ESW


        1.       Objectives and Target Users

20.      Data on the objectives of ESW activities are not readily available.18 The evaluation team used
information on terms of reference of consultant contracts for all outsourced ESW activities. Appendix 2
lists the objectives, target users or audience, outcomes, and impacts of the selected ESW.

21.     The evaluation team distinguished two types of the selected ESW activities--diagnostic studies
and institutional development. The first type includes a variety of diagnostic studies that are necessary
before ADB can go ahead with its operations in any area. Such studies range from poverty
assessments, sector analyses,19 public expenditure reviews, and public sector resource management
issues to capacity assessments. Half of the selected ESW activities had direct linkages with ADB's
project and program loans. In India, almost all state-level ESW helped identify policy issues that ADB
could address with such loans. Published reports also helped in information benchmarking.20

22.     Nine country economic reviews and 31 other ESW activities can be classified as diagnostic
studies. Five ESW activities aimed to support institutional development, and the remaining 5 attempted
to undertake both diagnostics and institutional development. Of the 50 selected ESW activities, 35 had
an internal audience, in terms of support for country programming or strengthening project quality; 8
were specifically targeted at an external audience, largely government agencies; and 6 had both
internal and external audiences.

18
   This information has recently begun to be compiled in Region West in a database covering all its departments. The
   information is also available for the Agriculture and Social Sectors Department (East).
19
   However, the scope of this evaluation did not include infrastructure sector such as power because there have been several
   evaluations of TA at the sector level. For example, in 1998 the Operations Evaluation Department examined TA to the
   power sector in India.
20
   Information benchmarking aims to provide the same reference material to all stakeholders on policy issues, development
   priorities, best practices, etc.
           2.       Relevance                              Figure 2: Stakeholders' Perceptions of ESW
                                                              Linkages with Government Priorities
23.      Awareness. The evaluation                                                                  team
                                                   75
began with an assessment of the level                                                                   of
awareness in the field of ADB's ESW
efforts. It was found that the level of
awareness was limited to government                50




                                                          P ercent
officials,   the     aid     community,
consultants working in the field, and
executing agencies for TA-funded
ESW. Even within these groups, the                 25                                                level
of awareness was limited to specific
studies that were handled by them.                                                                  Most
of the nongovernment or private
stakeholders were not aware of ESW                   0
carried out by ADB. Several reasons
                     21
                                                             S tro ng            W e ak             were
identified for this low level of ESW = economic and sector work.
awareness. First of all, ADB's ESW Note: Six percent of stakeholders surveyed had no response.
activities are not always published. Source: Staff.
Second, even if they are published, the
dissemination channels are limited. Third, the time lapse between field consultations and publication is
long and largely uncertain. A large number of stakeholders suggested that ADB work with preset
schedules and that a publication be launched as an event to which private sector representatives,
academia, and other groups are invited. It was also brought out that a preset timetable for major reports
would help generate expectations for ESW output. Within groups of stakeholders, the government and
other partner agencies are fully aware of ADB's ESW efforts in the country if these are funded through
TA resources. In such cases, most relevant agencies also participate in design, and subsequently in
the implementation aspects. They are not generally aware of studies that are done in-house by staff or
staff consultants. The level of awareness for TA-funded ESW activities was limited to specific TAs
rather than all ESW efforts of ADB in the field.

24.     Relevance. The evaluation team tried to assess stakeholders' perceptions of the relevance of
various ESW efforts and their linkages with government priorities. Relevance in this study has been
defined as consistency of goals, purpose, and outputs with the government's own development goals in
the context of ADB's overall operations. These perceptions were traced through a series of questions in
the interview guide directed at assessing linkages of ESW activities in the context of the government's
development programs and seeking information on origin of a particular study; its linkage with the
government's plans, sector programs, and priorities; and the local context or relevance.

25.      All stakeholders were finally asked a direct question to rate the level of relevance of a particular
ESW. The majority of stakeholders perceived the linkage of individual ESW activities to the
government's priorities as weak (Figure 2). This was partly due to two reasons: First, though most
governments had some form of system to prioritize investment projects, such a system did not exist or
was weak when it came to studies and TA; and second, a number of stakeholders noted that internal
screening takes place only when proposals involve budgetary implications for governments. Since most
ESW activities did not imply budget outflows on the part of governments, the task of ESW planning was
left to the funding agencies. In some sense, ADB's ESW activities are not as yet seen as demand
driven. The majority of stakeholders thought that ESW activities helped to design future operations of
ADB, and in that context, they were relevant.


21
     This was not the case with other multilateral institutions--most stakeholders interviewed had higher awareness of ESW by
     the World Bank or United Nations agencies.
         3.       Cost Effectiveness

26.     The evaluation team was able to collect data for 35 outsourced ESW activities from ADB's
database on the number of days of work, terms of references, types of deliverable outputs, and whether
reports were finally received or not. No information is available on the cost of 10 ESW activities carried
out by staff. In two other cases, it is difficult to segregate the costs of ESW from capacity building or
loan processing efforts. No information is available on the three remaining ESW activities.

27.     The average direct cost of these 35 ESW activities was $172,000.22 The average direct cost of
ESW at the World Bank in 1999 was $112,000.23 The cost comparison with the World Bank is only
indicative, because ADB does not have comparable cost data on all ESW activities.

28.     If one looks at the cost of TA versus non-TA ESW, typically TAs involve higher average costs:
17 TA-funded ESW activities cost on average $330,000,24 whereas the average cost of ESW done
through staff consultants was significantly lower at $25,000.25 The average cost for TA-funded ESW
was higher, because mostly firms rather than individual consultants were used. Almost all stakeholders
interviewed expressed concern about the cost effectiveness of ADB's ESW activities.

         4.       Quality

29.      The documentation with respect to outputs of ESW remains an area of concern. The evaluation
team had to spend considerable effort to ascertain what the deliverable outputs were supposed to be
and whether these were available in the first place. Information was not readily available on the
objectives, scope, and purpose of ESW, nor on the targeted audience for non-TA-funded ESW
activities. This could be ascertained only by examining each consultant's contract for outsourced
studies and the final performance evaluation form to see whether the output was actually delivered.
Some reports had to be obtained from the consultants, executing agencies, field offices, or former staff
handling these ESW activities. Even after that, the evaluation team was not able to find reports and
other papers with respect to two activities. The overall situation is only marginally better in TA-funded
ESW compared with non-TA-funded ESW with respect to identification of the purpose of the ESW
activity and its linkages with lending and country operations.

30.      From 50 ESW activities, only 12 studies were published, 7 of which were country economic
reviews and country operational strategies.26 In India, 1 ESW study was published in addition to 5
country economic reviews and country operational strategies during 1995-2000 from the 24 ESW
activities selected.27 In the Philippines, 4 of 11 ESW activities led to publications; 2 of these were joint
studies with other agencies (the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank). In
Samoa and Vanuatu, country economic reports take the form of the Pacific Island Economic Report
series and are much more comprehensive than the usual country economic reviews. The Vanuatu
report was published in 1997 and that for Samoa in November 2000.

22
   This cost covers only ESW activities. For example, if TA costs included capacity building, training, or equipment, these were
   excluded from the costs.
23
   The average direct cost of ESW activities at the World Bank has declined from a peak of about $160,000 in 1995, reflecting
   an increase in the number of comparatively small products costing less than $30,000. The cost of ESW activities at the
   World Bank varies, depending on the type of ESW, from $76,000 for infrastructure to more than $200,000 for environment-
   related activities.
24
   These costs exclude costs relating to non-ESW activities from TA.
25
   These costs only include ADB's costs and not other partners who joined the study--Australian Agency for International
   Development in Samoa and World Bank and United Nations Development Programme in the Philippines.
26
   Publication is an indication that some minimum standards of quality are met and so could be used as an indicator of
   acceptable quality.
27
   In addition, the National Council of Applied Economic Research is in the process of publishing the output of one ESW
   activity as a book later this year.
31.     Only about half of the
                                                     Figure 3: Stakeholders' Perceptions of
stakeholders had seen the final ESW                                  ESW Quality
outputs. It was found that ESW that led                                                                  to
projects or programs was of acceptable           60
quality, though a number of examples                                                                 in all
countries were brought out by
stakeholders where the local context             40                                                  could




                                            Percent
have been improved. It was noted that                                                                 even
the best technical solutions need to be
                                                 20
tailored to fit the local context. In most
responses         to    interviews     and
questionnaires, the implementability of           0
recommendations was seen as a weak                     Exce lle n t Ve ry  Goo d   Averag e Poo r
                                                                                                      area.
A number of instances were pointed                                  Goo d                               out
where the recommendations could not                                                                     be
                                             ESW = economic and sector work.
implemented given the local conditions                                                                   or
                                             Source: Staff.
capacities within governments. In
Samoa and Vanuatu, most stakeholders pointed to the need to tailor operations within the human
resource constraints and vulnerabilities facing these small economies. In their view, good ESW should
provide solutions that recognize these constraints, but it was not always so. In state level operations in
India, variations within different states need to be explicitly built into the design and pace of reforms.
For example, it was pointed out that promoting market-based instruments for environmental protection
in a state like Madhya Pradesh did not recognize the large presence of the public sector. Besides, such
a policy change would require internal capacity that was just not available in the state government.

32.     Stakeholders' perceptions of ESW quality are generally positive (Figure 3). Within different types
of stakeholders, consultants as a group found ESW outputs as excellent or of very good quality. Most
other stakeholders thought that the quality was good to average. Overall, more than 60 percent of the
stakeholders rated quality as good or better. Some pointed out in interviews that the quality of ESW
reports was variable, and there seemed to be a lack of effective quality control on ESW outputs. ADB's
ESW efforts were rated as the same as or better than those of other aid agencies.

       5.      Planning and Other Processes

33.      All governments had some form of system to prioritize investment projects, though the
processes for planning studies and TA were weak. In India, ADB's contribution to studies aimed at
reforms has been relatively small at the central government level, though ADB's presence at the state
level is quite significant. Even then, ESW planning is a weak area, and ADB's efforts are not integrated
with the program of other studies of the state governments. Individual studies are not linked to each
other even though they are set within the medium-term country program.

34.    Most of the stakeholders, except those in Samoa, insisted that the idea for the ESW originated
at ADB, and to that extent there was limited ownership. In Gujarat in India, and in Samoa, most
stakeholders mentioned that basic reform strategies were homegrown, and more often ADB's ESW
supported and accelerated the process of change by articulating details of programs. In Samoa, the
government has adopted a practice wherein team leaders of all TAs are government officials in order to
enhance overall learning and capacity building by keeping the government actively engaged in the
process. Such an approach has helped to make implementation and monitoring effective.

35.    In terms of planning processes, design, and implementation, ADB adopted consultations only if
the ESW was funded through TA resources. Otherwise, there were limited or no consultations with
governments or other agencies. Even when consultations were carried out with governments, the
overall quality of the consultative processes was determined by the internal capacity of the
governments. In Vanuatu, there are very                              Figure 4: Stakeholders' Perceptions of             few
economists in the government, and                                              ESW Dissemination
hence consultations have been largely                                                                                     in
form. Similarly, in Madhya Pradesh in                    100                                                          India,
consultation processes for ESW have                                                                                    been
weak and have largely taken the form of




                                                     P ercent
review and comments on reports.
                                                                50
36.     Within ADB, overall planning for                                                         ESW
is supposed to be linked to country level
operations. ESW is initiated in three             0
possible ways: (i) requested by the                        Satisfactory     Not Satisfactory
government at the time of country
programming (but this is not very often), ESW = economic and sector work.                          (ii)
                                               Source: Staff.
through interaction between the resident
mission and the programs division when
important issues are identified, and (iii) through staff initiatives. Though most work is linked to
operations within a country and is planned to support the medium-term operations, the actual work on
ESW ends up becoming ad hoc, given the constraints of staff, the priority given to lending operations,
and the overall incentive structure. Lack of consultation at the planning stage and somewhat weak
screening processes lead to duplication of effort. At times, ADB was doing ESW studies on subjects
where considerable work was being undertaken by governments. Even within ADB, linkages and
information on ESW are weak, and some instances were found where the same issues were being
addressed in the same country by different operational and non-operational departments, without
building on individual efforts. This leads to misallocation of scarce staff and other resources.

37.     Timeliness was an important concern, with consultants' outputs being delayed in many cases.
Most stakeholders interviewed felt that the timeliness of ESW outputs needed to be improved
significantly. It was noted by most stakeholders that once the field work had been undertaken, the
governments or larger development community had no idea when the work would be completed and
whether it would be available in published form. Better communication with the government agencies
and larger development community on the progress of ESW as well as a timetable for publication would
go a long way towards improving the visibility of ESW outputs. Most stakeholders recommended that
the present dissemination channels of ESW be improved (Figure 4).

38.     Overall implementation and monitoring of ESW remains an area of concern. There have been
several efforts to collate information on ESW with a view to improving implementation and monitoring,
but in the absence of a clear definition of ESW or a set of processes relating to ESW, this has been an
uphill task. In the field, with the exception of Samoa, most governments also have weak systems for
implementation and monitoring. As a result, the implementation processes of TA-funded ESW activities
are driven largely by ADB or consultants. Non-TA-funded ESW is monitored internally within the ADB
division or department only.

           6.       Impacts

39.     It is difficult to quantify direct impacts of ESW on ADB's operations.28 The evaluation team tried
to assess impacts from desk studies and through stakeholder interviews. Most stakeholders were of the
view that ESW underpins ADB operations in terms of better project and program quality, and hence the
lasting impact of ESW is seen as ADB's lending operations within a country.


28
     There is no self-evaluation of ESW activities, and the seven TA completion reports that are available for the ESW sample
     studied do not elaborate on impacts.
40.     There are some indirect impacts of continuous efforts that spill over to institutional development
and building constituencies for policy reforms.29 When asked to name a few indirect impacts of ESW,
stakeholders saw constituency building and information sharing as two important ones. Reforms are
slow processes, and studies help to build support for change though in a diffused way. A number of
stakeholders commented that, in countries where there is some resistance to change, views of
multilateral agencies on policy issues have greater credibility and are seen to be objective compared to
internal studies of governments.30

41.      In Vanuatu and Samoa, country economic reviews were more detailed, and in the absence of
other external commentary, these were used as reference material by consultants, the aid community,
and some academicians.31 In the Philippines and at the central government level in India, most
stakeholders thought that a large part of ESW was for the internal use of ADB. The overall impact of
ESW activities was seen to be limited by external stakeholders. At the state level in India, the overall
ESW impact was seen to be significant because it facilitated resource flows to the state. Appendix 2
lists the likely impacts of selected ESW activities.

C.       Conclusions

42.       The study concludes that ESW activities at ADB absorb about 5-6 percent of staff time, $3
million-$5 million in staff consultant inputs, and $30 million-$50 million of TA resources annually. Past
efforts at enhancing the effectiveness of ESW have not been very successful because there is a
perception within ADB that present staff resources are not adequate to generate effective ESW
outcomes. The comments of most stakeholders consulted, and the practices of other agencies, indicate
that it is possible to improve ESW outcomes without significantly increasing resources.

43.      The overall outcomes and impacts of ESW activities on an ADB-wide basis remain diffused.
There are several reasons for such low impacts. First, they remain diffused because, though most ESW
activities address development issues, linkages among purpose, outputs, and impacts are weak during
both planning and implementation. Second, ADB's ESW activities are seen not as knowledge products,
because only a small fraction of studies are published.32 Dissemination channels are weak, even for
published reports. And even when reasonably good ESW is produced, it remains largely unnoticed in
draft form due to constraints on publication and dissemination, and due to staff focus on operations.33
The evaluation team found many studies that could have been published with little additional effort.

44.     The overall involvement of governments in ESW planning is limited. The cost effectiveness of
ESW activities is a major concern of most stakeholders. The overall quality of ESW is good when it
supports projects or programs. But internal processes to track inputs, outputs, and quality control are
weak. There is a need to strengthen accountability for resource use by streamlining processes. The
study finds that it is possible to get more value addition from ESW activities by improving management
of ESW within ADB and using it strategically. Chapter IV deals with some of these issues in detail.




29
   Some ESW activities also help in defining ADB's own policies or sector strategies. For example, ADB's rural development
   policy has drawn heavily on the results of the Rural Asia Study undertaken through regional TA.
30
   This means that ADB needs to publish more to begin a debate on policy issues.
31
   Many stakeholders, however, pointed out that in the era of information overload, ADB needs to make large and bulky
   reports user friendly.
32
   The main reasons for this have been identified as lack of staff and other resources, lack of emphasis on publication within
   the budgeting process, lengthy procedures for publication, and lack of incentives to publish. Most of these reasons can be
   eliminated without significant cost implications.
33
   There are also some good examples where ADB ESW activities have been well disseminated. For example, regional TA
   5753 for Developing Best Practices for Promoting Private Sector Investment in Infrastructure and the annual Asian
   Development Outlook are seen as important knowledge products by stakeholders.
                           IV.      THE WAY FORWARD: MANAGEMENT OF ESW

45.      The key challenge for the future is to mainstream ESW activities in delivering ADB's broad
development mandate. It is possible to increase the visibility of ADB's efforts and enhance the overall
quality of ESW without large resource implications. ADB needs to evaluate three options: (i) business
as usual, (ii) marginal improvements (in terms of putting in monitoring or coordinating systems), and (iii)
ESW as a separate nonlending service. Even though data on cost and resources utilized are sketchy, it
is clear that ESW activities absorb significant direct staff resources, and much more indirectly through
TA. In the environment of increasing accountability, continuing with business as usual does not seem to
be an acceptable option. Looking at the past few years, the second option of continuing marginal
improvements does not seem feasible either because such improvements have not generated the type
of impacts that are required today. It is important to bring ESW up to the same level as other activities if
it is to become a strategic instrument for ADB in years to come. This requires ESW to be treated as a
separate product or service of ADB, just like TAs or other instruments. The future course to improve the
management of ESW as a separate product has to effectively remove the existing constraints that
make it a residual activity today.

A.      Strategic Management

46.      Selectivity. The first step in making ESW a strategic instrument is to be selective. The key
reform required is to increase managerial attention to ESW. This will need to be accompanied with
steps to sensitize staff and managers alike to the problems of ESW across ADB. At present, there is
still a perception among some staff that there are no issues with respect to either the quality or overall
usefulness of individual ESW activities. According to this view, if more staff resources are available,
everything will be fine. The evaluation team found that the reality is somewhat different. There are far
too many ESW activities being initiated today, in a given department and across many departments. In
2000, ADB had a portfolio of 220 ongoing ESW activities compared with about 400 at the World Bank,
yet ADB's staff strength is about one tenth that of the World Bank. There is considerable fragmentation
of ESW efforts across different departments within ADB. A large number of ESW activities do not get
completed or remain in draft form. Screening processes have to be introduced to stop the proliferation
of ESW. There is a need for greater effort in planning and designing ESW. A long-term approach and
linkages with past efforts are crucial for ESW to be an effective instrument for enhancing operational
quality.

47.      Quality ESW. It is important to focus on the outputs, outcomes, and expected impacts at the
planning stage of ESW activities to enhance overall quality. ESW will need to be clearly defined and
closely integrated in the country strategies and operational plans, with its outputs defined a priori, for an
identified audience, with greater involvement of governments in the selection of ESW tasks. Box 1
identifies the attributes of good ESW activities. The ultimate test is that ESW is demand driven. It is


                             Box 1: Attributes of Good Economic and Sector Work

     Quality at entry includes clarity of purpose, well-defined milestones, intended audience, expected outputs,
     and likely impacts.
     Ownership should be strong within governments and the Asian Development Bank.
     Technical excellence should be the key. The solutions suggested should be well rooted in analysis; local
     knowledge should be blended with global insights.
     Implementability should be the most important guiding principle.
     Processes should be collaborative so as to build partnerships.
     Adequate inputs (such as staff, skills mix, budget) and effective oversight are required to ensure quality.
important to develop the ESW agenda in consultation with the governments. There has to be greater
cost effectiveness, and ESW outputs need to be produced in a timely manner. ESW will not have an
impact unless it addresses a problem acknowledged by governments and solutions are seen as
objective and correct and delivered in simple language. The findings of ESW activities will need to be
developed into targeted messages and disseminated. This could be done through an appropriate media
strategy. Good quality ESW activities are those that serve as a vehicle for engaging governments and
other development partners to make ADB's interventions effective.


                      Box 2: Stakeholders' Perceptions of the Asian Development Bank's
                                         Economic and Sector Work

     "Why bother with ESW if you do not publish and disseminate?"
     "ADB needs to be involved in the TAs and studies and not leave it entirely to consultants."
     "ADB staff are more sensitive (than external consultants) to governments and local development issues."
     "ADB needs to be flexible and less driven by internal processes."
     "Other agencies get more out of the consultants because more is demanded and they make sure this is
      done. With ADB this is not the case."
     "All good ESW should begin with literature reviews so as not to reinvent."
     "ESW activities by ADB are important because these are independent assessments of development
      options facing an economy."
     "ADB is not maximizing its 'Asian' advantage."
     "Resources for ESW are not a problem--these can be mobilized provided there is a clear demand for
      quality ESW by ADB management."
     "Ownership is a double-edged weapon--it generates local expectations that need to be managed
      strategically if the reforms are to move forward."


48.    Media Strategy. Steps to improve ESW at ADB have to deal not only with the actual
constraints, but also with the perceptions about quality of ESW both within ADB and outside. Box 2
presents some of the perceptions the evaluation team came across in the field with respect to ADB's
ESW activities. An effective media strategy will be required to deal with perceptions while steps are
being undertaken to improve the management of ESW internally.

B.      Improving Internal Systems for ESW

49.      At present, ESW remains an undefined activity. ESW needs to be defined in the Operations
Manual and in ADB processes so as to ensure identical treatment throughout ADB. This could be done
as part of the review of business processes that accompanies ADB's reorganization. Internal systems
need to be put in place that will effectively manage this product to enhance value addition from ESW
activities. The study concludes that ESW has to become a separate nonlending service just like TA if
the required incentives are to be generated and if it has to get the same level of managerial attention. It
also requires screening and quality control processes to reduce the fragmentation and waste of
resources. A number of process changes are suggested to make ESW an effective instrument. The
study has identified five minimum steps that need to be in place over the medium term to enhance the
overall effectiveness of ESW activities in ADB for the consideration of review of business process:
           (i)      Definition. The first step is to define ESW as a separate nonlending service in the
                    Operations Manual and other ADB documents.34

           (ii)     Tracking System. A system of tracking is required to monitor resource use for and
                    results of ESW activities. Budget codes are needed to track such activities on a central
                    basis. An abbreviation could be introduced to distinguish ESW as a separate nonlending
                    activity even if it continues to be funded through a variety of sources.

           (iii)    Internal Processes. The third step will be to introduce internal processes that will
                    enhance the overall quality of ESW activities. Simple processes for planning, screening,
                    implementation, monitoring, reporting, and self-evaluation need to be introduced. To
                    facilitate screening, a simple concept paper should be prepared at the outset for each
                    proposed ESW that describes expected outputs, immediate results or outcomes, budget,
                    staff accountability, target audience, type of deliverable outputs, consultative processes,
                    time schedule, peer review, dissemination channels, and overall linkage with ADB
                    operations. Tighter cost controls and higher performance standards for consultants are
                    required to increase the cost effectiveness of ESW activities. With a tracking system in
                    place, it should be possible to generate periodic reports for monitoring status of inputs,
                    costs, outputs, time lapsed, etc., and thereby focus attention of management on ESW
                    activities. Inclusion of ESW in the Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance
                    Portfolio Performance would be a good starting point. Self-evaluation and client
                    feedback on final outputs should also be instituted for ESW activities. These internal
                    processes for management of ESW will help to institutionalize accountability for results.
                    Greater staff involvement will help to enhance the overall quality of ESW.

           (iv)     Dissemination Strategy. ADB needs to have a strategy to use the vast amount of
                    knowledge generated through ESW activities. This will require streamlining processes
                    for publication, making available resources for editing work, providing staff incentives,
                    and recognizing staff efforts in publication. One way would be to enhance the overall
                    quality and prestige of the existing publications and create incentives for staff to
                    contribute their ESW outputs to such a publication forum. Greater use of information
                    technology and availability of drafts on the ADB intranet would be useful. Emphasis on
                    publication, continuous dialogue with development communities, and an effective
                    dissemination strategy are required to enhance visibility of ESW and its overall value
                    addition. ESW activities need to be planned and implemented as a vehicle to engage
                    governments and other development partners in making ADB's operations effective.

           (v)      Change Agent. Finally, the proposed changes will require a change agent. A small
                    group can be given a time-bound program to mainstream ESW in ADB's development
                    agenda.




34
     The definition should also clarify what is not ESW. Such a definition could also specify criteria for funding ESW activities
     from different sources, and processes for monitoring and coordination of ESW activities across operational and non-
     operational departments/offices. Based on this evaluation, a tentative definition of ESW could be as follows: "ESW is
     primarily a country-based knowledge instrument to diagnose development problems and identify policy and investment
     prescriptions within the context of ADB operations."
                                                                                        Appendix 1, page 1

                                    CHRONOLOGY: 1993-2001

Year                   Process Improvement Efforts for Economic and Sector Work at ADB

Dec 1993   The Economics and Development Resource Center (EDRC) develops several options to institute
           a system for screening and prioritizing economic and sector work (ESW) in the Asian
           Development Bank (ADB). The proposal does not get adequate support from other departments.

Jan 1994   The report of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality recommends, with respect to ESW,
           (i) allocation of adequate resources to ESW to ensure comprehensiveness and depth of ADB's
           macroeconomic and sectoral analyses; (ii) more systematic ESW and comprehensive institutional
           assessments to support the identification, prioritization, and selection of projects; and
           (iii) mainstreaming of ESW at ADB as support to project quality and ADB's operations by listing
           them as part of country operational strategy study (COSS) and country operational program
           paper (COPP).

           Specific inadequacies identified in ADB practices at that time with regard to ESW include the
           following: (i) macroeconomic and social developments in the developing member countries
           (DMCs) are not adequately assessed for their strategic implications for potential ADB
           investments; (ii) evaluations of the country's economic and social progress are not conducted
           sufficiently in an analytical manner; (iii) detailed sector studies are often not available; and
           (iv) there is a weak linkage among ESW, the country programming process (then represented by
           the COSS, economic review and Bank operations paper [ERBOP], and COPP documents), and
           project design. Closer cooperation between EDRC and the operational departments and offices
           is also needed in the context of upgrading ADB's ESW.

Mar 1994   A few COPP documents begin listing ESW, including title, objectives, operational linkages, inputs
           necessary to implement ESW, and status of approval.

Oct 1994   The need to strengthen the prioritization and monitoring of ESW is identified as a follow-up action
           during informal discussions by the ADB Board of the 1995-1997 Three-Year Rolling Work
           Program and Budget Framework.

Nov 1994   The Programs Department (West) (PWD) outlines a proposal for strengthening ESW prioritization
           and monitoring processes: (i) the program managers, in consultation with projects departments
           and offices, will prepare a complete list of ESW items to be undertaken in each DMC for the
           1995-1997 period; the basis will be submissions made by the projects departments in a format
           provided for by the programs departments; (ii) an interdepartmental working group will be
           constituted to review, comment, and prioritize ESW items; (iii) implementation and its progress
           will be commented upon during country programming review committee meetings; and (iv) a
           summary of completed item of work will be compiled and serve as a reference to avoid
           duplication and as an input into project processing and operational work.

1994       Several departments comment on the PWD proposal. Despite an ensuing debate on the
           definition of ESW, no agreement is reached as to what constitutes ESW at ADB. There is no
           resolution on the proposal for an interdepartmental working group on ESW to be headed by
           either the PWD director or two vice-presidents.

May 1995   Individual efforts surface at EDRC attempting to bring a system to ESW at ADB. Nothing comes
           out of it.

1995       Following staff instructions for the country assistance plan (CAP) 1995-1997, country documents
           begin listing ESW as part of the preparation of the country programming documents.



                                (Reference in text: page 1, para. 2.)
                                                                                                    Appendix 1, page 2

Year                          Process Improvement Efforts for Economic and Sector Work at ADB

1995             An interdepartmental working group on the review of ADB's business processes redesigns
                 country programming documents. The previous COPP and country assistance work plan for the
                 first time are synthesized into the CAP with standardized content and format.

Dec 1995         The Guidelines for Preparation of Country Assistance Plans for 1997-1999 are released as staff
                 instructions dated 19 December 1995 after a review of the 1995 CAP process. The format for a
                 table listing planned ESW is included in the section on overall operational plan. Information on
                 sector category, activity/objective, implementation mode (technical assistance [TA] or staff
                 consultant), responsible division, and start/completion dates is to be included in the CAP.

May 1996         The country economic review (CER) replaces the ERBOP as the principal economic background
                 document on the DMC. The main difference is that the review of ADB operations in DMCs is now
                 undertaken in the CAPs and the Compendium of Country Program Notes, instead of covering it in
                 the CERs. Staff Instructions are released on 7 May 1996 to effect this change.

Nov 1996         The General Guidelines on Operational Procedures dealing with Country Planning and
                 Programming are revised and issued on 19 November 1996. ESW is to be presented as a table
                 in the CAP. The Regional Assistance Plans and Bank Assistance Plan require a brief description
                 of ESW to be undertaken and to highlight main country-specific initiatives.

1996             Individual ESW activities began to be listed in the CAP. Information on source of funding and
                 time schedules is introduced as a part of the country planning exercise.

1998             The new guidelines for Country Planning and Programming documents drop the table formats for
                 listing ESW. The ESW list is replaced by a qualitative description of issues that need to be
                 addressed in the context of country planning work in the 1999-2001 CAP. No schedules nor
                 specific ESW titles are identified; only highlights of country-specific initiatives are included in the
                 country planning documents.

May 1999         Vice-President (West) constitutes an Interdepartmental Working Group under the chairmanship
                 of the PWD deputy director to deliberate on the definition of ESW activities and to finalize the
                 1999 work program for Region West. The final report of the Working Group is submitted in July
                 1999.

Jun 2000         Programs departments prepare a review of 1999-2000 ESW that highlights operational issues
                 such as the need for an information system for ESW, need for better planning and prioritization of
                 ESW, and lack of internal and external interlinkages as the major issues that need to be
                 addressed to get more out of ongoing efforts.

Sep 2000         Draft report on ESW and advisory technical assistance is prepared by another Interdepartmental
                 Working Group under the Redesign of Business Processes. Scarcity of staff resources and
                 priority given to lending operations are identified as two important factors influencing the quality
                 and relevance of ESW at ADB.

Dec 2000         A staff instruction is issued to list ESW activities separately from technical assistance activities in
                 all country strategy and programming documents.

Feb 2001         A focus group examining ESW and regional technical cooperation at ADB is constituted as part of
                 the Review2001 exercise.

Note:   This is an illustrative list of major ADB-wide efforts at improvement. It does not include several very good efforts
        undertaken at the department level covering review and systematic improvements.
Source: Staff.
                                                                                                   Appendix 2, page 1

                                SELECTED ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK
1.   Title                                  Macroeconomic Analysis
     Country                                India
     Funding/Year Completed                 Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1995
     Direct Inputs ($)                      1,352
                   (no. of days)            60
     Deliverables                           Assistance in data and model
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR       Institutionalize flow of funds accounting framework and RMSM model for India
     Target Users or Audience               Internal-ADB country programming
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts         Outcome-Model and operational manual for model
2.   Title                                  Country Risk Assessment Link and RMSM-X Model
     Country                                India
     Funding/Year Completed                 Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1996
     Direct Inputs ($)                      38,864
                   (no. of days)            60
     Deliverables                           Macro model and manual
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR       Develop macroeconomic model to strengthen ADB's analytical capabilities
     Target Users or Audience               Internal-ADB country programming
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts         Impact-Limited and not sustainable because model was not institutionalized
3.   Title                                  Public Sector Restructuring
     Country                                India
     Funding/Year Completed                 Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1996
     Direct Inputs ($)                      74,824
                   (no. of days)            100
     Deliverables                           Report
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR       Diagnostic study of Gujarat's public sector undertakings; prepare scope and
                                            timetable for future reforms
     Target Users or Audience               Internal-ADB project quality
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts         Output-One paper
                                            Outcome-ADB operations at state level
                                            Impact-Limited
4.   Title                                  State Economic Profile
     Country                                India
     Funding/Year Completed                 Non-TA (Staff)/1997
     Direct Inputs ($)                      --
                   (no. of days)            --
     Deliverables                           Internal report
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR       Diagnostic study of various states to support selection of ADB's focus states
     Target Users or Audience               Internal-ADB project quality
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts         Output-Draft note
                                            Outcome-Identified ADB's focus state
                                            Impact-Indirect (resource mobilization for state)
5.   Title                                  Implementation of Public Sector Restructuring
     Country                                India
     Funding/Year Completed                 Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
     Direct Inputs ($)                      15,000
                   (no. of days)            35
     Deliverables                           Report
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR       Diagnostic study to assess poverty impacts of displaced workers on account of
                                            closure of public sector undertakings
     Target Users or Audience               Internal-ADB project quality
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts         Output-Report not traceable
                                            Outcome-Support to program loan preparation

-- = no data available, ADB = Asian Development Bank, ESW = economic and sector work, RMSM-X = Revised Minimum
Standard Model-eXtended, TA = technical assistance, TOR = terms of reference.



                                        (Reference in text: page 3, para. 11.)
                                                                                                      Appendix 2, page 2

6.   Title                                   State Finance Review
     Country                                 India
     Funding/Year Completed                  Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1999
     Direct Inputs ($)                       4,600
                   (no. of days)             31
     Deliverables                            Two papers
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR        Diagnostic study to review and assess public finances in India, particularly at
                                             state levels
     Target Users or Audience                Internal-ADB project quality
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts          Output-One draft paper
                                             Outcome-Negligible
                                             Impact-Negligible
7.   Title                                   India Environmental Profile
     Country                                 India
     Funding/Year Completed                  Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1999
     Direct Inputs ($)                       15,506
                   (no. of days)             60
     Deliverables                            Draft report
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR        Information benchmarking to prepare an environmental profile and a strategic
                                             framework for environmental management in India
     Target Users or Audience                Internal-ADB support to country strategy
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts          Output-Publication
                                             Outcome-Information dissemination
                                             Impact-Limited as yet
8.   Title                                   Program of Studies on Economic and Policy Reforms
     Country                                 India
     Funding/Year Completed                  TA 2367/1999
     Direct Inputs ($)                       396,214
                   (no. of days)             6,920
     Deliverables                            Report
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR        Constituency building to further policy reforms to embark on a high growth
                                             path while protecting disadvantaged groups
     Target Users or Audience                External-Government and others
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts          Output-Publication in process
                                             Outcome-Further policy debates in a limited way
                                             Impact-Limited in terms of policy reform process, but indirectly supported skills
                                             development for young economists in the implementing agency
9.   Title                                   Reducing Poverty: A Framework for ADB's COSS
     Country                                 India
     Funding/Year Completed                  Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/2000
     Direct Inputs ($)                       22,500
                   (no. of days)             120
     Deliverables                            Report
     Objectives as Defined in the TOR        Diagnostic study to develop a conceptual framework for poverty reduction in
                                             India at both the central and state levels
     Target Users or Audience                Internal-ADB support to country strategy
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts          Output-Draft paper and three consultation workshops
                                             Outcome-Information dissemination to stakeholders
                                             Impact-Uncertain as yet
10. Title                                    Study for Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board
    Country                                  India
    Funding/Year Completed                   Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1996
    Direct Inputs ($)                        55,000
                  (no. of days)              60
    Deliverables                             Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR         Diagnostic study to define the role and functions of Gujarat Infrastructure
                                             Development Board
     Target Users or Audience                Internal-ADB project quality
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts          Output-Final report not traceable as yet
                                             Outcome and Impact-Difficult to assess

COSS = country operational strategy study.
                                                                                                Appendix 2, page 3

11. Title                              Restructuring State-Owned Enterprises of Gujarat
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2552/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  588,753
                  (no. of days)        902
    Deliverables                       Assistance to technical secretariat
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to define the role of Gujarat State and prepare proposals for
                                       divestiture or restructuring of 21 public sector enterprises
    Target Users or Audience           External-Government and others
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Several reports
                                       Outcome-Support to ADB operations
                                       Impact-Limited local skill development
12. Title                              Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2668/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  288,799
                  (no. of days)        1,442
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Constituency building to strengthen expenditure and tax system reforms of the
                                       Government of Gujarat
    Target Users or Audience           External-Government officials
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Report
                                       Outcome-Support to government reforms
                                       Impact-Limited local skill development
13. Title                              Industrial Policies for Growth in Kerala
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/2001
    Direct Inputs ($)                  8,500
                  (no. of days)        60
    Deliverables                       Paper
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to define a vision and strategy to promote industrial
                                       development in Kerala
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Paper
                                       Outcome-Support to ADB operations
                                       Impact-Limited as yet
14. Title                              Madhya Pradesh Public Enterprise Reform
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  30,000
                  (no. of days)        60
    Deliverables                       Paper
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study of Madhya Pradesh public sector undertakings; suggest
                                       scope and timetable for future reforms; detailed studies for at least seven large
                                       public sector undertakings
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Reports
                                       Outcome-Support to ADB program loan
                                       Impact-Uncertain as yet
15. Title                              State Economic Profile of Madhya Pradesh (Background paper for Madhya
                                       Pradesh: Study on Agriculture and Rural Development)
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  7,600
                  (no. of days)        60
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to support state level operations and policy dialogue
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Report not traceable
                                       Outcome-Difficult to assess
                                       Impact-Indirect, identified scope for ADB operations in second state
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 4

16. Title                              Madhya Pradesh Public Resources Management
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  15,000 (lumpsum)
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Several studies
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to support state level operations and policy dialogue
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-One paper available
                                       Impact-Difficult to assess
17. Title                              Social Safety Net of Madhya Pradesh
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  11,600
                  (no. of days)        60
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study on national and international legal policy framework for
                                       addressing the needs of displaced workers and experiences with establishing a
                                       social safety network
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Report not traceable
                                       Impact-Difficult to assess
18. Title                              Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net in Madhya
                                       Pradesh (Refers only to ESW part of TA)
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3338/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  596,000
                  (no. of days)        1,231
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study on developing and implementing comprehensive and socially
                                       sustainable program of public enterprise reforms; capacity building for public
                                       undertaking reforms and corporate governance
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Being finalized
                                       Outcome and Impact-Difficult to assess, but negative feedback from
                                       stakeholders
19. Title                              Support for Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance and Institutional
                                       Strengthening
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2943/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  775,000
                  (no. of days)        1,645
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to enhance development management in state government
                                       by reforming public finance
    Target Users or Audience           External-Government and others
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Report
                                       Outcome-Support to tax rationalization
                                       Impact-Limited in terms of institution development and capacity building
20. Title                              Country Operational Strategy Study
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff/Staff Consultant)/1995
    Direct Inputs ($)                  9,978
                  (no. of days)        123
    Deliverables                       Input into the COSS
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   --
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome-Support to ADB operations
                                                                                                Appendix 2, page 5

21. Title                              Country Economic Review
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1996
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Brief review of the country's economic performance in the context of ADB
                                       operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome-Support to ADB operations
22. Title                              Country Economic Review
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Brief review of the country's economic performance in the context of ADB
                                       operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome-Support to ADB operations
23. Title                              Country Economic Review
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Brief review of the country's economic performance in the context of ADB
                                       operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome-Support to ADB operations
24. Title                              Country Economic Review
    Country                            India
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Brief review of the country's economic performance in the context of ADB
                                       operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome-Support to ADB operations
25. Title                              Institutional Capacity Building for Policy Formulation, Planning, Monitoring and
                                       Evaluation for the Agriculture Sector
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2733/1996
    Direct Inputs ($)                  883,990
                  (no. of days)        2,063
    Deliverables                       Report, training program
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Capacity building and institutional strengthening for project and policy
                                       planning, monitoring, and evaluation
    Target Users or Audience           External-Government and others
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Report and training
                                       Outcome-Limited skill development for policy analyses
                                       Impact-Overall limited but introduced participatory planning processes to
                                       stakeholders
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 6

26. Title                              Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Profile
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2916/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  557,504
                  (no. of days)        1,323
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to plan sector investments and identify ADB's operational
                                       agenda
    Target Users or Audience           Internal and external to support ADB operations
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Draft sector profile
                                       Impact-Limited
27. Title                              Education Sector Study
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3072/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  141,000
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to plan sector policies and identify future education program
                                       of ADB
    Target Users or Audience           Internal and external to support ADB operations
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Joint publication on education sector study
                                       Outcome-Evolved a broad common sector strategy
                                       Impact-Limited as yet
28. Title                              Urban Poverty Study
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  31,911
                  (no. of days)        120
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to assess urban poverty, develop a clear strategy for urban
                                       poverty reduction, and identify the future role of ADB
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Draft paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-Negligible
29. Title                              Urban Sector Profile
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  12,100
                  (no. of days)        25
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to assess the urban sector in the Philippines and develop
                                       potential programs for ADB
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Sector profile publication
                                       Outcome and Impact-Limited as yet
30. Title                              National Urban Policy Framework
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3196/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  137,345
                  (no. of days)        405
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to prepare sector review and formulate framework to address
                                       key urban development and housing issues; constituency building to address
                                       key issue of urban poverty
    Target Users or Audience           External-Government and others
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Government planning document
                                       Outcome and Impact-Limited as yet
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 7

31. Title                              Strengthening of Public Finance and Planning of LGUs
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3145/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  810,000
                  (no. of days)        1,629
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to optimize national government agency expenditures for
                                       devolved local government activities; constituency building to promote the
                                       legal establishment of an LGU Development Fund
     Target Users or Audience          External-Government and others
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts    Output-Report
                                       Outcome and Impact-Negligible
32. Title                              Poverty Assessment in Mindanao
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  24,000
                  (no. of days)        51
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to examine the determinants of poverty in the Philippines with
                                       particular emphasis on Mindanao
     Target Users or Audience          Internal-ADB
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts    Output-Publication
                                       Impact-Limited as yet
33. Title                              Poverty Assessment for the Philippines
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3411/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  43,000
                  (no. of days)        25 (Refers only to reports. No data available for consultation workshops.)
    Deliverables                       Consultation workshops, report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Constituency building to support government's national antipoverty action
                                       agenda and diagnostic study to support preparation of ADB country strategy
                                       and plans
     Target Users or Audience          External-Government and others (on the consultation workshops)
                                       Internal for the poverty assessment
     Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts    Output-Draft report
                                       Outcome-Government planning document
                                       Impact-Negligible
34. Title                              Decentralization in the Philippines and its Impact on ADB Operations
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Paper
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   No TOR prepared
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Draft paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-ADB staff learning
35. Title                              Shelter for Poor: Housing Sector Profile
    Country                            Philippines
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  16,100
                  (no. of days)        42
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to define ADB's role in the housing sector
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Draft paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-Limited as yet

LGU = local government unit.
                                                                                                Appendix 2, page 8

36. Title                              Economic concerns and capacity building in the Treasury Department in the
                                       areas of macroeconomic analysis and public enterprise reforms
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2985 and TA 3311/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Report, manuals, training, and in-house advice
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   ESW cannot be segregated from the capacity-building activities; initial ESW
                                       identified a restructuring of policy planning functions at Treasury and supported
                                       by long-term capacity building; work is in progress to establish a
                                       macroeconomic model
    Target Users or Audience           External-Government
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome-Restructured Treasury and built government's analytical and planning
                                       skills
                                       Impact-Substantial and sustainable
37. Title                              ESW supporting the Financial Sector Program Loan
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   ESW cannot be easily segregated from project preparation activities
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB project quality
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Outcome and Impact-Support to program loan preparation
38. Title                              Country Economic Review
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to review the country's economic operations in the context of
                                       ADB operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Country economic review
                                       Outcome and Impact-Support to ADB operations
39. Title                              ESW in connection with the proposed small business development project
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3262/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  41,849
                  (no. of days)        55
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to assess environment for small business in Samoa and
                                       assist in identifying ADB support
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Report
                                       Outcome-Support to ADB operations
                                       Impact-Limited
40. Title                              Samoa 2000: Building on Recent Reforms
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 3202/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  98,542
                  (no. of days)        146
    Deliverables                       Published report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to take stock and identify development issues and options in
                                       the context of ADB operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal and external
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Published report
                                       Outcome and Impact-Limited
                                                                                               Appendix 2, page 9

41. Title                              Initial Poverty Assessment
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 5907/Ongoing
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to assess vulnerability and identify development issues and
                                       options in the context of ADB's operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Still ongoing
42. Title                              Samoa: Economic and ADB Operations
    Country                            Samoa
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/2000
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Brief review of country's economic performance in the context of ADB
                                       operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Internal board paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-Support to ADB operations
43. Title                              Agriculture Sector Study
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 5543 and TA 5657/1996
    Direct Inputs ($)                  26,268
                  (no. of days)        51
    Deliverables                       Report (Input to Vanuatu Pacific Island Economic Report)
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study on agriculture sector priorities for ADB support
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Draft report
                                       Outcome and Impact-Negligible
44. Title                              Public Sector Enterprises Study
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 5543 and TA 5657/1997
    Direct Inputs ($)                  61,289
                  (no. of days)        58
    Deliverables                       Report (Input to Vanuatu Pacific Island Economic Report)
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study on public enterprise operations and options for privatization
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Draft report
                                       Outcome and Impact-Negligible
45. Title                              Vanuatu: Economic Performance, Policies and Reform Issues
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 5543 and TA 5657/1997
    Direct Inputs ($)                  146,137
                  (no. of days)        239
    Deliverables                       Published report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to take stock and identify development issues and options in
                                       the context of ADB operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal and external
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Published report
                                       Outcome-Support to ADB operations and aid coordination
                                       Impact-Substantial as a resource material
46. Title                              Microfinance & Community-Based Rural Enterprise Development
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff Consultant)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       No information as yet
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   No information as yet
    Target Users or Audience           No information as yet
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     No information as yet
                                                                                             Appendix 2, page 10


47. Title                              Vanuatu: Economic and ADB Operations
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1998
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to review the country's economic operations in the context of
                                       ADB operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Internal board paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-Support to ADB operations
48. Title                              Vanuatu: Economic and ADB Operations
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             Non-TA (Staff)/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Board document
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to review the country's economic operations in the context of
                                       ADB operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Board paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-Support to ADB operations
49. Title                              Budget and Expenditure Review
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 2656/1999
    Direct Inputs ($)                  24,500
                  (no. of days)        43
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to review budget
    Target Users or Audience           Internal and external
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Output-Paper
                                       Outcome and Impact-Limited
50. Title                              Initial Poverty Assessment
    Country                            Vanuatu
    Funding/Year Completed             TA 5907/Ongoing
    Direct Inputs ($)                  --
                  (no. of days)        --
    Deliverables                       Report
    Objectives as Defined in the TOR   Diagnostic study to assess poverty and identify development issues and
                                       options for ADB operations
    Target Users or Audience           Internal-ADB
    Outputs, Outcomes, and Impacts     Joint initiative with the United Nations Development Programme; still ongoing
