Validation Report




Reference Number: PCV: IND 2008-57
Project Number: 23251
Loan Number: 1274
November 2008




India: National Highways Project




 Operations Evaluation Department
                                  ABBREVIATIONS

           ADB          ­     Asian Development Bank
           BME          ­     benefit, monitoring, and evaluation
           EA           ­     executing agency
           EIRR         ­     economic internal rate of return
           MOST         ­     Ministry of Surface Transport
           NHAI         ­     National Highways Authority of India
           PCR          ­     project completion report
           PIU          ­     project implementation unit
           SDR          ­     special drawing rights
           TA           ­     technical assistance
           TCR          ­     technical assistance completion report




                                           NOTE
                         In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



                                       Key Words

india, adb, asian development bank, highways, roads, lessons, operations evaluation
department, performance evaluation




Director          H. Hettige, Operations Evaluation Division 2, Operations Evaluation
                  Department (OED)

Team leader       N. Singru, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
Team members      R. Lumain, Senior Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 2,
                  OED
                  C. Roldan, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation
                  Division 2, OED
                                PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT VALIDATION

A. Basic Project Data                                   PCR Validation Date:                         November 2008
Project and Loan/Grant       23251                                                                 Approved    Actual
Number:                      1274-IND
Project Name:                National Highways Project Total Project Costs ($ million):              308.80        302.79
Country:                     India                     Loan/Grant ($ million)                        245.00        231.87
                                                       (SDR equivalent):
Sector(s):                   Transport/Roads and       Total Cofinancing ($ million):                  0.00         0.00
                             Highways
ADB Financing                ADF:                      Borrower ($ million):                          63.80         70.92
($ million):                 OCR: $245.0               Beneficiaries ($ million):
Cofinanciers:                                          Others ($ million):
Approval Date:               29 Nov 1993               Effectiveness Date:                         20 Jun 95     4 May 95
Signing Date:                22 Mar 1995               Closing Date:                               31 Dec 99     10 Feb 03
Project Officers:            Name:                     Designation:                                  From           To
                             R. Hennes                 Project Engineer, IWTC                        1998          1999
                             P. Pattison               Senior Project Implementation                 2000          2001
                                                        Officer, INRM
                             T. Kandiah                Principal Investment Programs                  2002          2002
                                                        Officer, INRM
                             A. Akanda                 Principal Transport Specialist,                2002          2003
                                                        INRM
Evaluator:                   T. F. Jones, Consultant   Director:                                  H. Hettige, OED2
Quality Control              N. Singru, Evaluation
Reviewer:                     Specialist, OED2

B. Project Description (summarized from the report and recommendation of the President)

   (i)        Rationale and expected impacts. The National Highways Project (the Project) aimed to (a) assist the
              Government in carrying out needed road improvements in major transport corridors; (b) improve the
              institutional capability through transfer of implementation responsibility for national roads to the Ministry
              of Surface Transport1 (MOST) and, by the fourth quarter of 1994, to the National Highways Authority of
              India (NHAI); and (c) increase industrial employment, thereby indirectly reduce poverty. The Project
              also strove to maintain the momentum already achieved on policy issues and quality of construction.

             Following a review of needed road development in India, highway sections proposed for improvement
             were selected for study by the Government and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). These sections,
             which had arisen from the national highway improvement plan that emerged from a fact-finding
             mission in December 1991, comprised a total of 1,520 kilometers (km) distributed over 21 high-
             priority subprojects. Their selection was based on criteria partly simulating economic return
             calculations, such as industrialization, traffic volume, and road condition. In conjunction with the
             Government and on the basis of field observations and a screening matrix including this criteria, the
             mission then ranked the proposed subprojects and reduced the list of highway sections for study to
             820 km distributed over 14 subprojects. The results of the subsequent feasibility studies, undertaken
             by domestic consulting firms guided by ADB-financed consultants under technical assistance (TA)
             project 1678-IND from December 1992 to May 1993, showed that all sections studied were feasible,
                                                                                             2
             with the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) ranging between 23% and 43%.

             The selection of project highway sections was based on merit (i.e., EIRR, existing road capacity
             utilization, and degree of industrialization) as well as on degree of project preparation and the

    1
         Since renamed the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport, and Highways.
    2
         ADB. 1992. Technical Assistance to India for Third Road. Manila (TA 1678-IND, for $250,000, approved on
         26 March).
   2


              absence of significant problems related to environmental clearance and land availability for right-of-
              way. This process resulted in the selection of about 330 km of high-priority sections, mainly for
              widening to four lanes and strengthening of the existing carriageway. The sections for widening in
              Haryana, Rajasthan, Bihar, and West Bengal complement the four-laning projects of ADB and the
              World Bank financed under the Second Road Project (1990) and the National Highway Project
              (1985), while the Andhra Pradesh sections complement with the Overseas Economic Cooperation
              Fund's (OECF) proposed National Highway 2 Improvement Project. The improvements envisaged
              were to increase the transport capacity of the existing facilities, which support the industry sector, and
              thereby increase employment and indirectly reduce poverty. All project highway section
              improvements were included in the Eighth Plan. In conjunction with the Project and at the
              Government's request, three advisory TA projects were also provided: (a) road safety (TA 2001-
                    3                                                                     4
              IND), (b) environmental management of road projects (TA 2002-IND), and (c) technical standards
                                                               5
              for highway concrete structures (TA 2003-IND). The Project was thus fully within ADB's operational
              strategy for India (Section C [iv]).

  (ii)        Objectives or expected outcomes. The Project's main objectives were to (a) assist the
              Government's efforts to improve the national highway system, particularly supporting the industry
              sector in the five project states;6 (b) lower transport costs in the project areas and facilitate more
              efficient movement of goods and passengers; (c) increase employment in the industry sector in the
              five states, made possible by the highway improvements including capacity augmentation;
              (d) upgrade the Government's institutional and implementation arrangements and construction
              supervision by a combination of international and domestic consultants working with MOST as the
              client; and (e) improve road transport operations.

  (iii)       Components. The Project covered the improvement of five national highway sections, totaling about
              330 km in five states (footnote 6). The improvements included widening to four lanes (234 km) and
              strengthening of the existing pavement with an asphaltic concrete pavement. The consulting services
              for construction supervision of civil works under the Project were to be carried out by an appropriate
              combination of international and domestic consultants.

  (iv)        Outputs. The civil works for the road improvements were implemented as envisaged at appraisal,
              except for delays and a major change in the project scope, which involved upgrading about 65 km of
              roads from a two- to a four-lane carriageway, including the 17 km Eluru Bypass, as warranted by
              traffic along the affected sections of National Highway (NH) 5.

C. Evaluation of Design and Implementation (project completion review [PCR] assessment and validation)

  (i)         Relevance of design and formulation. At appraisal and completion, the Project is assessed as
              highly relevant and is consistent with the Government's overall development objectives and ADB's
              strategy for the road subsector.




   3
         ADB. 1993. Technical Assistance to India for Road Safety. Manila (TA 2001-IND, for $210,000, approved on
         29 November).
   4
         ADB. 1993. Technical Assistance to India for Environmental Management of Road Projects. Manila (TA 2002-IND,
         for $240,000, approved on 29 November).
   5
         ADB. 1993. Technical Assistance to India for Technical Standards of Highway Concrete Structures. Manila (TA
         2003-IND, for $350,000, approved on 29 November).
   6
         The five states include Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Haryana, and Rajasthan. Bihar state was divided in
         2002, and the road section under the Project now lies in Jharkhand. However, to avoid confusion, the road section
         is still referred to in the project completion review as being in Bihar to enable comparison with the appraisal report.
                                                                                                                          3


(ii)     Outputs and costs as envisioned during appraisal as compared to actual costs and
         achievement of outputs; reasons for any deviation.

                                   Table 1: Project Cost at Appraisal and Actual
                                      Appraisal Estimate ($ million)             Actual ($ million)
Project Component                     Foreign     Local      Total         Foreign    Local         Total        Ratioa
A. Base Cost
   1. Right-of-Way                      0.00          0.30       0.30          0.00       0.50        0.50        1.67
                  b
   2. Civil Works                      83.70        125.60     209.30        104.76     157.14      261.90        1.25
      a. Contract 1 NH8
         Gurgaon­Kotputi               32.36         48.54       80.90        32.03       48.05      80.08        0.99
      b. Contract II NH2
         Raniganj­Panagarth            16.00         24.01       40.01        19.67       29.51      49.18        1.23
      c. Contract III NH2
         Banwa Adda­Bararkar           16.91         25.36       42.27        18.22       27.34      45.56        1.08
      d. Contract IV NH9
         Nandigama­Vijayawada            6.40         9.61       16.01          7.08      10.61      17.69        1.10
      e. Contract V NH5
         Vijayawada­Eluru              12.03         18.08      30.11         27.76      41.63       69.39        2.30
   3. Construction Supervision          7.70          6.30      14.00          6.09       4.98       11.07        0.79
   4. Incremental Administration        0.00          1.00       1.00          0.00       1.19        1.19        1.19
         Subtotal (A)                  91.40        133.20     224.60        110.85     163.81      274.66        1.22
B. Contingencies
  1. Physical                           4.90          7.00     11.90            0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00
  2. Price                              9.50         22.80     32.30            0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00
        Subtotal (B)                   14.40         29.80     44.20            0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00
C. Interest and Other Charges
    during Construction                    40.00          0.00    40.00          28.13        0.00      28.13      0.70
            Total (A+B+C)                145.80        163.00 308.80           138.98       163.81    302.79       0.98
NH = national highway
a
  Calculated as the ratio of actual project cost to appraisal cost estimate.
b
  The final bill for some of the civil works contracts are being reviewed, and arbitration proceedings are under way.
Sources: Asian Development Bank reports and the National Highways Authority of India.

         The loan was designed to cover about 60.9% of the local cost. Between 1995 (the year of the Loan
         Agreement) and 2003 (the year the loan was closed), the Indian rupee was devaluated by about 50%,
         in effect making the contract components denominated in rupees about 50% cheaper in US dollar
         terms. This resulted in loan savings and an overall project cost of 98% of the appraisal estimate. The
         rapid growth of traffic on NH5, specifically the section covered by Contract V, warranted widening
         from two to four lanes and the inclusion of the Eluru Bypass, which increased the cost by 2.3 times.
         Otherwise, component costs were not significantly out of line with appraisal estimates considering the
         delays in implementation and increasing costs due to inflation.
(iii)    Project cost, disbursements, borrower contribution, and conformance to schedule (as relevant
         to project performance). Project costs were not out of line as mentioned above, but disbursements
         were slower than envisioned at appraisal due to implementation delays. But once the Project actually
         commenced, disbursements followed a relatively typical pattern. There were several reasons for
         delays, including (a) delays in the start of prequalification due to late preparation of bidding
         documents, (b) delays in handing over the Project to NHAI from MOST, (c) delays in the award of civil
         works contracts due to nine cases of litigation, (d) slow start of civil works, (e) delays in land
         acquisition, (f) design deficiencies, (g) late approval of a change of scope for Contract V, (h) delays in
         approval of contract variations, and (i) delays in clearing encumbrances from the right-of-way. Delays
         in project implementation translated into lost benefits and often higher costs. The Project was
         completed in June 2002 compared with an appraisal estimate of October 1998, a 44-month delay.
         The first loan extension approved in May 1999 was to allow the civil works contracts to be completed
         by the end of 2001. Contracts I­IV were completed from January to October 2001. The delay in
         completion of Contract IV was partly due to a major change in project scope. A second loan extension
         was approved in December 2001 to complete Contract V, which was mostly completed in June 2002.
 4



(iv)   Implementation arrangements, conditions and covenants, and related TA. Implementation
       arrangements were as envisaged at appraisal. MOST was the Executing Agency (EA) for the Project.
       Once NHAI became operational in 1995, administration of the Project was assumed by the NHAI, but
       MOST retained responsibility for overall project coordination. NHAI was given the appropriate
       authority to approve relatively minor change orders only in 2000 after ADB intervention. This authority
       was passed on to the project directors at the project implementation units (PIUs), as previously they
       had to be referred to MOST for final approval. NHAI set up an appropriate set of PIUs but had some
       difficulty staffing them in the early stages of implementation.

       The Government and the EA generally complied with the standard loan covenants with some
       exceptions. In all, 13 major loan covenants were complied with, two were partly complied with, and
       three were not complied with. There was partial compliance with the covenants related to (a) the use
       of weigh-in-motion equipment procured under ADB- and World Bank-financed road projects to
       complement axle load enforcement, and (b) suitable efforts to encourage the use of multi-axle
       vehicles. The electronic weighbridges were used for statistical purposes but not for enforcement. This
       changed in 2005 when the Supreme Court of India banned overloaded trucks. According to the PCR,
       enforcement of axle load control still needs to be strengthened. The Ministry of Finance has taken
       steps to encourage the use of multi-axle vehicles, mainly through lowering excise duty on them.

       The stipulated expansion of the ADB-financed Pavement Management System for implementation
       nationwide did not take place. However, a similar covenant under a later ADB-financed road project
       was complied with, so this covenant could be considered as complied with even though it required
       considerable time for implementation. Covenants related to the submission of PCRs and benefit,
       monitoring, and evaluation (BME) reports were not complied with, although several timely requests
       were made by ADB. NHAI did not submit the project completion and BME reports on the basis that
       the supervising consultants were demobilized and the loan was prepaid in February 2003. It
       submitted contract completion reports for only two of the five contracts.

       The Project had three associated TA projects (Section B[i]). Although no TA completion reports were
       prepared at the time, the projects were completed and considered successful. The TA completion
       reports were prepared as part of the PCR.

(v)    Performance of the Borrower and EA. The Government was the Borrower, and MOST was the EA.
       As envisaged, NHAI was established and acted as the Implementing Agency. NHAI initially had
       difficulties staffing its PIUs and gaining authority to approve needed variations and contract revisions.
       This authority was gradually attained, and NHAI's implementation performance subsequently
       improved. Government approval of the major change of scope involving Contract V required 16
       months, causing an extension of the loan closing date. Other avoidable delays are described in
       Section C (iii). Additionally, the Borrower failed to meet some important covenants as described in
       Section C (iv). Finally, at the time of PCR preparation in 2007, the final bill for some civil works
       contracts were still being reviewed, and arbitration proceedings were still ongoing. Although much
       improvement to NHAI's capabilities was noted, the various delays and lack of compliance with
       covenants led the PCR to rate the performance of the Borrower and the EA as partly satisfactory.
       This Evaluator agrees with the rating.

(vi)   Performance of ADB. The Project was administered and supervised from ADB headquarters before
       being transferred to the India Resident Mission in October 1999. Five different ADB project officers
       were involved in the administration of the Project. A total of 14 review missions, three disbursement
       missions, and a midterm review were undertaken during the almost 9 years that the Project was
       active. As a result, ADB was proactive in preparing necessary approvals and helping to solve
       administrative and technical issues. The subject PCR was drafted more than 4 years after project
       completion. Preparation of the PCR by ADB was delayed by nonsubmission of the PCR and BME
       reports by the EA. ADB eventually undertook preparation of the PCR based on available information.
       Overall, the performance of ADB was satisfactory.
                                                                                                            5


D. Evaluation of Performance (PCR assessment and validation)

  (i)     Relevance. The relevance of the Project is considered high, as the Project was and still is consistent
          with the Government's overall development objectives and ADB's country strategy for the road
          subsector. In 1998, the Government announced a major program to upgrade 13,000 km of national
          highways to a four-lane standard. This has since been expanded to other sections of the national
          highway network.

  (ii)    Effectiveness in achieving outcome. The PCR rated the Project as effective, and this appears to
          be true. It has helped to improve important links of the national highway system, enhanced the
          efficiency of moving goods and people, and lowered vehicle operating costs. Vehicle speeds
          increased, and travel times have been reduced. Where needed, the Project was adjusted to
          accommodate growing traffic demands through widening and bypass construction. Institutions have
          been developed, and improved capacity to undertake future projects has expanded. Other benefits
          expected to be achieved could not be fully verified as the EA did not undertake BME studies.

  (iii)   Efficiency in achieving outcome and outputs. The Project is rated as highly efficient with an
          overall EIRR of 25.3% compared with the 37.2% at appraisal. All highway sections were estimated to
          have EIRRs ranging from 19.4% to 34.0%. The differences between the reevaluation and appraisal
          figures are mainly due to (a) revisions in the economic costs derived from actual costs, (b) the longer
          construction periods caused by delays in implementation, and (c) a lower-than-expected traffic growth
          rate.

  (iv)    Preliminary assessment of sustainability. Sustainability of the Project is rated as likely. NHAI has
          been contracting out highway maintenance to the private sector. Other arrangements are being made
          for the highway stretches being widened or to be widened under the build­operate­transfer contracts
          that include routine and periodic maintenance. Although the use of overloaded trucks on national
          highways is forbidden, enforcement is lacking and needs to be monitored and strengthened or else
          the maintenance requirement may exceed the resources available.

  (v)     Impact (both intended and unintended). An initial environmental examination was prepared at the
          time of the feasibility studies and whenever realignment was proposed. The examination found that
          there would not be any adverse environmental effects since the improvements were almost entirely
          within the right-of-way. Also, it was reported that the contractors followed environmentally sound
          construction practices. The PCR mission noted that drainage had been improved and that there was
          no discernable noise, air pollution, or soil erosion problems.

          BME was not carried out as expected, but the PCR mission noted that incomes of those engaged in
          businesses near the highways had increased and that the quality of life had generally improved.
          Employment and improved accessibility for local residents was improved judging by the increased
          number of passenger buses in most of the project areas.

          The Project was approved before ADB's Involuntary Resettlement Policy (1995) was formulated. For
          scope changes where realignment and land acquisition were involved, ADB requested that NHAI
          prepare a short resettlement plan, which was acceptable.

E. Overall Assessment, Lessons, and Recommendations (validation of PCR assessment)

  (i)     Overall assessment. Overall, the Project is considered successful on the basis of the quantitative
          assessment of its relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. It achieved its main
          objectives of improving the national highway network and contributing to institutional development.

  (ii)    Lessons.
          (a)    The provisions in the bid documents must be made more rigorous to ensure that contractors
                 provide the committed technical and financial resources for project implementation to help
                 ensure that contracts are finished on time and with good quality.
    6


                (b)      Projects should generally be in an advanced stage of preparation before loan approval to
                         ensure early loan effectiveness and to avoid delays during implementation.
                (c)      When a new implementing agency such as NHAI is created, it takes time for the institution to
                         be fully staffed and for the necessary authority and other powers to be identified and
                         granted.

   (iii)        Recommendations.
                (a)   The issue of axle overloading should be followed up and rigorous enforcement encouraged
                      by ADB through ongoing and future projects.
                (b)   Given the experience gained on this Project, future project preparation should recognize the
                      need to have the Project in an advanced stage of preparation before loan approval. Also,
                      given expected delays on the part of contractors and government approval practices, more
                                                                            7
                      realistic implementation schedules could be prepared.

F. Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization (PCR assessment and validation)

Implementation witnessed appropriate supervision, review, and monitoring by the supervision consultants, NHAI,
and ADB. The corrective actions suggested to the contractors were helpful in resolving issues and improving their
performance. However, it would have been useful to put into place a project performance monitoring system,
which should have been developed during project processing to monitor the project impact at completion and
during project operations. The EA did not undertake BME studies. The project completion and BME reports were
not submitted on the basis that the supervision consultants had been demobilized and the loan had been prepaid
in February 2003 (Section C [iv]).

G. Other (e.g., safeguards, including governance and anticorruption; fiduciary aspects; government assessment
   of the Project, as applicable) (PCR assessment and validation)

Safeguards were complied with. Corruption does not appear to be a major issue. Fiduciary aspects appear to have
been well handled.

H. Ratings                                                 PCR           OED Review                 Reason for
                                                                                             Disagreement/Comments
Relevance:                                           Highly relevant    Highly relevant
Effectiveness in Achieving Outcome:                  Effective          Effective
Efficiency in Achieving Outcome and                  Highly efficient   Highly efficient
Outputs:
Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability:            Likely             Likely
Borrower and EA:                                     Partly             Partly
                                                     satisfactory       satisfactory
Performance of ADB:                                  Satisfactory       Satisfactory
Impact:                                              Positive           Positive
Overall Assessment:                                  Successful         Successful
Quality of PCR:                                                         Satisfactory




    7
           See the PCR for ADB. 2007. Project Completion Report. India: Surat­Manor Tollway Project. Manila (Loan 1747-
           IND) as an example of the positive effect of having adequate time for preconstruction activities
                                                                                                              7


I. Comments on PCR Quality

The PCR is well written, complete, and in line with the above criteria. A few specific comments on the PCR follow.

   (i)      The PCR mentions that litigation helped to delay implementation and that arbitration is ongoing, but it
            would have been useful to understand how this situation could be avoided or mitigated in the future.
   (ii)     Para. 44 of the PCR states, "no specific level of reduction of vehicle operating costs was set as a
            target at appraisal." Appendix 17 of the report and recommendation of the President does show a
            table of vehicle operating costs for "with" and "without" the Project.
   (iii)    The fourth outcome in the PCR's Appendix 1, "increase industrial employment", could better be
            characterized as a project impact.
   (iv)     The PCR's Appendix 2 shows figures under contingency that do not seem to tally with data given in
            the basic data.
   (v)      PCRs, as appropriate, need to be prepared soon after project completion, usually 12­24 months after
            project completion (PAI 6.07). In this case, the PCR was prepared more than 4 years after the loan
            closing date.

J. Recommendation for OED Follow-Up

No follow-up action is required.

K. Data Sources for Validation

   (i)      PCR, report and recommendation of the President, legal documents;
   (ii)     Management review meeting and staff review committee documents and summary record of discussion
            of ADB's Board of Directors;
   (iii)    Board reports and other progress reports;
   (iv)     project administration memorandum and list of archived documents;
   (v)      supervision reports, including the most recent midterm review or progress reports, and back-to-office
            report of the PCR mission; and
   (vi)     Operations Evaluation Department evaluations of previous projects, including the recent Sector
            Assistance Program Evaluation and PCR reviews.
   REGIONAL DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
                          VALIDATION REPORT


On 5 August 2008, Director, OED2, Operations Evaluation Department (OED), received the
following comments from the India Resident Mission, South Asia Department.

We have reviewed OED's earlier draft project completion report validation report circulated to us
on 3 July 2008 and its final draft sent to us for review on 31 July 2008. We appreciate that the
comments we made to OED on the earlier draft have been adequately incorporated in the final
draft. Therefore, we have no formal comment to make on the final draft.
