Validation Report
Reference Number: PCV: IND 2007-27
Project Number: 31328
Loan Number: 1974
February 2008




India: Modernizing Government and
Fiscal Reform in Kerala Program




Operations Evaluation Department
                                      ABBREVIATIONS

             ADB             ­     Asian Development Bank
             DMF             ­     design and monitoring framework
             LSG             ­     local self-government
             MGP             ­     modernizing government program
             PCR             ­     program completion report
             RRP             ­     report and recommendation of the President
             SLPE            ­     state-level public enterprise
             TA              ­     technical assistance


                                           Key Words

adb, asian development bank, expenditure, fiscal reforms, indian fiscal reform, kerala government,
local government, public enterprises, performance evaluation, program completion report, resource
management, revenue, validation




Officer-in-Charge     R. Keith Leonard, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director

Quality Control       P. Robertson, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
Reviewers             O. Nuestro, Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
                      B. Cafirma, Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
                     Operations Evaluation Department
                  Program Completion Report (PCR) Review
1. Project Data                                     PCR Review Date
                                                    Posted
  Project              31328                                                        Appraisal      Actual
  Number
  Project Name         Modernizing                   Total Project Cost               200.00       200.00
                       Government and Fiscal         ($ million)
                       Reform in Kerala
                       Program
  Country              India                         Loan/Credit ($ million)          200.00       200.00
  Sector               Law, Economic                 Cofinancing ($ million)
                       Management, and Public
                       Policy
  Financing            ADF                           Borrower Contribution
  ($ million)                                        ($ million)
                       OCR: 200.00                   Board Approval                    16 December 2002
  Cofinanciers                                       Closing Date                     20 September 2005
  Project              Name                          Designation                       From       From
  Officers                                                                          (month/yr) (month/yr)
  (Appraisal/          W. McCarten                                                   31 March 31 December
  Implementation                                                                       2005       2005
  PCR)                 Xiaoqin (Emma) Fan            Senior Public Sector
                                                     Management Specialist
  Evaluator       Peter Robertson                    Director                          R. Keith Leonard
  Quality Control Peter Robertson
  Reviewer
ADF = Asian Development Fund, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = program completion report.

2. Project Description (in the report and recommendation of the President [RRP])

        a.      Rationale. The government of Kerala had a long-established development
                program with impressive achievements in human development but, along with
                other Indian states, was faced with a worsening fiscal condition that threatened its
                economic growth potential, and with a decline in social services.

        b.      Impact. Poverty reduction and achievement of the development targets set in the
                tenth 5-year state plan within a sustainable framework.

       c.       Expected Outcomes. (i) Fiscal sustainability, including initial policy actions for
                reform in the power sector; (ii) improved quality, equity, and value-for-money of
                services provided by the government of Kerala and local self-governments (LSGs);
                (iii) improved targeting and quality of poverty reduction programs and social
                services; and (iv) strengthened functions and structures of state and local
                governments.

       d.       Outputs
                (i) Fiscal reforms to achieve fiscal sustainability
                    (a) Rules-based and forward-looking fiscal management framework
 2


                 (b) Revenue mobilization
                 (c) Expenditure restructuring
                 (d) Prior actions for power sector reform
                 (e) Reform of state-level public enterprises (SLPEs)
            (ii) Modernizing government program (MGP)
                 (a) Improved public service delivery by the government of Kerala and LSGs
                 (b) Strengthened functions of state government and LSGs
                 (c) Improved targeting and quality of poverty reduction programs

3. Evaluation of Design and Implementation (envisioned versus actual, as assessed by the
   evaluator)

      a.     Relevance of design and formulation. The Program was relevant. It was also
             consistent with the fiscal reform and governance strategies of both the
             governments of Kerala and India, and with ADB's India country program and
             institutional policies and strategies, both at appraisal and at completion. Strong
             government ownership of MGP reforms was evident. However, the program
             design was overly ambitious in addressing key obstacles to development through
             fiscal and governance reforms (para. 71), particularly given the effect of external
             factors such as policy decisions of the Government of India on the pay of civil
             servants.

      b.     Key conditions (outputs and costs, by component, as envisioned during
             appraisal, as compared with actual costs and achievement of outputs; reasons for
             deviations). The adjustment costs of reform were the detailed project
             implementation costs given in Appendix 7 of the RRP. The PCR does not analyze
             the extent to which these costs were accurately determined nor say whether
             counterpart loan funds were used to cover the costs.

      c.     Program cost, disbursements, contribution of the Borrower, and
             conformance with schedule (as relevant to the success of the Program). The
             adjustment costs of reforms were estimated at $592 million over 4 years, with the
             Program conceived as a cluster of two subprograms totaling $300 million. The first
             $200 million allocated for subprogram 1 was disbursed in two equal tranches. The
             first tranche was released when the loan took effect, and the balance in March
             2005, 9 months after the planned release, because of delay in the formation of the
             procurement service provider.

             The second subprogram was later scrapped even before its start, as the
             Government of India deemed the government of Kerala to be "fiscally stressed"
             and unable to apply for further multilateral borrowing.

             The Government of the Netherlands agreed to provide a $50 million grant to
             support MGP reforms. Half was released at the same time as the first tranche of
             the loan, for subprogram 1; the amount intended for the canceled subprogram 2
             was not released.

      d.     Implementation arrangements, conditions and covenants, and related
             technical assistance. The Program had two Executing Agencies, the Office of the
             Chief Secretary and the Finance Department, with an MGP steering committee
             chaired by the chief secretary and made up of secretaries and principal secretaries
                                                                                               3


             of the departments participating in the Program. A cabinet subcommittee on MGP
             under the chief minister provided strategic direction on the MGP initiatives. The
             General Administration MGP Department was set up to coordinate and monitor the
             MGP component including the technical assistance (TA) funded by the
             Government of the Netherlands. After the Program and the TA the MGP
             Department staff returned to their original departments, putting in question the
             sustainability of a department set up as a secretariat for such reforms. ADB
             provided a preparatory TA to support the design of the loan, and two small-scale
             TA projects totaling $300,000 during implementation. The Government of the
             Netherlands similarly provided TA amounting to $6.5 million.

      e.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency. The performance of the
             Borrower was less than satisfactory. Ownership of the MGP initiatives was strong
             only while the loan and TA funding lasted; after that, the MGP institutional
             arrangements collapsed (PCR, para. 48). The Borrower's commitment to fiscal
             reforms was halfhearted, and the proposed communication strategy referred to as
             a key aspect of the Program in the RRP and the Management Review Meetings
             could not avert, or respond adequately to, the negative media coverage of the
             reforms (PCR, paras. 49­50).

             The Office of the Chief Secretary and the Finance Department were adequate
             Executing Agencies, according to the PCR. But the setting up of a new
             government department to coordinate MGP reforms was a questionable decision,
             given the department's demise along with the Program.

      f.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank. ADB performed satisfactorily. Its
             monitoring missions were frequent during implementation, and the India Resident
             Mission was given responsibility for responding to issues raised in the media.

4. Evaluation of Performance (assessment by the evaluator)

      a.     Relevance. Relevant (section 3a).

      b.     Effectiveness in achieving outcome. Less effective. The conditions and
             covenants were met, but not the outcome and some outputs. The risks identified in
             the design and monitoring framework (DMF) ended up being major constraints: the
             possible lack of political ownership and apparent lack of political will to make
             difficult decisions such as disallowing pay increases with their obvious negative
             fiscal implications; deep structural impediments such as devolution without fiscal
             decentralization; extremely limited bureaucratic commitment to and ownership of
             reforms, as evidenced by the reaction to moves to reform the secretariat and to
             create a special-purpose department, which may have marginalized the MGP
             process; and a service culture unfamiliar with change.
      c.      Efficiency in achieving outcome and outputs. Efficient. According to the PCR,
              there were no cost overruns or major delays in implementing policy initiatives
              (PCR, para. 60).

      d.     Preliminary assessment of sustainability. Unlikely. A key constraint on
             sustainability identified in the PCR is the Kerala government's continued weakness
             in current expenditure control and revenue growth. The second subprogram did
             not get going because, in the Government of India's estimation, the fiscal condition
 4


              of the government of Kerala's was too straitened to support further loans from
              ADB.

       e.     Impact (both intended and unintended). Overall impact was modest at best. The
              PCR states, however, that some positive social impact may have been generated
              (PCR, para. 63).

5. Overall Assessment, Lessons, and Recommendations (assessment by the evaluator)

       a.     Overall Assessment. From the ratings presented in section 4, the Program was
              partly successful.

       b.     Lessons

              (i)     Such reform programs need an effective communication strategy to outline
                      the benefits of reform and mitigation measures for those affected.
              (ii)    It may be necessary to separate fiscal and governance reforms in design;
                      however, continued separation during implementation is problematic, as
                      the Program showed.
              (iii)   Maintaining political commitment to fiscal reform requires significant
                      investment in policy dialogue and flexibility to adapt to external factors.

      c.      Recommendations. In policy-based lending, ADB needs to invest considerable
              resources in maintaining policy dialogue with political leaders as well as senior
              bureaucrats, and to support targeted development of capabilities.

6. M&E Design, Implementation, and Use (assessment by the evaluator)

       The monitoring and evaluation system--its design, implementation, and use--was poor.
       The DMF was not consistent with the description of the Program in the text of the RRP.
       For example, against the DMF statement of "purpose" (equivalent to "outcome"), "support
       implementation of the MGP," para. 30 of the RRP named four objectives: (i) to achieve
       fiscal sustainability, including the initial policy actions for power sector reform; (ii) to
       improve the quality, equity, and value-for-money of services provided by the Kerala
       government and LSGs; (iii) to improve the targeting and quality of the poverty reduction
       programs and social services; and (iv) to strengthen the functions and structures of state
       and local governments in Kerala to increase accountability, responsiveness,
       transparency, and efficiency. These objectives became thematic areas with "outputs"
       under each. The DMF, on the other hand, had six main output areas--power, fiscal, core
       functions, LSGs, poverty reduction, and SLPEs. Each of these had from one to four output
       statements. This apparent design flaw carried over into the outcome or output level,
       depending on the desired degree of detail. It seems that (i) the DMF was constructed after
       the policy matrix and text as a mandatory requirement of the RRP and not as a program
       design tool; and (ii) those who designed the Program were not very familiar with DMF
       construction.

7. Other (safeguards, fiduciary, unintended impact--positive and negative)

       There were no safeguard violations or major unintended consequences.
                                                                                                                 5



8. Ratings                           PCR                OED Review         Reason for
                                                                           Disagreement/Comments
Relevance                            Relevant           Relevant
Effectiveness in Achieving           Less effective     Less effective
Outcome
Efficiency in Achieving              Efficient          Efficient
Outcome and Outputs
Preliminary Assessment of            Less likely to Less likely to
Sustainability                       be sustainable be sustainable
Borrower and EA                      Satisfactory   Less than      Commitment not sustained;
                                                    satisfactory   institutional arrangements and
                                                                   communication strategy not
                                                                   effective
Performance of ADB                   Satisfactory   Satisfactory
Impact                               Not rated      Modest
Overall Assessment                   Partly         Partly
                                     successful     successful
Quality of PCR                                      Satisfactory

9. Comments on PCR Quality

These comments are based on the following:

        (i)     Quality and completeness of evidence and analysis to substantiate the ratings
                given.
        (ii)    Consistency with PCR guidelines (PAI 6.07).
        (iii)   PCR candor and internal consistency; consistency of narrative and ratings with
                monitoring indicators and other data.
        (iv)    Candid, accurate consideration of external factors (positive and negative) and
                attribution of results.
        (v)     Extent to which lessons and recommendations are based on evidence and
                analysis

The PCR is satisfactory for the following reasons:

        (i)     Except for its failure to include an analysis of adjustment costs, the PCR contained
                sufficient evidence to substantiate its ratings.
        (ii)    The overall evaluation in the PCR assigns a 10% weighting to an added criterion--
                "other." This criterion is used in assessing the effort and capacity of the
                government of Kerala in implementing the program conditions, carrying out a large
                number of service delivery projects, undertaking numerous initiatives in
                17 government departments, and introducing innovative consulting approaches. All
                these should already have been assessed under effectiveness.
        (iii)   The PCR is internally consistent, with additional information in appendixes
                consistent with the narrative.
        (iv)    The PCR lessons and recommendations are consistent with the narrative.

 ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMF = design and monitoring framework, LSG = local self-government, MGP =
 modernizing government program, OED = Operations Evaluation Department, PCR = program completion report,
 RRP = report and recommendation of the President, SLPE = state-level public enterprise, TA = technical assistance.
   REGIONAL DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT
                          VALIDATION REPORT


On 2 October 2007, Director, OED1, Operations Evaluation Department (OED), received the
following comments from the South Asia Department (SARD).

The draft Program Completion Report Validation Report for Loan 1974-IND: Modernizing
Government and Fiscal Reform in Kerala Program, has been well prepared. Therefore, we do
not have any comments to make on the final draft.
