Validation Report




Reference Number: FRV: IND 2013­01
February 2013




India: Country Partnership Strategy 2009­2012
Final Review Validation




Independent Evaluation Department
            ABBREVIATIONS

ADB     ­    Asian Development Bank
ADF     ­    Asian Development Fund
ANR     ­    agriculture and natural resources
CAPE    ­    country assistance program evaluation
CDM     ­    Clean Development Mechanism
CPS     ­    country partnership strategy
CPSFR   ­    country partnership strategy final review
DEA     ­    Department of Economic Affairs
DFID    ­    Department for International Development of the
             United Kingdom
EU      ­    European Union
FY      ­    fiscal year
GDP     ­    gross domestic product
ICT     ­   information and communication technology
IED     ­    Independent Evaluation Department
IIFCL   ­    India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited
IIPFF   ­    India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility
JICA    ­    Japan International Cooperation Agency
km      ­    kilometer
KRDP    ­    Khadi Reform and Development Programme
MDG     ­    Millennium Development Goal
MFF     ­    multitranche financing facility
O&M     ­    operation and maintenance
PCR     ­    project completion report
PFR     ­    periodic financing request
PPP     ­    public­private partnership
PSOD    ­   Private Sector Operations Department
RTI     ­   Right to Information
SARD    ­   South Asia Department
SMEs    ­   small and medium-sized enterprises
TA      ­   technical assistance
TPRM    ­   tripartite portfolio review meeting
ULB     ­   urban local body
UN      ­   United Nations
USAID   ­   United States Agency for International Development
                                              NOTES

              (i)     The fiscal year (FY) of the Government of India begins on 1 April and
                      ends on 31 March.

              (ii)    In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

              (iii)   For an explanation of rating descriptions used in ADB evaluation reports,
                      see: ADB. 2010. Revised Guidelines for the Preparation of Country
                      Assistance Program Evaluation. Manila.




                                            Key Words

 asian development bank, country partnership strategy final review, development impact,
 effectiveness, efficiency, independent evaluation department, india, relevance, strategic
 positioning, sustainability, validation



Director General       V. Thomas, Independent Evaluation Department (IED)
Director               H. Hettige, Independent Evaluation Division 2 (IED2), IED
Team leader            C. Kim, Principal Evaluation Specialist, IED2, IED
Team members           F. De Guzman, Evaluation Officer, IED2, IED
                       R. Isidro-Cajilig, Evaluation Assistant, IED2, IED

                       Independent Evaluation Department, VR-10



In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the Independent Evaluation Department does
not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                               CONTENTS
                                                                                              Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                  i

I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                               1
       A.   Validation Purpose and Procedures                                                     1
       B.   India's Development Context and Government Plans                                      1
       C.   Country Partnership Strategy                                                          3

II.    VALIDATION OF THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FINAL REVIEW                                8
       A.    Strategic Positioning                                                                8
       B.    Program Relevance                                                                   11
       C.    Efficiency                                                                          15
       D.    Effectiveness                                                                       18
       E.    Sustainability                                                                      20
       F.    Development Impact                                                                  22
       G.    Overall Assessment                                                                  26
       H.    Performance of Borrower, Executive Agencies, and Implementing Agencies              28
       I.    Perception Survey on ADB's Performance                                              29
       J.    ADB's Performance                                                                   30
       K.    Conclusions                                                                         31
       L.    Lessons and Recommendations                                                         32

III.   ASSESSMENT OF THE QUALITY OF CPS FINAL REVIEW                                             34


APPENDIXES
1.     India Country Partnership Strategy Final Review                                           35
2.     India Country Economic Indicators, 2002­2011                                              36
3.     ADB Public Sector Loans to India, 1986­2012                                               37
4.     ADB Nonsovereign Operations Projects in India, 1987­2011                                  38
5.     ADB Technical Assistance to India, 1986­2012                                              39
6.     ADB Economic and Sector Works in India                                                    40


SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX
A.   ADB Clients and Stakeholders Perception Survey (available on request)




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
The peer reviewers were J. Weiss, Professor of Development Economics, University of
Bradford, United Kingdom, and H. Feig, Lead Evaluation Specialist, IED. B. Prakash as a
consultant assisted the team leader. To the knowledge of the management of IED, there were
no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        India is presently the largest ordinary capital resources borrower of the Asian
Development Bank (ADB). In 2009, ADB formulated a country partnership strategy (CPS) for
India, which was implemented during 2009­2012. In March 2012, ADB's South Asia
Department prepared a CPS final review report (CPSFR) as an input to ADB's new CPS for
India for 2013­2017 and requested the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) to validate
the self-evaluated CPSFR. Using its standard methodology, IED reviewed the CPSFR and
related documents and undertook an evaluation mission to India. This CPSFR validation builds
on IED's first country assistance program evaluation (CAPE) for India prepared in 2007, which
evaluated ADB operations in India during 1986­2006.

        Country context and government plans. When the CPS was launched in 2009, the
Indian economy was moving along its high growth trajectory of more than 8% per annum.
However, it was adversely affected by the world economic and financial crisis through trade and
financial linkages. The global crisis exposed India to growing stress through various adverse
developments in its external trade and investments. This, combined with domestic factors like
the growing fiscal deficit, resulted in macroeconomic imbalances. The passage of the CPS has
been through an unexpectedly stressful period, with economic growth slowing to 6.5% in 2011.

         Under the government's Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007­2011, with which the CPS was
aligned, a strategy of high and inclusive growth was envisaged. Key areas of support included
(i) the revival of agricultural growth, (ii) infrastructure development, (iii) provision of essential
services to enhance human capital skills, and (iv) promotion of environmental sustainability. The
government plans were contingent on the stable and sustained participation of the private sector
in India's development efforts. Additionally, the government stressed good governance at all
levels, with emphasis on meeting the needs of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.

Country Partnership Strategy and its Program

          ADB, through the CPS, responded to the government strategy and priorities. The CPS
had four strategic pillars or objectives: (i) supporting inclusive and environmentally sustainable
growth, (ii) catalyzing investments through using innovative business and financing solutions,
(iii) strengthening results orientation and emphasizing knowledge solutions, and (iv) supporting
regional cooperation. In pursuing the objectives, the CPS focused on a strong element of
inclusive growth in its program on the basis of the following: (i) inclusion of lagging states such
as weakly-performing northeastern states in ADB operations, (ii) choice of subsectors such as
rural roads, (iii) support to agriculture and water resource management, and (iv) promotion of
financial inclusion. The thrust of the CPS was consistent with government plans and ADB's
Strategy 2020.

       In pursuing the above CPS objectives, ADB allocated about $2 billion of ordinary capital
resources lending and $20 million nonlending program per annum for India. Over the CPS
period (2009­2012), ADB approved a sovereign lending program of $8.7 billion, comprising 80
investment projects. The lending program is assessed to be relevant as it adequately supported
the CPS objectives. As of 31 December 2011, the portfolio comprised 79 loans. Of these, 25
loans were related to the energy sector with a value of $3.6 billion, 18 loans were in transport
and information and communication technology ($4.1 billion), 21 loans in water and other
municipal infrastructure and services ($2.0 billion), and the rest in other sectors.
ii


Performance of ADB Operations

         The CPSFR self-assessed the overall performance of ADB operations during the CPS
period (2009­2012) as successful, based on satisfactory strategic positioning, a relevant
program, and an effective and efficient delivery of outputs and expected outcomes, and a likely
sustainable and satisfactory development impact. This validation endorses the ratings of the
CPSFR, and thus rates the overall performance successful. It considers that ADB has achieved
its limited CPS objectives through designing and executing a relevant program. The strategic
positioning was satisfactory as it supported the government's development strategy that
targeted both rapid growth and inclusive development, although actual results have not been
assessed. The validation's overall performance rating is in line with the 2007 CAPE's rating
(successful). Nonetheless, it should be noted that ADB's results orientation needs to improve in
order to generate greater total development impacts, based on enhanced targeting and
monitoring of results that are linked to CPS objectives.

        At the sector level, ADB operations in energy and transport sectors have performed well.
However, in agriculture and natural resources, water and other municipal infrastructure and
services, and finance sectors, operational efficiencies need to be improved, especially in terms
of project implementation delays. The previously-weak efficiency in implementing ADB projects,
however, has improved notably due to several efficiency measures introduced or strengthened
in the CPS period through the periodic tripartite portfolio review meetings and capacity
development programs. The contract awards and disbursement ratios exceeded the ADB-wide
average, with the average disbursement ratio of 27% against the ADB-wide average of 20%.
The ADB program was assessed effective in achieving the initial outcomes and outputs,
especially in energy and transport, and building local capacity relating to public-private
partnerships and projects management.

         ADB's multitranche financing facilities (MFFs) modality has emerged as a preferred
operational modality in India since 2005 as it allows executing agencies to plan and pace the
implementation of large scale projects according to their progress and convenience. India is
currently a major recipient of MFFs. The MFF modality also suits the area- or time-slice of
operations and allows operations to be mobile across states within the same sector. This
validation received positive feedback from various ADB counterparts in the government on the
usefulness of the modality, particularly in designing and implementing large-scale projects.
IED's recent evaluation study on MFFs pointed out that commitment fee savings are not
significant where MFF tranche sizes were about the same as regular loans. India was an
exception in terms of better due diligence being undertaken on the institutional capabilities.
However, there were issues of project level due diligence on technical and other aspects, and
classification of tranche scope changes as minor changes. In addition, the design of the MFF
modality is such that in general it may not formally benefit from the lessons of previous MFFs
and tranches. Therefore, to improve the development effectiveness of upcoming MFF programs
and tranches, it would be useful to capture and report on the lessons from MFFs during the
preparation of the CPS.

Key Findings and Challenges for the Program

        Support for policy reforms. The 2007 CAPE emphasized the significance of ADB's
policy inputs with its financing. The importance of the policy inputs has been augmented in light
of the lagging sector policy reforms (e.g., especially in fiscal management, power distribution,
and urban development) in the country during the CPS period. The CPS broadly followed
government plans and subscribed to the comprehensive programs launched at the national
                                                                                                 iii


level. ADB's role of making timely policy inputs and advice at the state level has become crucial
and more significant over the CPS period.

        Support for knowledge solutions and products. ADB technical assistance has been
successful in introducing knowledge solutions with innovative elements (e.g., use of public-
private partnerships, carbon credits, partial risk guarantees, and environmentally-friendly coastal
protection solutions) and international best practices and procedures through a wide-scale
capacity development program. Umbrella technical assistance projects for this purpose have
enhanced the project preparedness of the executing agencies by supporting feasibility studies,
preliminary design, bid documents, and bid evaluation, among others. This validation notes that
these efforts together have supported the government's Finance Plus approach well by adding
extra value to ADB's financing through providing knowledge solutions. It also notes the need for
ADB to strengthen its related technical expertise of its staff and dissemination of knowledge
products in India. Given India's scale and complexity, ADB's addressing of development issues
often involves the challenge of adapting available knowledge to local conditions and advising
decision makers to adopt necessary reforms and new practices, particularly at the state level.

        Strengthening of capacity development. Capacity development is required for several
agencies with which ADB is working. This is particularly so because ADB operations are
entering softer (hence, more difficult) sectors (e.g., water and other municipal infrastructure and
services, Khadi and small industries, and skills development). Further, ADB is operating in many
lagging states (e.g., selected northeastern states) as the CPS concentrated nearly 70% of its
operations in the lagging states where exposure to international standards and know-how is
particularly scant. Likewise, operations in urban local bodies and cities cannot be undertaken
satisfactorily without developing their own capacity to plan and implement development projects.
This validation found that the resident mission had done well in conducting useful capacity
development activities, as confirmed by various stakeholders. Such value adding activities need
to be expanded, given the large magnitude of the requirements in India.

        Role of non-sovereign operations. ADB's non-sovereign operations have promoted
the public-private partnerships modality in India through participating in core development
projects. ADB had actively invested in India focusing on energy, transport, and industry sectors,
but the investment has become stagnant in recent years. However, the demand for ADB's non-
sovereign operations in India remains strong as the private sector of the economy grows rapidly.
Therefore, ADB's private sector operations would need to find its role to support private sector
development more broadly than in the past within the context of ADB's lending program.
Nonetheless, strategic awareness about this changing pattern was not adequately emphasized
in the CPS. Given the significance of the role of the private sector in Indian economy, there is a
need to build a strategic framework for India operations that encompasses synergies between
public and private sectors.

       Strengthening of results framework and monitoring. Despite the emphases made in
the 2007 CAPE, the CPS and CPSFR did not pay attention to monitoring the CPS results
framework and tracking the development impact of the ADB program on the ground. Both the
CPS results framework and sector road maps lacked monitorable indicators and also linkages
between the planned program and the CPS objectives and between outputs and outcomes.
Hence, it is hard to understand whether the CPS objectives at the overall and sector levels have
been achieved based on the project outputs.
iv


Recommendations for the Next CPS

       The CPSFR recommended specific actions to improve ADB performance in each of the
evaluation criteria. This validation adds the following crosscutting recommendations for the new
CPS. More detailed ideas are suggested in the main text (paras. 129­136).

       (i)     Strengthen policy dialogue and direct engagement, particularly at the state
               level, for better strategic programming. State governments are the primary
               agencies to implement development programs; they differ significantly from each
               other, necessitating development interventions to be localized, and their
               commitment to policy emphases also varies. Although states are given access to
               centrally-funded programs, their inclusion has often taken place long after the
               program design had been fixed at the national level, leaving little room for
               customizing the program. Therefore, once a program is cleared with the central
               authorities, further feasibility studies may be prepared for each participating state,
               incorporating state-specific variations and their specific institutional issues. ADB's
               programming functions could be strengthened by linking ADB programs with the
               state governments' planning process, especially for those weakly performing
               states (e.g., the northeast states where ADB operates).

       (ii)    Enhance synergies and impact by better linking outputs to outcomes and
               through sustained partnerships. ADB's India program is small (less than 1%),
               compared to the national gross investment. As such, close partnerships with
               government, other development partners, and the private sector in designing
               ADB's projects are particularly important to generate synergies and increase the
               outcomes from ADB operations in India. This is because both the line ministries
               and departments, as well as ADB, are organized on sectoral lines and their
               operations tend to be on a sectoral basis, lacking cross-sectoral coordination
               within ADB or with other development partners. ADB needs to ensure that cross-
               sectoral issues (e.g., linking road projects with social services and agricultural
               sector programs) are addressed in a more strategic manner to support the
               objectives of more inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth.

       (iii)   Increase ADB staff resources at the field level to engage better with lagging
               states and augment resources for technical work to deliver innovative
               solutions and to stay abreast of client requirements. The resident mission
               has been given more than double the number of delegated loan projects (from 15
               to 42) since 2009, while the corresponding increase in the staff resources
               remained slow, causing substantial overstretching of staff resources. The
               available staff resources need to match the workload and the expectations of the
               clients. Often ADB staff have to interact with civil service experts and make
               policy-related discussions and/or decisions with technical professionals and
               academics serving on government committees and boards. Such expanded and
               policy-level engagement should be backed by adequate technical work and
               expertise from ADB, for example, in the areas of fiscal management, power
               distribution and ultra-mega power projects, renewal energy, and river basin or
               coastal management.

       (iv)    Prepare an integrated strategic framework to synergize ADB's public­
               private sector operations in India. As the private sector's role in India's
               economic development is growing fast and becoming more diverse, ADB's CPS
                                                                                       v


      positioning should also be broad-based, understanding the role of private sector
      and its complementarities with the public sector. Currently, the CPS is largely
      public sector-oriented. Based on a joint public­private sector strategic framework
      that ensures synergies and greater impact, ADB should develop suitable roles for
      ADB's private sector development and private sector operations. To this end,
      ADB needs to strengthen its analytical work on various issues linking public­
      private sectors at different levels and prepare a combined strategic framework, a
      road map, and action plans for future country operations in India.

(v)   Improve monitoring of the CPS results framework based on sharper CPS
      objectives and tracking of development impact and sustainability. The CPS,
      as well as the CPSFR, was weak in providing sharp objectives and monitorable
      indicators in its results framework. The design quality of the results framework of
      the next CPS should be significantly improved to help monitor implementation of
      its various objectives for achieving greater impact and sustainability. The
      government has emphasized its results orientation through adopting its Finance
      Plus approach that aimed to generate better outcomes from external financing.
      Therefore, ADB should develop improved results monitoring in its projects to
      prove greater additionality from them under this approach.




                                                   Vinod Thomas
                                                   Director General
                                                   Independent Evaluation
                                           I.      INTRODUCTION

1.     This chapter presents background information on the purpose of this validation,
pertinent India's development context and government plans, and objectives and other key
features of ADB's country operational strategy for India.

A.        Validation Purpose and Procedures

2.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 2009 formulated and implemented a country
partnership strategy (CPS) for India covering 2009­2012 1 and its South Asia Department
(SARD) prepared a CPS final review (CPSFR), a self-evaluation, in March 2012 (Appendix 1).2
The CPSFR identified issues and lessons from ADB operations in India, which will serve as
inputs for preparing a new India CPS for 2013­2017. Upon request by SARD, the Independent
Evaluation Department (IED) has prepared this validation report to assess the quality and
coherence of the self-evaluation and suggest lessons and recommendations for the new CPS.
For this, IED undertook a desk review of relevant documents, including IED's 2007 country
assistance program evaluation (CAPE) for India, 3 and fielded a mission to India to hold
discussions with government representatives, stakeholders, and the India Resident Mission.
IED assessed ongoing projects using data available to the mission, including the documents of
the tripartite portfolio review meetings (TPRMs) where ADB and government staff periodically
reviewed the progress of ADB-financed projects. IED also conducted a client and stakeholder
perception survey in May 2012 to collect stakeholders' feedback and suggestions on ADB
operations.

B.        India's Development Context and Government Plans

3.     This section describes India's development context at the time of CPS formulation and
subsequent developments up to 31 March 2012. The discussion is situated in the context of
the government's Eleventh Five Year Plan (covering the period from 1 April 2007 to 31 March
2012) to which the CPS was aligned. It describes how India's efforts to protect its high
economic growth rate from the global economic crisis of 2008/2009 became mixed up with
domestic economic issues and resulted in macroeconomic imbalances.

          1.       Development Context

4.     The CPS period (2009­2012) had been unexpectedly stressful. In 2009, India's gross
domestic product (GDP) was moving along its high growth trajectory of more than 8% per
annum. Economic fundamentals were solid and policy makers' confidence was high. The
private sector's contribution to the Indian economic grew, particularly in information and
communication technology (Appendix 2).

5.      During the world economic and financial crisis of 2008/2009, the Indian economy--
being relatively less integrated with the global economy--was in a comparatively less
vulnerable position but it started showing signs of being adversely affected by the crisis through
its trade and financial linkages. As in several other economies in Asia and the Pacific, India's
immediate response was to launch a large fiscal stimulus that was intended to shore up the


1
    ADB. 2009. Country Partnership Strategy: India, 2009­2012. Manila.
2
    ADB. 2012. Country Partnership Strategy Final Review: India, 2009­2012. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2007. Country Assistance Program Evaluation: India. Manila.
2


growth rate.4 However, given its high public debt and the level of deficit financing, India did not
have much fiscal space for undertaking it. The continued crisis exposed India to growing
uncertainties and stress in view of shrinking trade, rising commodity prices (especially food and
fuel), reduced banking credit, lower foreign direct investment, and continued global uncertainty
and volatility. Other highly industrialized economies (especially the United States, European
Union [EU], and Japan) were growing below their trend, signifying a downside risk for the
Indian economy.

6.      The overall conditions contributed to growing macroeconomic imbalances. On the
domestic front, the fiscal deficit was increasing on account of growing subsidies. The overall
government's deficit jumped from 2.5% in fiscal year (FY) 2007 to 6.0% in FY2008, and further
to 6.5% in FY2009. Many states did not have adequate fiscal space to undertake development
programs. Inflation had begun to slow down but was still high, especially food inflation (focused
on vegetables, fruits, dairy, and other high protein foods). Fuel prices remained at elevated
levels. Excessive imports in relation to exports added to the trade deficit, which ballooned to
$185 billion by the end of FY2011 (i.e., March 2012) and fed into the current account deficit.
Much-needed reforms related to the Indian economy and sectors that ADB has been
supporting, such as power and finance sectors, were still pending.

7.      In FY2011, the annual GDP growth rate fell to 6.5%. The fiscal year showed an adverse
balance of trade of ­9.3% of GDP, an all-time record for the Indian economy. The declining
foreign direct investment was not adequate to cover the gap and as a result there was a current
account deficit of 4.0% of GDP. The inflationary pressures resurfaced. The central bank had
been tightening monetary policy by increasing the bank rate to cool down the overheated
economy. This monetary tightening squeezed credit and contributed to slower economic growth.

8.      Critical shortages in infrastructure, especially energy, are binding constraints on the
Indian economy. Likewise, pressures for continued consumption subsidies, instead of investing
in better health, education, and social services are a difficult trade-off to manage. On the
monetary side, a critical challenge is to bring the price level down without sacrificing economic
growth. The rapid depreciation of the Indian rupee (by more than 25%) during the first half of
2012 helped improve the balance of payments but the inflationary pressure remains strong.
The high fiscal deficit needs to be controlled.

          2.      Government Plans

9.      Under the Eleventh Plan, the government focused on a growth strategy of high and
inclusive growth. This two-pronged approach was aimed at a growth process that was
expected to yield broad-based benefits and ensure equal opportunities for all. Key areas for
policy attention and public support included (i) the revival of agricultural growth, (ii)
infrastructure development, (iii) services essential to enhancing human capital (including job-
related skills), and (iv) the promotion of environmental sustainability. Through the CPS, ADB
responded to these government strategic thrusts and growth objectives.

10.     Tying the Eleventh Plan to a results framework, the Planning Commission identified
27 indicators on which the plan's performance would be assessed. In addition to the targeted
9% economic growth, other indicators included were related to (i) income and poverty, (ii)
4
    "The fiscal stimulus package put in place to revive demand in 2008­2009, entailed a large expenditure hike
     including front-loading of plan expenditure. Thus, both plan and non-plan expenditure went up substantially in
     2008­2009 and 2009­2010." Government of India, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey 2011­12. New
     Delhi: Oxford University Press. para. 3.26, p. 59.
                                                                                                               3


education, (iii) health, (iv) women and children, (v) infrastructure, and (vi) the environment.
Some of these indicators were further disaggregated into 13 state level targets. The
expectation was that state governments would design their own policies and programs to
achieve Eleventh Plan objectives and targets.5

11.     The first important assumption of the Eleventh Plan was the need for investment rate in
to increase from 32.0% of GDP at the end of the Tenth Plan to 36.8% by the end of the
Eleventh Plan. However, estimates of savings at the end of the Tenth Plan were subsequently
revised downward, 6 thus increasing the resource gap for the Eleventh Plan. 7 Difficulties
resulting from the global crisis added to this gap.

12.     The second important assumption of the Eleventh Plan was that the private sector
would continue to play an expanding role in increasing investments in the economy. The share
of private sector investments in the last three plans had been steadily increasing from about
65% of total investment in the Eighth Plan, to 71% in the Ninth, and 78% in the Tenth Plan.
The Eleventh Plan expected to stabilize this division of investment between the private and
public sector at 78%. In this sense, a vibrant and globalized private sector was at the heart of
the Eleventh Plan targets. For this, the need for economic reforms that would let the private
sector play its envisaged role grew bigger.

13.    Thirdly, the public sector had to help increase savings by reducing its own deficit. This
assumption reflected a significant turnaround compared with past experience in India. The
Eleventh Plan had set a higher bar for the public sector's own performance. Finally, the
Eleventh Plan was aware of the volatility of fuel prices, and of the possibility of India having to
pay a much larger amount for oil imports. This contingency was expected to be met by
incoming foreign investments, an assumption that did not materialize.

14.     On gender and development, the Eleventh Plan emphasized the importance of
guaranteeing women's rights and entitlements across all sectors of government programs. One
of the key development targets of the government was to ensure that at least 33% of the direct
and indirect beneficiaries of all government schemes were females. A separate Ministry of
Women and Child Development was established in 2006 to support the plan. The government
also introduced gender budgeting to improve the sensitivity of the development programs to
women and children.

C.         Country Partnership Strategy

15.      The formulation of the CPS was based on the recommendations of IED's 2007 CAPE
for India. Evaluating the performance of ADB operations in India during 1987­2006, which was
rated borderline successful, the CAPE had made some important recommendations. These
were geared to (i) improve strategic focus, (ii) improve the quality of ADB's financial support,
(iii) improve nonlending services, (iv) increase private sector operations, and (v) increase
responsiveness to client concerns.

5
    Government of India, Planning Commission. 2011. Mid-Term Appraisal: Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007­2012.
    New Delhi: Oxford University Press. p.7.
6
    The revised estimates of the Central Statistical Organization adjusted the Tenth Plan average savings to 31%,
    increasing the financing gap (Government of India, Planning Commission. 2011. Mid-Term Appraisal: Eleventh
    Five Year Plan, 2007­2012. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. para. 2.4, p. 23).
7
    The saving­investment gap in FY2006 (the last year of the Tenth Plan) was ­1.1% of GDP and widened to ­2.8%
    of GDP by FY2010. (Government of India, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey 2011­12. New Delhi:
    Oxford University Press. Table 1.4, p. 5). The final data for FY2011 have not been published.
4


16.      ADB had three main considerations while designing the CPS (CPSFR, para. 1) and
explored a possible strategy under which a high growth rate for the Indian economy could not
only be continued, but would also be more inclusive. The first consideration was to maintain a
high level of economic growth in India of about 9% or more. The second was that such a high
growth rate could not be taken for granted and that sustaining it would be a challenge. The
third was that India's improved economic performance had not made much dent on its poverty
situation and rural­urban disparities. This validation considers the approach and selection of
priority areas in the CPS as adequate. The priority areas of the CPS are summarized below.

17.     Country partnership strategy objectives and priorities. The CPS was designed to
achieve its four objectives or strategic pillars: (i) supporting inclusive and environmentally
sustainable growth, (ii) catalyzing investments through innovative business and financing
solutions, (iii) strengthening results orientation and knowledge solutions, and (iv) promoting
regional cooperation. The prevailing situation of the economy posed multiple challenges for the
government and its development partners. The infrastructural backlog in the energy, transport,
and irrigation persisted and ADB attached high priority to relieving these shortages. The
achievement of the CPS objectives is discussed in paras. 93­98.

18.     Infrastructure sectors. Within the infrastructure sector, energy and transport had
constrained the achievement of rapid economic growth, especially for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs), which could be a source of employment generation. These constraints
particularly affected lagging states (i.e., the northeast states where ADB operates), rural areas,
and the poor. ADB planned transport sector interventions in the areas of rural roads, the urban
metro railways system, and the main Indian railway network. ADB also pushed for investments
in water resources, as the sector was capable of impacting agricultural productivity in the short
term, and sustaining environmental and natural resources over the long term. Hydropower also
supported sustainable environmental management by augmenting alternative sources of
energy such as solar power and other renewable energy sources. ADB planned to improve the
sector regulation and power distribution through a program supporting the formation of a
national grid and its management, and a policy loan.

19.     Investments in rural infrastructure were expected to open up access to markets and to
enable farmers to move up the value-chain by opting for high-yielding varieties and diversifying
their cropping pattern. However, agricultural production had been decelerating. During the
implementation of the previous plans, per capita availability of food grains had declined for
about two decades.8 The Eleventh Plan sought to reverse the trend with the help of enhanced
rural infrastructure. The enhanced agricultural growth was also expected to contribute to
ensuring food security.9

20.     Inclusive development. To address inclusive development concerns, ADB sought the
revival of poorer states and the rural economy, which was critical for employment generation
and poverty reduction in the country. ADB also made special attempts to provide for
disadvantaged groups to benefit in the development process. More importantly, by directing
about 70% of ADB operations to the lagging states, ADB strengthened its inclusive


8
    Government of India, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey 2011­12. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
    Table 1.17, p. A22.
9
    For a recent review of ADB's role in food security in the region, see "Agriculture in ADB and its Contribution to
    Food Security" in 2012 Annual Evaluation Review (IED. 2012. 2012 Annual Evaluation Review. Manila: ADB),
    pp. 48­63.
                                                                                                             5


development focus. Nonetheless, ADB's inclusive development interventions remained limited
to several selected sectors or subsectors.

21.     Regional cooperation. The promotion of regional cooperation, through cross-border
infrastructure and the enhancement of trade and investment, was another focus in line with
Strategy 2020.10 ADB focused in particular on northeastern states, thus strengthening linkages
with the neighboring economies of Bangladesh, Bhutan, Myanmar, and Nepal.

22.     Private sector participation. In addition to its direct operations in the private sector,
ADB rightly aimed at mainstreaming public­private partnerships (PPPs) through a pilot
program supported by technical assistance (TA) projects. In addition to capacity building, ADB
supported (i) improvements in the PPP enabling environment (through the development of a
draft policy framework, manuals, sector regulatory inputs, etc.); (ii) development, structuring,
and facilitation of bidding for PPP pilot projects with potential for replication, in difficult sectors
(mainly water supply and sanitation, health, and education); and (iii) a PPP implementation
modality for providing urban amenities to rural areas. This included capacity development,
particularly on risk assessment. The emphasis on supporting infrastructure development and
private sector operations was quite relevant and appropriate. The lack of infrastructure had
been impeding faster growth in manufacturing and services. The private sector had an
important role in realizing the goals of the Eleventh Plan. Hence, ADB's efforts to support the
private sector through promoting PPPs were considered useful (Box 1).

                                 Box 1: Public­Private Partnership Initiative
     The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has been supporting India since 2006 to mainstream public­
     private partnerships (PPPs) in its operations. This support has been provided through a series of 7
     technical assistance (TA) projects (totaling $15.3 million) from 2006 to 2011, and built on under loan
     operations.
     The primary objective of promoting PPPs in India has been to (i) accelerate investments in
     infrastructure, and (ii) introduce improved asset management techniques. The major constraint has
     been a lack of know-how among officials, especially at the state level and below. ADB's support has
     built PPP cells for supporting officials and has mobilized technical and professional inputs in
     accordance with requirements. This has been done both at the national and states levels. PPP
     exchanges have been established in Mumbai and New Delhi to promote dissemination of PPP-
     related information and experience.
     The methodology helped to establish the necessary databases; provide management information
     system expertise; support PPP policy making; and prepare frameworks for implementing typical
     projects in construction, urban waste management, urban transport, among others. Project-specific
     deeper transaction level expertise, including legal advice, has been made available to these cells
     through the engagement of firms and individual consultants. Projects developed under this support
     have also included funding from different sources within India, such as the government's variable
     gap funding scheme and the Indian Infrastructure Development Fund.
     Capacity development of central and state officials has been the main approach. It also showcases
     international best practices. More than 180 workshops have been held involving more than
     4,400 participants. This broad-based upgrading has resulted in a number of states undertaking PPP-
     linked initiatives. These include Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Uttarakhand, among others.
     Hundreds of projects have been supported, including pilot projects and cross-state projects.
     Knowledge dissemination is undertaken through case studies, bulletins, and web broadcasts.
     Source: Independent Evaluation Department.

10
     ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank, 2008­2020.
     Manila.
6


23.     Knowledge solutions. ADB pursued the government-initiated Finance Plus approach,
under which projects became more effective by bringing new knowledge solutions, practices,
processes, and know-how to India operations and supported the government with various
project-related knowledge solutions. This Finance Plus approach was adopted by the
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) of the government to ensure that the development
impact of the external assistance becomes larger than the value of financial support. With this
in view, the DEA examined the project proposals from the states from a Finance Plus
perspective, such as the adoption of international best practices in a particular sector, the
inclusion of innovative elements, enhanced project management systems, etc.11 This validation
notes that ADB has made adequate progress in this value adding area.

24.     Capacity development. ADB TA has contributed to capacity development in its
counterpart agencies in India.12 This validation's perception survey, to be discussed later in this
report (para. 123), confirms this. ADB launched a large training program anchored at the
resident mission for the executing and implementing agencies, training them in modern project
management techniques and methods. The training program spanned a broad range of
subjects and topics relevant to development projects. A calendar of training was prepared and
provided to executing and/or implementing agencies for them to be able to plan the
participation of their staff. Officers at the state and lower levels have particularly benefitted from
the capacity development activities of ADB's operations in India. As mentioned earlier, more
than 4,400 officials participated in the capacity building workshops--creating a cadre that is
expected to be more receptive to reforms, knowledge solutions, and improvements in
implementation and governance. This validation considers that, while the resident mission has
done well in launching useful capacity development activities, which is confirmed by feedback
from various meetings, the activities need to be expanded given the large requirements.

25.     Operational sectors. Aligning itself with the Eleventh Plan, the CPS was designed to
support the government within the framework of ADB's core competencies and priorities as
articulated in ADB's Strategy 2020. The CPS covered the following sectors and subsectors for
lending operations. This validation considers the choice of the following ADB operational
sectors adequate. A list of ADB loan projects is in Appendix 3.
          (i)   Agriculture and natural resources. To help address the fundamental problem of
                low productivity in agriculture, ADB sought to diversify agricultural output and
                improve water resource management in the sector. ADB's interventions also aimed
                to address the important issue of environmental and natural resources
                sustainability.
          (ii) Energy. To help relieve the binding constraints in energy, ADB focused on
                improving the energy sector's regulatory environment, generation, and distribution.
                ADB also aimed to support development of hydropower, solar, and other
                renewable energy forms for promoting environment sustainability.
          (iii) Transport. ADB aimed to help develop an integrated system of road networks at
                the national and state levels in selected states, including rural roads which provide
                connectivity of the poor to product and factor markets, and delivery of essential
                services for the poor. ADB interventions also aimed to modernize Indian railways.
          (iv) Finance. ADB supported greater participation of the private sector in development
                interventions through the PPP modality and promoting financial inclusion through
                improved rural cooperatives, and other rural employment-generating village-based

11
     Minutes of the February 2012 Tripartite Portfolio Review Meeting (TPRM), para. 5.
12
     From 1986 to 2011, ADB approved 328 TA projects amounting to $244.8 million, comprising 110 project
     preparatory TA projects and 218 other TA projects.
                                                                                                                    7


              industries like Khadi (hand-spun and woven cotton cloth and apparels) under the
              Khadi Reform and Development Program (KRDP).13
         (v) Water and other municipal infrastructure and services sector. ADB undertook
              integrated urban development supporting water, sanitation, environment, and
              urban transport systems.
         (vi) Human development.14 ADB added this new sector in the course of implementing
              the CPS, recognizing the need to empower people with "skills and knowledge,
              especially in the context of India's goals of inclusive growth and enhancing the
              overall productivity of the economy" (CPSFR, para. 36). This move is considered
              appropriate.

26.     Nonsovereign operations. The CPSFR notes (para. 49) that nonsovereign operations
amounted to an additional $1.1 billion approved during 2009­2011. This included eight loans,
equity investments and guarantees, comprising $648 million of debt $58 million of equity and
$400 million of guarantees. Debt approved included the energy sector (46%), transport (39%),
and finance for the development of trade finance for SMEs (15%). Equity investments were for
clean energy, and credit enhancement was approved for grid-connected solar power projects
(38%) and for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (62%). A list of nonsovereign
operation projects is in Appendix 4.

27.     Nonlending operations. The CPS also envisaged an active program of TA in support
of ADB's India program. This validation notes that ADB TA projects have played an important
role in terms of introducing new technologies and management practices in different sectors
that have so far been dominated disproportionately by the public sector perspective. Such
innovations are also important to push for exports, especially in the manufacturing and industry
sectors where improvements are needed in India. A list of TA projects is in Appendix 5.

28.    Role of major development partners. The role of major development partners has
undergone a structural change during the period covered by the CPS. Over time, the
government reduced the number of counterpart aid agencies in the country. These now include
the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom (DFID), the European
Union (EU), German development cooperation through KfW, Japan International Cooperation
Agency (JICA), and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) aside
from multilateral organizations like ADB, the United Nations (UN) agencies, and the World
Bank. As the operations of all the aid agencies were coordinated by the government's DEA, a
broader convergence in terms of strategies and approaches was achieved around the country's
development agenda, with virtually no duplication in terms of sectors or spatial coverage.15
Nonetheless, the validation noted the need to strengthen interagency dialogue on policy areas.

29.     The Japanese program is estimated at about ¥300 billion annually (about $3.8 billion). It
primarily focuses on supporting urban metro transport and dedicated freight corridors for the
Indian railways. JICA also supports the setting up of transport infrastructure in the Bangalore-
Chennai region, and was active in the state of Gujarat. Support in the northeastern states,
which promises to open up linkages with East Asian economies, is also envisaged. This is
expected to promote regional cooperation and integration with East Asian economies.

13
   ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Program Loan and
   Technical Assistance Grant to India for the Khadi Reform and Development Program. Manila.
14
   Since this is a new sector and the design of ADB's involvement in the area is still evolving, skills development is
   not discussed separately under the CPSFR validation section, unlike other sectors that are discussed individually.
15
   A screening committee at the DEA's Multilateral Institutions Division selects project proposals for their
   contributions to the Finance Plus approach.
8


30.    German development cooperation through KfW is active in the energy sector,
sustainable economic development, and urban development. It is cofinancing a run-of-the-river
hydro dam in Himachal Pradesh with ADB. In private sector operations, KfW is engaged with
the Export-Import Bank of India in refinancing risk sharing arrangements. It is also involved in
ADB's efforts to restructure rural cooperative banks and has cofinanced the Rural Cooperative
Credit Restructuring and Development Program.16 German development cooperation through
GTZ17 is involved in the city development initiative in Chennai and Pimpri-Chinchwad (off-Pune
in Maharashtra).

31.     The World Bank's portfolio comprised 75 active projects across 10 sectors:
23 agriculture and rural development projects, 6 energy projects, 8 environment projects, 12
transport projects, 3 Panchayat Raj Institutions projects, 5 rural water sewerage and sanitation
projects, 6 urban development projects, 4 finance and private sector projects, 3 education
projects, and 5 health projects. ADB and the World Bank work jointly with the DEA in
monitoring portfolio and procurement activities. The World Bank's total net commitments at the
end of March 2012 stood at $23.5 billion, with about two-thirds for the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and one-third for the International Development Agency.

32.    The DFID has helped with TA support and is extending flood management support to
the northeastern states. Its studies on water resource management, jointly with ADB, are
producing technically sound outputs. These studies focus on transboundary issues and have a
strong interface with environmental and climate change issues. DFID is also likely to be
engaged in research partnerships in India, with a view to contributing to knowledge solutions
and sharing mutual development experience. It may also be involved in the forthcoming skills
development area, but may be less active in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
poverty reduction after 2015. The EU is active in the education sector and the USAID in health,
while UN agencies continue to focus on the broad area of development, including gender (UN
Women) and human development (United Nations Development Programme).

     II.       VALIDATION OF THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FINAL REVIEW

33.        In this chapter, IED validates the CPSFR and assesses ADB's operational performance
in India following the IED's evaluation criteria: (i) strategic positioning, (ii) program relevance,
(iii) efficiency, (iv) effectiveness, (v) sustainability, and (vi) development impact. The
assessment used, among others, the analysis of the 2007 CAPE and findings of the recent IED
validation mission. The discussions narrate the strategic issues in each major sector,
i.e., agriculture and natural resources, energy, transport and communications, water and other
municipal infrastructure and services, and finance, with illustrative references to specific
projects. The chapter also validates the performance of the borrower and ADB, and closes with
an overall assessment, lessons, and recommendations.

A.         Strategic Positioning

34.     The CPSFR assessed the strategic positioning of the CPS as satisfactory, finding it
consistent with the government's Eleventh Plan, ADB's Strategy 2020, and ADB's overarching
objective of poverty reduction. This validation agrees with the CPSFR, and assesses strategic
positioning as satisfactory. One weakness is that the CPS results framework, as a key planning
16
   ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance Grant to India for the Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring and Development Program.
   Manila.
17
   GTZ, DED, and InWEnt merged to become GIZ in January 2011.
                                                                                                9


tool, did not provide adequate indicators. This validation's assessment about strategic
positioning is detailed below.

35.     Alignment. ADB has closely responded to the country's needs and government's
development priorities according to the Eleventh Plan. The thrusts identified above in relation
to the CPS, as well as the Eleventh Plan, are broadly in consonance with ADB's Strategy 2020.
ADB's focus on infrastructure, the private sector, and the environment was appropriate. Two-
thirds of ADB operations were accounted for by energy and transport infrastructure to address
core binding constraints. Within agriculture and natural resources (ANR), ADB prioritized
investments in irrigation infrastructure and water management. ADB targeted mainstreaming of
PPPs and sought to bring ADB's public and private sectors together in financing and
implementing large investment projects. However, a strategic framework cohesively
encompassing both ADB's public and private sector investments was not there.

36.     ADB emphasized good governance, gender and development, and capacity
development, especially in the poor lagging states. ADB also emphasized knowledge solutions
to enhance rapid economic development, and in the context of climate change underscored the
significance of long-term sustainable management of the environment. The promotion of
regional cooperation through cross-border infrastructure and the enhancement of trade and
investment was another focus in line with Strategy 2020. ADB focused on northeastern states,
thus strengthening linkages with the neighboring economies of Bangladesh, Bhutan, Myanmar,
and Nepal.

37.     Long-term continuity and regional links. A notable feature of ADB operations is that
it entered only those sectors where engagement was going to be long-term. ADB continued to
be involved in sectors such as energy, transport, water and other municipal infrastructure and
services, and rural infrastructure. The CPS also highlighted the need for pursuing regional
cooperation and integration, linking India with neighboring economies. Among other things, it
recommended to build on ADB's South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation Program and
to support the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-sector Technical and Economic Cooperation
(CPS, paras. 31, 38, and 61).

38.    Development partners. Partnership and harmonization among development partners
under the CPS have been facilitated to a large extent by the fact that the government helped
development partners devise their own interventions in support of the objectives of the
Eleventh Plan. Aid agency-proposed activities were coordinated by the government (i.e., DEA)
at the highest level. ADB collaborated closely with other development partners to prepare a
cogent development program for India and to leverage additional financing resources (CPS,
paras. 32, 46, 57, and 82). Development partners indicated that ADB discussed its planned
operations with them in advance, enabling them to propose their own operations in tandem
with ADB support. This resulted in considerable synergy and created a win­win position for
development partners, including ADB.

39.     Country partnership strategy results framework. The CPS provided an overall
results framework which summarily linked the CPS outcomes and outcome indicators with
those of the Eleventh Plan of the government on the one side and the individual sector results
framework on the other. There were no specific indicators identified at the macro-level. Further,
the details of outcome indicators were not provided in every sector road map. For some
sectors, like energy, specific indicators were identified while they were not stated precisely for
other sectors. This validation considers it a gap in the CPS. Importantly, the CPSFR did not
10


provide any assessment of the results framework, missing a valuable opportunity to provide
input for designing the next CPS.

40.     Allocation of lending and nonlending resources. During the CPS period, ADB
allocations for the India program were about $2 billion per annum. This was more than the
amount during the previous CPS periods. The CPSFR notes that about 70.0% of the total
approvals were for the lagging states. As much as 34.3% of total ADB support was devoted to
the energy sector and another 32.0% for transport. Thus, 64.3% was directly deployed in
relieving the critical shortages and pushing the infrastructure envelope. During the CPS period,
a number of TA projects were approved with a value of about $18 million annually. 18 The
sectoral distribution of the TA portfolio mirrors the loan portfolio. A list of TA projects is in
Appendix 5 and a list of economic and sector works for India is in Appendix 6. This validation
considers that the resource allocation was adequate.

41.     However, the ANR sector and rural infrastructure development, which were introduced
in the India program during the previous CPS, took time to grow and received only a small
amount of the allocation. Moreover, these allocations were confined to one or two states. This
arrangement does not correspond to the importance of the issues identified in the approach of
the CPS to development problems and the emphasis conferred on the different sectors.
42.       Modalities. In terms of operational modalities, ADB used a full range of available
options--standing-alone project loans, program loans, financial intermediation loans, and
multitranche financing facilities (MFFs). Traditionally project loans and program loans--
including sector development programs--were dominant in ADB's India program. The use of
MFFs emerged as a preferred modality for large-scale infrastructure projects in India since
2005.19 MFFs allowed executing agencies the freedom to pace and plan the implementation of
projects according to progress and convenience. MFFs also suited the area- or time-slice of
operations and allowed operations to be mobile across states within the same sector. In
addition, the MFF modality offered a longer term commitment from ADB, it did not incur a
liability to pay commitment fees on the entire MFF envelope and enabled many implementing
agencies that were earlier used to only managing municipal services in cities and urban
centers, for instance, an opportunity to design and implement comprehensive urban projects.
However, capacity development in these lower level agencies is needed in large measure. This
validation received positive feedback on the usefulness of the modality, particularly in
designing and implementing large-scale projects, from ADB counterparts in the government.
IED's recent evaluation study20 pointed out that commitment fee savings are not substantial
where MFF tranche sizes were about the same as regular loans. India was an exception in
terms of better due diligence being undertaken on the institutional capabilities. However, there
were issues of project level due diligence on technical and other aspects, and classification of
tranche scope changes as minor changes. In addition, the design of the MFF modality is such
that in general it may not formally benefit from the lessons of previous MFFs and tranches.
Therefore, to improve the development effectiveness of upcoming MFF programs and


18
   Of these, about $7.4 million per annum was from ADB's Technical Assistance Special Fund while the remainder
   was sourced from other aid agencies' funds.
19
   The Asian Development Bank (ADB) introduced the multitranche financing facility (MFF) modality in 2005 and it
   was mainstreamed in 2008 to facilitate greater certainty and upfront agreement with a client through financing that
   fits within the client's longer-term plan. As of December 2011, 66 MFFs had been approved in ADB for $31.9
   billion. India has been a major user of the MFF and accounts for 25 MFFs (38% in terms of the number of MFFs)
   in the amount of $9.2 billion (29% by amount). So far, these MFFs have generated 54 tranches for $6.0 billion.
   The approved MFFs cover a broad spectrum in India.
20
   ADB. 2012. Real-Time Evaluation Study of the Multitranche Financing Facility. Manila
                                                                                                             11


tranches, it would be useful to capture and report on the lessons from MFFs during the
preparation of the CPS.

B.         Program Relevance

43.      The CPSFR assessed the CPS program successful (relevant). The CPS delivered
support for $8.65 billion over the CPS period (2009­2012), comprising 80 investment projects.
The CPSFR argues that the program has served as an instrument to deliver the strategic pillars
or objectives laid out in the CPS and supported the sectors of energy (34.3%), transport and
communications (32.0%), finance (15.0%), water and other municipal infrastructure and
services (13.2%), ANR (3.2%), and education and human development (2.3%). At the macro
level, the India CPS program was relevant as it pursued the broad objectives of the Eleventh
Plan and the government's development priorities and adequately supported the CPS
objectives. The program was also consistent with ADB's Strategy 2020 and its emphasis on
infrastructure, i.e., energy, roads, water, and sanitation services. ADB also targeted water
infrastructure management and supported long-term conservation measures like coastal
management.

44.    The planned sector programs have been well delivered, slightly exceeding the CPS
target ($2.0 billion per year). A strength of ADB's operational support has been that the
program was designed to support the government's Finance Plus approach. In doing so, the
ADB operations team has engaged more actively with the state governments and entities as
they were the main implementing agencies. Nonetheless, for the ADB program to be more
relevant to their diversified needs, the programming functions at the state level need to be
strengthened. Specific sector features of program relevance are detailed below. This validation
concurs with the CPSFR, and assesses the CPS program relevant. A brief assessment of
program relevance is given below.

           1.      Design Features to Address Key Sector Issues

45.     Agriculture and natural resources. Key sector issues included (i) food security, (ii)
low productivity, and (iii) poor utilization of water resources. The long-term trend of declining
agricultural productivity was reversed under the Eleventh Plan.21 ADB's sector program under
the CPS was in the form of one stand-alone loan and six loans under MFF programs, as well
as TA projects. The agribusiness infrastructure project is supporting small farmers in the states
of Bihar and Maharashtra in shifting to higher value-chain production. Further, ADB's project in
Chhattisgarh and Orissa was aimed at introducing participatory irrigation systems and the
empowerment of water users' associations. It also pursued more efficient, productive, and
participatory irrigation systems.

46.     Responding to the government's request for Finance Plus-oriented lending and
promoting knowledge solutions, the design quality of projects in the ANR sector included the
following important features: (i) a legal and institutional framework that supports the value chain
approach in the agribusiness subsector, (ii) the setting up of viable PPP arrangements in post-
harvest and marketing infrastructure for high value products, (iii) a demonstration of highly
productive and efficient irrigated agriculture, and (iv) the introduction of environmentally and
socially friendly coastal protection solutions.


21
     The average growth of agriculture during the CPS period varied from 0.1% in FY2008, 1.0% in FY2009, 7.0% in
     FY2010, and 2.5% in FY2011, yielding an average of 2.65% over 4 years but with high variance.
12


47.     Energy. Energy sources in India include coal, lignite, crude oil, natural gas,
hydropower, nuclear power, wind, and solar power. The key sector issues are the following: (i)
power shortages and the unreliable quality of electricity; (ii) high aggregate technical and
commercial losses caused by the weak management of state electricity boards; and (iii) the
need for greater involvement of the private sector in the energy sector, especially in distribution
franchise. The government is keen to accelerate power generation because the previous five
year plans (eighth to tenth) could only generate 50% of the planned additions to generation
capacity. The Eleventh Plan improved power generation by involving the private sector. A
major weakness of the Indian energy sector lies in the management of the power distribution
system and adequate pricing. State electricity boards that manage electricity distribution need
to be restructured comprehensively because they do not have adequate resources and
capability to manage the system and bring in much-needed reforms, including pricing of
electricity. The CPSFR did not address this concern adequately.

48.    Through six stand-alone project loans and 25 periodic financing requests (PFRs) under
14 MFFs, ADB interventions focused on power generation, transmission, distribution, and
sector regulation and reforms in selected states, to ensure long-term continuity and
sustainability. A national power grid development program loan and a policy loan for Bihar to
improve power system improvement were approved as planned. ADB contributed to renewable
energy hydropower generation (856-megawatt run-of-river hydropower capacity in Himachal
Pradesh, and Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission). In addition to supporting transmission
and distribution systems, ADB supported distribution feeder separation, enabling 24-hour
power supply to 100% of the rural villages in Madhya Pradesh; and capacity building to
strengthen sector regulation and advance sector reforms in Assam, Bihar, and Himachal
Pradesh. Private sector participation was supported in its solar power generation in Gujarat
and Rajasthan.

49.     The design qualities and their innovative features, as part of the knowledge solutions,
included an ADB-initiated biofuels study, generating insights on cross-sectoral implications and
measures to introduce more greening measures to the energy sector. ADB also provided TA to
build capacity in the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) initiative, and led two hydropower
projects to sign carbon credit sales agreements. With ADB's support, Power Grid Corporation
of India developed a corporate environment and social management system.

50.     Transport and communications. Key sector issues included (i) low levels of
investment in transport infrastructure, (ii) limited organizational capacity in project development
and implementation, and (iii) a limited role for the private sector in developing transport
infrastructure. The government has been trying to develop a transport network system from
rural roads to national highways. It also has an ambitious program for modernization of the
country's railway network, in accordance with the Indian Railways' Vision document tabled in
the Parliament.

51.     During the CPS period, ADB helped construct national highways with consideration for
safeguards, social safety, and the environment. It supported rural road projects in a number of
states and is supporting railways in its modernization efforts. The transport sector accounted
for 27 loan projects backed by a number of project preparatory and advisory TA projects. ADB
supported state roads in Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and the
northeastern region; and contributed significantly to greater inclusion and connectivity. Rural
roads in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, and West Bengal are providing all-
weather connectivity to previously unconnected areas. ADB has also supported urban transport
projects, especially rail-based urban transport.
                                                                                                  13


52.     Pursuing the Finance Plus and knowledge solutions approach, ADB's transport sector
strategy helped develop an enabling environment for road sector development--laws and
regulations to promote private sector participation, establish a non-lapsable road development
fund, and strengthen the capacity of road agencies to implement build-operate-transfer
schemes and performance-based contracts. ADB helped introduce safeguard frameworks, and
reinforce the integration of social and environmental safeguards and community consultations
into rural road projects. ADB supported CDM activities and efforts to obtain carbon credits
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change for the railway project.

53.     Water and other municipal infrastructure and services. Key sector issues included
(i) clearing the urban infrastructure backlog, (ii) devolving development autonomy and
municipal services to urban local bodies (ULBs), and (iii) setting up technical planning and
management capacity institutions in the country to support urban renewal. With an urban
population of nearly 400 million in India, urban development is a gigantic task.

54.     The sector support program consists of 29 approved loan projects, which are under
implementation. Ten of these are stand-alone projects, while 19 are under nine MFFs. ADB's
projects have contributed to a better environment through support for cleaner water, sanitation,
sewerage systems, energy generation from wastes, the CDM, and urban transport. Institutional
strengthening for better service delivery has also been promoted through municipal reforms
and capacity development. In keeping with ADB's Water Operational Plan, 2011­2020, 22 the
sector programs emphasized higher efficiency in water use, increasing investment in sewerage
management, and bringing private sector efficiencies in operations. ADB has also been
engaged in the development of tourism infrastructure, an employment-intensive sector of the
economy.

55.      The major features of the design included (i) adoption of a strategic, holistic, and
integrated approach to sustainable urban development and environment improvement;
(ii) provision of basic water and sanitation services to the lagging states and poorer urban
centers, while incorporating the Ministry of Urban Development's benchmark targets in the
design; (iii) knowledge transfer through the dissemination of best practices in urban municipal
services; (iv) ring-fencing urban services accounts to protect their finances; and (v) introducing
innovative facilities like the partial credit guarantee to support project bond issuance in the local
currency bond market.

56.     Finance and public sector management. ADB's involvement in financial inclusion
mainly related to rural finance, especially rural cooperatives and the KRDP. ADB's financial
sector operations were in line with the government's sector strategy, as embodied in the
Eleventh Plan, and included knowledge solutions. The program focused on (i) leveraging
private sector investment in infrastructure through PPPs and innovative financial instruments;
and (ii) supporting states in undertaking fiscal reforms under the framework of the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act. It supported ULBs to improve public financial
management for the effective management of public utilities and the delivery of services. ADB
also supported Assam state in public resource management. Finally, it supported micro, small,
and medium-sized enterprises for generating employment.

57.     ADB operations with significant knowledge solutions and policy reforms had the
following features: (i) mainstreaming the PPP infrastructure financing modality in India, (ii)
supporting public resources management reforms, and (iii) pioneering policy-based lending for

22
     ADB. 2011. Water Operational Plan 2011­2020. Manila.
14


ULBs and assisting in introducing performance-based devolution mechanisms. Much more
efforts need to be put into this policy reform area, particularly at the state level as some state
governments are much in need of adopting knowledge solutions and policy reforms.

           2.      Design Features to Address Crosscutting Issues

58.      Skills development. Despite significant investments in both the general and technical
education system at all levels in the country, the quality of education remains uneven and, on
the average, students' achievement standards are low. The government has adopted a new
National Policy on Skills Development (2009), which targets the upgrading of skills of 500
million students up to 2022. The government has sought ADB's support in this undertaking and
ADB adopted human resource development as a new sector. It has responded by initiating TA
to the National Skill Development Corporation. The TA is helping to explore effective strategies
for the implementation of the 2009 National Skills Policy. It also aims to identify implementation
approaches and strategies for skills development activities.

59.      Gender mainstreaming. The CPSFR states that effective gender mainstreaming
registered an improvement during 2009­2012 by increasing from 25% of the portfolio at the
beginning to about 38% at the end of 2011. The CPSFR does not provide details on the
gender-related outputs and outcomes, although a number of innovative gender mainstreaming
activities have been undertaken in India. For example, support to women entrepreneurs
through ADB's Micro, Small and Medium-size Entrepreneurs Development Project, associated
Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction grant project for women entrepreneurs, is an important
initiative. The project is being implemented through the Small Industries Development Bank of
India while the grant project is being implemented in the states of Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh.

60.      In addition, under rural roads projects, traveling to schools, health centers, and
marketplaces has become safer and convenient, particularly for women. The availability of
electricity to rural households has helped women to undertake domestic chores and earning
activities with less drudgery. In Chhattisgarh, under the irrigation project, active participation of
women was built into the project design. During the field visit, the IED mission noted women's
participation in field level meetings. Women participants shared their viewpoints and expressed
satisfaction at being part of the projects. Notwithstanding, in India, a lot more progress is
needed to have effective gender equality across states, sectors, and social hierarchies.

61.      Monitoring. ADB's SARD uses a common monitoring format in its TPRMs for reviewing
ongoing projects. 23 The format used in these meetings facilitates easier understanding by
officials even remotely related to a project. Every executing and implementing agency knows
that it would be called upon to explain the performance of its project according to this format,
which has become a common instrument of monitoring and evaluation in India. A collective and
shared understanding about project monitoring has been built around it in ADB's Indian
operations. During TPRM discussions, a project's implementation is assessed in detail and
reviewed rigorously. The discussion takes place publicly in the presence of a large number of
staff, especially from the Indian central ministries of economics and finance, as well as senior
officers of ADB, executing agencies, and implementing agencies. With the help of

23
     The format has much in common with the project performance report and design and monitoring format used in
     ADB records. The key difference is that the resident mission format is oriented to monitoring project
     implementation and its progress, whereas the project performance report is structured to suit the many other
     broader institutional requirements of ADB, such as public information disclosure.
                                                                                                                      15


presentations and handouts, the resulting assessment by those present is transparent and
consistent. 24 Projects are awarded red, yellow, and green flags to indicate the degree of risk
they face (from high to low).25

62.    Staff in many departments and ministries of the government conveyed to the IED
mission that this method of monitoring progress had been a source of tremendous learning for
them. They not only learned a lot about ADB's system and its project processing practices, but
more importantly, they learned about project implementation from each other--whether
emulating good practices or side-stepping impediments.26

63.      While a systematic job is being done in terms of monitoring project implementation in
India, additional information and analysis are required to assess the development outcomes
and impact of projects.27 The periodic TPRMs are more than satisfactory for monitoring project
implementation. However, they are not adequate to determine project outcomes and impact in
terms of the results framework, although the CPS noted that "projects that are nearing
completion or have been closed, are selected for detailed discussion of their overall results in
terms of their outputs and outcomes (p. ii)." 28 These observations apply unevenly across
sectors. For example, power and highway projects have useful baseline indicators while
multisector urban projects, rural road projects, and financial inclusion projects seem to have
difficulty identifying achievements as these projects lack baseline indicators.

C.       Efficiency

64.     The CPSFR assessed the efficiency of the CPS program successful (efficient). It
pointed out that "repeat projects have been more efficient as they ride on capacity that has
been built and institutions that have been strengthened" (CPSFR, para. 81). This validation
agrees with the CPSFR and rates the program efficient, mainly because the transport and
energy sectors, which take about two-thirds of the ADB portfolio29, were efficient while other
sectors have had some implementation issues. It is also noted that the average disbursement
rate in India was about 27%--much higher than the ADB average of about 20%, even though
the portfolio has been growing rapidly (Table 1). There has been a sharp increase in the
number of delegated loans to the resident mission since 2010 (from 15 to 42), while the
corresponding increase in the staff resources remained slow. This suggests that staff
resources for project implementation have been outstretched in the resident mission.


24
   Besides reviewing contract awards and disbursements, TPRMs also examine project implementation
   comprehensively. For example, the minutes of February 2012 observe that "despite the high disbursements
   achieved in 2011, there are a number of projects which are underperforming and running behind the schedule."
25
   Out of 73 active loans at the end of December 2011, 17 were identified as red flag projects with major issues
   (23%) and another 18 with yellow flags (25%).
26
   The record of background documents and minutes is maintained for future reference. Two such sets of
   documents covering about 75­80 projects each for 2010 and 2012 were reviewed in detail, as an input for this
   validation.
27
   This Indian case is in line with the general findings of IED's special evaluation study on managing for development
   results. "At present, attention is more focused on the beginning links of the chain (e.g., activities and outputs) vis-
   à-vis the later links (e.g., outcomes and impacts). Reinforcing the later (weaker) links would be a useful way of
   making the entire chain stronger and achieving greater results orientation." IED. 2011. Managing for Development
   Results. Manila: ADB. p. 53.
28
   As a large number of projects are in the nature of MFF tranches, perhaps these are individually too discrete to
   bear out results. As such, these may not be amenable to an impact assessment just yet.
29
   As of 31 December 2011, the India portfolio included 79 loans with a net loan amount of $11.9 billion. There were
   25 loans in the energy sector, 18 loans in the transport sector, 21 loans in the urban sector, and six loans in the
   ANR sector. The finance sector had nine loans, of which four were program loans.
16


                         Table 1: Financial Performance Ratios, 2007­2011
                     Item                       2007     2008     2009      2010      2011
     A. Loan Portfolio
      1. Amount of Active Loans ($ million)      7,247    8,188    8,449    10,154     11,875
      2. Number of Active Loans                     38       44       53        67         79
      3. Number of Loans Delegated to the           15       15       15        24         42
         Resident Mission
     B. Financial Performance
      1. Contract Awards ($ million)             1,437    1,154    1,657     1,856      1,751
      2. Disbursement ($ million)                1,363    1,508    1,340     1,699      1,434
      3. Disbursement Ratio (%)                   25.9     28.4     23.2      32.3       24.8
     Source: Asian Development Bank database.

65.      Project implementation delays in some projects have been an issue, but ADB has been
addressing them through an enhanced portfolio review mechanism and capacity development
programs for project implementing agencies. As most projects approved over the period 2002­
2011 are still under implementation, evidence on the efficiency of ADB's current Indian portfolio
is limited. Further, given that many of these operations are phased MFFs and their future PFRs
are yet to be designed, it is not possible to assess their outcomes in terms of performance
standards, costs, or economic benefits. In this sense, the validation's discussion below focuses
on implementation efficiencies and is based on some completed projects, some progress
reports, including midterm reviews, and the detailed minutes of individual projects in TPRMs.
Overall, implementation efficiency has been better in the energy and transport sectors in
comparison with other sectors.

66.     Agriculture and natural resources. None of the ANR projects has been completed to
date, so only a tentative assessment of likely efficiency is provided here. Most of the ANR
projects are innovative in nature. Executing and implementing agencies are involved in their
implementation for the first time. Even service providers like bidders, contractors, suppliers,
and consultants have to contend with international standards for the first time as far as quality
controls are concerned in the ANR sector. Likewise, the assessment of the quality of outputs,
and the handing over of the completed assets to the beneficiaries are new activities and
procedures for some government staff, so causing delays. In addition, delays in a flood control
project in the northeast are likely to expose the region to yet another season of monsoonal
floods, causing damage to swaths of population, homes, assets, and infrastructure. Some ANR
projects faced slippages and were delayed because of various reasons, including lack of
preparedness of project management offices, lengthy bid evaluation processes, delayed
internal processing, and long turnaround time of statutory clearances and approvals. Often,
delays took place in the absence of qualified bidders or the failure of contractors to meet set
standards.

67.     Energy. As many projects are similar to previous ones, there is much opportunity for
on-the-job learning and benefitting from lessons learned. Consequently, the resources and
procedures-oriented efficiencies in the energy sector have been high. Most projects have
managed to deliver outputs without major slippages or delays. As acknowledged in a number
of TPRMs, the use of project readiness filters has played an important role in keeping
implementation broadly on track in the energy sector. As of December 2011, the TPRM noted
that there were no major issues in the ongoing projects, except in the case of Uttarakhand
which experienced significant slippages and delays. ADB's first energy sector intervention in
Bihar was slow to take off, but with the help of TA, it is now under implementation. In
comparison to other sector operations in India, the average loan extensions (at 14 months)
                                                                                                           17


were lowest for the energy sector. The project completion report (PCR) validation for the
Assam Power Sector Development Program noted some methodological issues regarding the
rate of return, but the economic internal rate of return was expected to be higher than the 12%
cutoff.

68.    Transport. Projects were well conceived and were based on plans that had been
prepared over a long period. These were detailed in packages of activities with suitable
advance actions. However, in some states, the capacities of local contractors, suppliers, and
consultants were weak on the ground; and the local market was inundated with too many
works. More than 1,000 packages of rural works were awarded as contracts, overwhelming
some contractors. However, about 90% of them were able to deliver. Time extensions were
needed in the case of Orissa30 and slower disbursements were experienced in Assam. The
PCR for the rural road sector program assessed it as efficient.31 As of December 2011, the
TPRM identified a total of 13 projects of which one had an implementation delay.

69.      Initially, railway projects also took longer to register progress as executing and
implementing agencies were not familiar with ADB practices, but they soon caught up and
implementation quality improved. Modern accounting architecture, i.e., converting the railways'
cash-based accounting system to an accrual-based system, involved a basic change and is
under implementation. Full implementation of the new accounting system is considered a
critical element for better financial governance and management, hence, for transparency and
efficiency enhancement of the Indian railway business.

70.     Thus, transport projects succeeded in constructing roads and delivering outputs.
Outcomes were especially encouraging with regard to rural roads. The economic internal rate
of return calculated for the first and second rural roads projects were estimated at 30.8% and
21.4%, respectively, exceeding ADB's benchmark of 12% by a wide margin (CPSFR, para. 93).

71.      Water and other municipal infrastructure and services. The CPSFR claims that
implementation efficiencies in this sector have been reasonable. However, this validation notes
that implementation of complex and fragmented projects have posed a number of problems
(CPSFR, p.17, para. 79). This constituted a more complex part of the Indian portfolio.
Implementation difficulties included (i) the low quality and capability of local contractors,
(ii) inadequate capacity and staffing of project management offices and project implementation
units, and (iii) general lack of experience and exposure to ADB practices in developing
proposals and awarding contracts. More importantly, every time a new project was introduced,
given the nature of urban development, it often involved a new ULB. A new location or a new
urban center made it necessary to get everyone on board and negotiate the impediments
anew. In comparison with repeat projects in some other sectors, little carryover of knowledge is
gained across urban projects because of their horizontal nature. More importantly, many ULBs
have little technical capability of their own. As of December 2011, there were 21 water and
other municipal infrastructure and services sector projects, of which five had implementation
delays.

72.    Finance. Implementation efficiencies have been mixed. Financial intermediation loans
were implemented well--these were fully disbursed for 37 PPPs. Likewise, program loans for

30
   ADB. 2005. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility to India for Rural Roads Sector II Investment Program. Manila.
31
   ADB. 2012. Completion Report: Rural Road Sector II Investment Program (Project 1) in India (Loan 2248-IND).
   p.9, para. 30.
18


Assam and Mizoram were well implemented despite the time overrun. Slower implementation
has been experienced in the case of rural cooperatives. The scope of this intervention was
extremely wide and ambitious. The Khadi industry turned out to be a tough subsector to work in
and posed huge implementation difficulties. The CPSFR suggests that ADB needs to examine
its role in such projects in the future. As of December 2011, there were eight projects in the
finance sector, of which three had implementation delays.

D.        Effectiveness

73.     The CPSFR assesses the CPS program successful (effective). It describes in detail
outputs and outcomes generated under different programs, especially in energy, transport, and
water and other municipal infrastructure and services sectors. Following the Finance Plus
approach, institutional development and knowledge solutions activities have been undertaken
in many ADB operations. This validation concurs with the CPSFR and assesses the program
effective. This assessment is based on a number of factors. First, a number of completed
assessments (e.g., Assam power, rural roads, Rajasthan urban water and sanitation services)
have evaluated the projects as effective. Second, the weight of the energy and transport
sectors has been dominant and has swung the overall portfolio outcomes toward effectiveness.
Lastly, some significant institution building activities in relation to PPPs and capacity building
have been successfully accomplished under the CPS. Details are provided below in relation to
the sectors.

74.     A total of 22 projects (involving 29 loans) for India were rated during 2002­2011. Fifteen
of these (68%), or 22 loans (76%), were rated highly successful or successful in achieving the
project objectives, while five were partly successful and two were unsuccessful. 32 This is a
huge improvement from the 63% project success rate during the previous period, 1991­2001.
The Indian success rate is also higher than the ADB-wide project success rate of 67% for
2002­2011.

75.     Agriculture and natural resources. The likely effectiveness of ongoing projects can
be assessed based on project progress, while waiting for the final assessment upon
completion. None of the MFFs in ANR have been completed (at facility level). The CPSFR
reports that irrigated area in Chhattisgarh and Orissa increased by 200,000 hectares. Over
800 water user associations were operating in irrigation areas. A preliminary study undertaken
with the help of TA consultants under the Chhattisgarh project indicates progress in
diversification of the cropping pattern. The study shows that the selection of new varieties of
seeds has also helped in increasing yields and the enhanced use of fertilizers.33 Only a few
studies have been mentioned in the CPSFR for review by this validation and the number of
observations in some studies was insufficient to draw generalized conclusions. Most of the
outputs in other ANR projects, like coastal management and agribusiness, are ongoing.

76.     Energy. The CPSFR details ADB's contribution to outputs and outcomes in the energy
sector. These included transmission lines (about 7,900 kilometers [km]); the setting up of 53
transmission substations and upgrading of 140 transmission substations; and the laying of
distribution lines (about 72,000 km, of which 27,800 km were part of the high-voltage
distribution system to guard against pilferage). In addition, ADB provided partial funding for 415
megawatts of a photovoltaic solar power system. It also conducted policy and regulatory

32
   The success rate for individual loans is much higher (i.e., 76%) than the project success rate in India. Many ADB
   projects in India tend to have multiple, phased loans to cover different areas or states.
33
   Crop cuts are regularly undertaken by the project to measure the results.
                                                                                                       19


activities in a number of states, including Assam. Most of the outputs were delivered, and
followed the procedures laid out under the project. The Assam power sector program,34 for
which PCR validation has been carried out by IED, was assessed effective.35

77.    Transport. ADB projects were effective in delivering a number of valuable outputs and
outcomes that involved innovations and knowledge solutions. ADB built 1,464 km of national
highways, 4,125 km of state highways, and 17,883 km of rural roads under the CPS period.
These roads connected thousands of homes and hundreds of cities across the country. In rail
transport, 353 km of railway tracks were converted from single lines to double tracks.

78.     In terms of institutional development, ADB set up a system of planned expansions of
road networks that proved to be its real contribution under the program. Good road plans with
detailed project reports were drawn and consideration was given to social, engineering, and
environmental conservation factors. Executing and implementing agencies developed norms
and good practices to ensure that these innovations and knowledge solutions were included in
the project design and were implemented with full commitment. Enabling Indian executing and
implementing agencies to prepare projects in line with international standards was an important
achievement. In summary, good road engineering practices were being blended to produce
social and environmental outputs under these projects.

79.      Water and other municipal infrastructure and services. Under the CPS, water and
other municipal infrastructure and services sector projects succeeded in delivering outputs that
involved significant knowledge solutions. The CPSFR states that these included the following:
(i) the installation of water treatment capacity of 1,224 million liters per day; (ii) the expansion
and rehabilitation of a 2,706 km water supply network; (iii) the creation of a 952 km wastewater
collection network and an additional 1,276 km water treatment facility; and (iv) the
augmentation of a solid waste treatment capacity by 376 tons per day. 36 The PCR for
Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project37 assessed the project effective.

80.     In terms of institutional development, urban water supply and sanitation projects helped
introduce several reforms that resulted in the following outcomes: (i) development of a
regulatory framework; (ii) the financial ring-fencing of accounts related to urban services; (iii)
introduction of sound pricing policies for urban services; (iv) inclusion of operation and
maintenance (O&M) under contracts for municipal services; (v) rendering of the PPP modality
as a viable operational option in a number of cases; and (vi) improvements in the management
and treatment of septic tanks, leading to improvements in the environment, a reduction in
greenhouse gases, and the promotion of conservation.

81.     The development of urban services was also effective in promoting tourism in the
region. Attention was especially given to noncommercial tourism, with emphasis on bed-and-
breakfast types of tourist services. TA support helped establish a regulatory system,
benchmarking water and sanitation system pricing for South Asian countries. Urban water
supply and sanitation related activities also promoted innovations that sought to move from
current flat tariffs to volumetric tariffs for water usage.



34
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans and
   technical Assistance Grants to India for the Assam Power Sector Development Program. Manila.
35
    IED. 2011. Program Completion Validation Report: Assam Power Sector Development in India. Manila: ADB.
36
   For details, see the CPSFR p.21, para. 99.
37
   ADB. 2011. Completion Report: Rjasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project in India. Manila.
20


82.     Finance. The financial sector rendered many outputs under the CPS. As the CPSFR
puts it, the India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility (IIPFF) I and II were exceedingly
successful in generating 37 PPPs.38 These helped build roads, airports, and power plants. The
airports of both Delhi and Mumbai were constructed and renovated under these interventions.
Some 2,000 km of national and state highway segments were built, and financial support was
provided to the Urban Mega Power Project in Gujarat. The total amount of funds leveraged by
these interventions amounted to about $7.9 billion (i.e., more than 11 times).39

83.      In terms of institutional and knowledge development, capacity was built and 21 PPP
cells were established in different parts of the country. The outputs of these cells have included
developing projects from the concept stage to bid process management and implementation as
well as risk appraisals of PPP projects. Development of sector tools included websites and
databases, and extended help to seek funding from central government funding schemes,
e.g., viability gap funding. These services are not confined to ADB operations but have also
been supporting government development interventions at large. In terms of public resource
management, a number of reforms were undertaken in the states of Assam and Mizoram.
These included the setting up of a tax management information system, the computerization of
treasury, and the closing down of loss-making public sector undertakings. Further, a group of
800 micro-, small, and medium-scale women entrepreneurs was being helped under the Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Project.40 However, progress has been slow in
the case of rural cooperatives and the KRDP.

84.     Technical assistance. ADB TA projects have been successful in promoting knowledge
solutions--introducing innovative practices and procedures through capacity development
programs. 41 Umbrella TA projects have enhanced the project preparedness of executing
agencies by supporting feasibility studies, preliminary design, bid documents, and bid
evaluation, among others. The Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) has also been
engaged in capacity building of commercial banks through its TA42 for commercial bank lending
for solar energy projects. It was found to be useful by commercial banks and the government.
All these TA inputs have enabled improved coordination between TA and loan projects. They
have led to (i) policy and awareness building, (ii) establishing processes and schemes, and (iii)
developing the project pipeline. More importantly, their outcomes have been shared at central
as well as state levels (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa,
and Uttarakhand). Likewise, capacity development TA has enhanced the implementation
capacity of executing and implementing agencies (para. 24). However, a recently held TA
TPRM drew attention to improving ADB's dissemination of knowledge products in India.

E.        Sustainability

85.     The CPSFR assesses the CPS programs successful (likely sustainable) as the program
is well endorsed and supported by the government, including investment of the government's

38
   A total of 30 subprojects were funded under the IIPFF I, covering 28 road projects and two international airports at
   Delhi and Mumbai.
39
   CPSFR, p. 19, para. 89.
40
    ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance to India for the Small and Medium Enterprise Trade Finance Development Facility. Manila.
41
   Seven of these TA projects were primarily engaged in capacity building for PPPs (TA projects 4890, 4993, 7152,
   7342, 7463, 7441, and 7625 for about $15.3 million). Of these, six were under this CPS.
42
    ADB. 2011. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Technical
   Assistance to India for Capacity Building for Commercial Bank Lending for Solar Energy Projects (Cofinanced by
   the Asian Clean Energy Fund under the Clean Energy Financing Partnership Facility). Manila.
                                                                                                 21


own funds in the sector. The CPSFR also identifies institutional and staff capacity
development, good practices, and government support as the major plank for ensuring
sustainability. This validation agrees with the CPSFR and assesses the CPS program likely
sustainable. This assessment is underpinned by a number of factors, including (i) the
government's total commitment to and support for agriculture and food production; (ii)
significant involvement of the private sector in energy and transport, along with an appropriate
regulatory regime and O&M; and (iii) compatibility of infrastructure with safeguards and
environmental conservation. This assessment is detailed below for each sector.

86.     Agriculture and natural resources. Since ANR constitutes an extremely important
sector for the development plans in India, the government attaches high priority to agricultural
reforms. In the government's report card on completion of 3 years in administration issued in
May 2012, food security was the first item for which the government claimed credit. Likewise,
improved water resource management received high-level attention from policy makers. Thus,
while the configuration of MFF tranches has yet to evolve fully, the context and possible
government support for ANR activities are assured. However, this validation notes that
capacities at the state level, where ANR projects are implemented, are limited by lack of
training, exposure to better practices, and international standards.

87.     Energy. The energy sector follows sustainable practices across the board. Power
generation is taken care of through extensive plant maintenance, as indicated by plant load
factor data. Financial allocation for O&M is adequately provided. The regulatory regime is kept
up by pursuing the provision under the Electricity Act 2003, especially in relation to tariff fixing
and revenue mobilization. Also, ADB TA helped to prepare master plans for the states of
Himachal Pradesh and Bihar to ensure the sustainable development of the energy sector.
Active involvement of the private sector in energy through PPPs is a positive development. The
CPSFR, however, needed to address state level management of electricity boards for putting
the sector on a sustainable path.

88.     Transport. This validation notes that special attention was paid to ensure the
sustainability of transport projects. Arrangements were made for O&M allocations to be ensured
so that assets created under the project could last longer. For this purpose, a road maintenance
fund was created in Madhya Pradesh. Similarly, a state highway fund was established to support
the future construction of state highways. The sustainability of roads is likely to be improved by
new institutional practices introduced under these projects. Special organizations created for the
projects, like the National Rural Roads Development Agency and States Rural Roads
Development Agencies, introduced reforms that are likely to benefit not only the road sector but
also other areas of development. These include environmental conservation, emphasis on green
construction, pursuing the CDM, and following road safety norms, among others. Several long-
term reforms in the railways sector are, however, still pending.

89.      Water and other municipal infrastructure and services. Sector sustainability issues
have two main aspects: (i) dealing with the financial outlays for the maintenance of assets, and
(ii) involving institutional arrangements to sustain good governance practices in the sector. The
allocation of resources was significant under the Eleventh Plan, so the initial resource
allocation was not likely to be the main issue. However, in some cases reforms are needed to
improve property tax collection, revise and implement water tariffs, ensure the imposition of
drainage surcharges, and register contracts with private providers for the maintenance of
services as a necessary condition. In this sense, the mobilization of resources by urban centers
on their own (not just state grants and subsidies) is also deemed crucial to sustainability.
22


90.     Although many of these and similar conditions are negotiated up front and were
included in loan covenants with targets, the level of compliance remained low. ADB has been
trying to negotiate the ring-fencing of financial resources that can be sourced for continued
urban development and the provision of services. Beside the slow pace of reforms, the key
constraints that this validation notes include the lack of expertise and technical know-how and
the lack of appropriate management support at the municipal level.

91.      Finance. The sustainability of the sector reforms relies on the capacity of the
organizations that have been financially supported under the CPS. The CPSFR suggests that
the sustainability of the IIPFF I and II activities is likely, as undertakings supported under these
loans are established and functioning well. Likewise, most of the public resources management
reforms in Assam and Mizoram are likely to continue. These may have to be topped up in
future, as economic growth takes hold in these areas. However, there are some unresolved
issues with regard to the rural cooperatives, for which legislation is awaiting consideration and
the approval of Parliament. Only then will a likely path for future reforms be clear. The KRDP is
still looking for the right direction and is unlikely to be sustainable in its present condition.

F.         Development Impact

92.      The CPSFR assessed the development impact of the CPS programs successful
(satisfactory). It provided a detailed account of sector objectives and their sector-specific as
well as cross-sectoral impacts. It also described plausible links between the CPS sector
outcomes and larger sector outcomes. Citing the CAPE 2007, the CPSFR argued that although
"ADB's financial assistance may have been small relative to the size of public investment in a
middle income and large economy like India, its support made a significant contribution to the
country's development process" (CPSFR, p. 24, para. 117). This validation took stock of ADB's
achievement of the overall CPS objectives and sector-level development impacts (paras. 93­
105). It agrees with the CPSFR and assesses the sector impacts satisfactory.

93.     Achieving overall country partnership strategy objectives. The CPS was designed
to achieve four strategic objectives (para.17). This validation considers that ADB has achieved
its limited CPS objectives through delivering its program for India. The following four
paragraphs discuss the results with respect to the strategic objectives of the CPS.

94.     Supporting inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth. Growing at a rate of
about 7.8% per annum under the Eleventh Plan, the Indian economy worked towards its
objective of greater inclusiveness despite the difficulties associated with the global volatility and
domestic constraints. This has led to a continued reduction in headcount poverty according to
the national poverty line.43 Further, there is some evidence that interstate disparities may have
improved under the Eleventh Plan as some of the lagging states have registered higher growth
rates, e.g., Orissa, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Uttarakhand. India's performance on
MDGs is mixed although the country is on track in terms of income poverty, enrolments in
primary education, drinking water, and reduction in gender disparities. However, it is lagging in
malnourishment, infant mortality rates, maternal health, and sanitation facilities. This validation


43
     The Indian poverty line, which is made of "different poverty lines at sub-national level ... separately for rural and
     urban areas," is lower than the international purchasing power parity-based poverty line (FY2004 prices).
     Government of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Central Statistical Organization. 2009.
     Millennium Development Goals: India Country Report 2009. Mid-Term Statistical Appraisal. Delhi. p.3. In May
     2012, the government set up a new commission to review the poverty line and reassess the number of poor in the
     country.
                                                                                                                 23


believes that ADB, in its narrow sphere of influence, has contributed to those positive
developments.

95.     Within its area of ADB engagement inclusiveness was pursued through (i) the inclusion
of lagging states in operations; (ii) the choice of subsectors, such as rural roads; (iii) rendering
support to agriculture and water resource management; and (iv) the promotion of financial
inclusion in the program. More importantly, the design of several projects followed an
environmentally sustainable path. There were two types of development impacts. First, through
its projects, ADB was able to demonstrate how to build more environmentally friendly and
sustainable projects in different sectors, e.g., renewable energy projects. Second, ADB was
able to convince executing agencies and their ministries, e.g., railways or highway authorities,
to adopt an environmentally sustainable framework in their approaches. A good beginning has
been made on both fronts.

96.      Catalyzing investments through innovative business and financing solutions.
Under the CPS, this has been supported through two main approaches. First, many projects
moved away from the departmental structure of ministries to the corporate organization format
under which business procedures have changed and development projects are being
implemented through new institutions. This is a structural shift in the organizational design of
business agencies that is potentially capable of far-reaching consequences. Second, ADB
projects relied on the PPP modality with a view to combine the respective strengths of the
public and private sectors to address sector development problems. By the sheer number of
PPP cases approved under the CPS period, with or without ADB, it is emerging as a major shift
in the earlier pattern of doing business in India. In the future, India's development agenda is
likely to be riding more and more on the strengths of its private sector, with the government in
an important role as regulator.

97.     Promoting results orientation. The CPS helped promote results orientation through
its projects. Results orientation has now spread across different ministries and departments of
the government in India because of, among others, the Right to Information (RTI) Act in 2005,
which requires public authorities to provide information to any citizen within 30 days. Most of
the sector ministries as well as the Planning Commission have developed and adopted a
results framework for evaluating their performance. In this sense, ADB's emphasis was not
only in step with the unfolding pattern in India, but encouraged the government to pursue
results orientation in its development efforts. Whenever a project was nearing completion, the
resident mission's TPRM focused on its outputs and outcome and took note of the results. 44
However, the CPSFR did not report on its results framework, which is another gap in the CPS
results orientation (para. 39).

98.    Promoting regional cooperation. Under the CPS, ADB pursued the core area of
regional cooperation by focusing on strengthening infrastructure and policy reforms in the
northeastern region of the country. Two projects that were approved are still under
implementation, i.e., the South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation Information Highway
Project and the South Asia Tourism Infrastructure Development Project. These are in addition

44
     IED's 2012 Annual Evaluation Review (footnote 9) observes that the India portfolio has grown rapidly after 2005.
     Because there are only a few project completion reports, and even fewer validations of PCRs, the review rightly
     cautions that "Careful monitoring of the ongoing portfolio is recommended." The validation is of the view that a
     comprehensive and thorough review of India's portfolio needs to be undertaken while keeping its peculiarities in
     view, such as the dominance of the energy and transport sectors, which each account for about one-third of the
     total, the predominance of the MFF modality in the program, and a lending environment characterized by the
     multilayered nature of operations. In this sense, the typology of projects in India is unique.
24


to the support for promoting trade and transport linkages across Bangladesh, Bhutan, India,
and Nepal under ADB's South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation initiative. 45 These
initiatives have engendered a new beginning based on greater subregional connectivity, an
improved trading environment, and a combined thrust for tourism. The development impact of
these initiatives is likely to manifest positively in the long term through increased trade and
other economic activities within the subregion.

99.     Sector-level development impacts. Greater complementarities are necessary to
achieve greater development impacts of ADB operations on the ground. The development
impact can become larger when projects are well linked across to different sectors and
stakeholders' economic activities (Box 2). The studies conducted under rural road projects
show the multifaceted nature of the development impact of rural connectivity, generating higher
agricultural productivity and improved access to basic health and education services. These
horizontal connections assume much greater importance in India as a number of government
schemes are trying to reach down to the target population vertically in parallel. For instance,
the Ministry of Rural Development has adopted a convergence approach to explore
complementarities between the schemes and programs of the ministry and those of other
ministries and state governments.46 However, the development programs' horizontal interface
is often not well followed through.47 Thus, ADB needs to assist the government in this regard
through future projects and TA. Although such horizontal linkages may have been implicitly
considered in ADB's sector and project selection, these need to be spelled out more explicitly
under the new CPS. Further, active involvement of the private sector in the management and
delivery of services requires these horizontal linkages to be pursued and monitored closely to
ensure their proper utilization.


                                   Box 2: Horizontal Complementarities
     The development patterns of nations feature multiple dots, each with distinct histories, geographies,
     and characteristics. Connecting these dots, according to evaluation findings, is key to getting good
     results from various interventions. Horizontal complementarities can be made across areas such as
     education and employment; water supply, sanitation and health; and roads and the environment.
     Here, the sectorwide approach modality--whereby development partners and governments pool
     resources to support integrated development--is expected to be among the best ways to increase
     efficiency in project implementation.
     A series of evaluative findings at the project or sector levels make the case for connecting the dots
     horizontally. An evaluation of rural roads showed that many poor people simply do not have the
     means to take advantage of a rural road. Focusing only on the immediate predicament or proximate
     needs risks losing sight of the desired results. The implication may not be that a single financier tries
     to support all the goals, but rather that the strategy of each sees the bigger picture and the work of
     different players is connected. An evaluation of rural roads showed that the poor often do not have the
     means to take advantage of a rural road. Evaluation consistently shows that coordination or
     collaboration across areas and among partners has been a weak link in the development process.
     Source: IED. 2012. Connecting the Dots for Greater Development Impact. Learning Lessons. Manila: ADB.



45
   See CPS, para. 38.
46
   The Ministry of Rural Development, in its annual report 2011­2012, indicated that the ministry, with the help of the
   Planning Commission, was trying to identify possible programs for convergence for the Twelfth Plan and beyond.
   It also illustrated several ongoing champion convergence programs such as the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
   Employment Guarantee Scheme.
47
   The central Ministry of Rural Development is reportedly trying to assess the total cost of all these schemes at the
   village level and beginning to take note of these horizontal interfaces.
                                                                                                            25


100. Agriculture and natural resources. According to the outputs and outcomes cited in
the CPSFR (based on studies conducted by civil society organizations under associated TA)48
and the field visits conducted by the Independent Evaluation Mission, the ANR program is likely
to have a significant impact on the wider economy of the irrigated area. Within the sector, it is
expected to improve agricultural yield as an outcome of investments under the project area
because of improved irrigation and crop diversification. This, in turn, will generate more
employment opportunities and more income in the neighboring rural areas, especially for
women. Likewise, water users associations are likely to catalyze not only improved water
resource management but also development activities at the local level once they become
recognized by stakeholders as a change agent. Further, improvements in flood control and
water resource management are likely to impact agriculture as well as other sectors in the
adjacent geographical and downstream areas. As projects are still under implementation, these
are all likely development impacts at the moment. Nonetheless, based on the interim results
available from project documents, indications are that the operations are on track toward
achieving some of these ends.

101. Energy. The development impact of ADB's energy sector projects is likely to be
significant, particularly because the operations are developing as planned and ADB is an
important player in the sector. As electricity availability is a binding constraint, ADB makes a
potential contribution to economic growth and development in the electricity-using sectors by
enhancing capacity for reliable electricity utility service and through improved management of
the energy sector (para. 76). Further, by improving the efficiency of operations, especially
through the reduction of power losses, it reduces avoidable outlays under public funds. Similar
economies can be traced to improvements in the regulatory environment of the energy sector,
especially where the functioning of state electricity boards has improved. By enabling the larger
and more economical transmission of power from surplus states to shortage areas, the
financial revenue of the energy sector is augmented and it renders the sector attractive for
future investments. Finally, bringing in enhanced private sector participation to the sector
improves efficiency. The commercial use of electricity is particularly beneficial for promoting
economic activities and growth. The commercial utilization of electricity in FY2009, at 10.4% of
the total, was 28% higher than it was 5 years earlier in FY2004.49

102. Transport. The development impact was assessed through some rigorously designed
socioeconomic studies conducted by ADB under the rural roads project. These studies covered
the states of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, and Orissa in 2009­2010. They found
that employment had increased in the connected habitations (by 9%). In some cases, per
capita income had increased by as much as 2.5 times previous levels. As a result, a significant
decline in the headcount of persons below the poverty line (by 3%) was noted. Besides these,
the CPSFR presented a number of social development indicators that registered improvements
in school attendance and teachers' presence in school. The rate of dropouts declined, while
improvements in health indicators related to mothers and children were registered.50 Further,
ADB projects have helped provide efficient and economical transport mechanisms in a number
of cities, generating savings in time and resources. Most importantly, improvements in
institutional practices--such as a non-lapsable road development fund and performance-based
contracts--are likely to be the additional long-term gains of ADB operations in the sector.

48
    CPSFR, para. 33. See also ADB. 2011. India: A Partnership for Inclusive Growth. Development Effectiveness
   Brief. Manila. p.19.
49
   Government of India, Ministry of Finance. 2012. Economic Survey 2011­12. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
   Table 1.25, p. A28.
50
   For details, see the CPSFR p. 28; Operations Research Group. 2009. Socio-economic Impact Assessment
   Report­Rural Roads Project 1. Consultant's report. Manila (Loan 2018-IND).
26



103. Water and other municipal infrastructure and services. The CPSFR states that
ADB's water and other municipal infrastructure and services sector services benefited 26.2
million persons through provision of services. Sewerage services were provided to 15.0 million
persons, while the size of the population that benefitted from solid waste management services
is estimated to be 19.1 million. Health benefits of quality water and better sanitation have an
immense development impact. In addition, a decline in nonrevenue water, as well as in
greenhouse gases, has been noted to have wider development implications. These are likely to
influence potential improvements in environment and climate change as well.

104. Finance. In the case of the IIPFF I and II, the development impact is linked to the new,
well-functioning airports in the metropolitan regions of New Delhi and Mumbai, and the partial
relieving of power constraints as a result of energy sector interventions. Likewise, long-term
gains resulting from improvements in public resources management are likely to impact
millions in the northeastern region of the country. They also have a positive demonstration
effect on the other states in the northeastern region or in the country at large. They may be
encouraged to pursue similar reforms, e.g., health sector and health insurance related reforms
undertaken in the Mizoram. The likely gains from the rural cooperatives project could also be
immense, although it is difficult to say anything at this stage as the program is on hold because
of pending legislative action (e.g., amending the Banking Regulation Act). Notwithstanding, it is
assessed that Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra have registered more progress in improving
rural cooperatives in comparison to other states. The impact of the Khadi program has yet to
shape up.

105. Role of non-sovereign operations. ADB's non-sovereign operations have promoted
the public-private partnerships modality in India through participating in core development
projects (para. 22). ADB had actively invested in India focusing on energy, transport, and
industry sectors, but the investment has become stagnant in recent years. However, the
demand for ADB's non-sovereign operations in India remains strong as the private sector of the
economy grows rapidly. Therefore, ADB's private sector operations would need to find its role
to support private sector development more broadly than in the past within the context of ADB's
lending program. Nonetheless, strategic awareness about this changing pattern was not
adequately emphasized in the CPS. 51 Given the emphasis of ADB's Strategy 2020 on the role
of the private sector in ADB-wide operations, and the share of the private sector in India's five
years plans, a meaningful country operations strategy should straddle this divide. India is an
appropriate case for introducing this approach, especially as the country operations have made
in-roads to the private sector through PPPs. Given the significance of the role of the private
sector in Indian economy, there is a need to build a strategic framework for India operations
that encompasses synergies between public and private sectors.

G.         Overall Assessment

106. The CPSFR self-assessed the overall performance of ADB operations during the CPS
period (2009­2012) as successful, with satisfactory strategic positioning, a relevant program,
and an effective and efficient delivery of outputs and outcomes, and a likely sustainable and
satisfactory development impact. This validation endorses the ratings of the CPSFR, thus rates
the overall performance successful, and considers that ADB has successfully achieved its CPS
objectives through a relevant program. Nonetheless, it should be noted that ADB needs to

51
     This is not only related to the India CPS. All country operations strategies in ADB are primarily designed from the
     point of view of public sector operations. This is a legacy practice.
                                                                                                             27


further improve its results orientation to generate greater total development impacts based on
results targeting and monitoring for achieving its CPS objectives. At the sector level, ADB
operations in energy and transport sectors have performed well, but agriculture and natural
resources, water and other municipal infrastructure and services, and finance sectors need to
improve project implementation efficiencies. The validation's rating is in line with the 2007
CAPE's performance rating (overall successful). 52

107.       Table 2 summarizes the rating according to the IED's evaluation criteria.

       Table 2: Ratings in India Country Partnership Strategy Final Review and Validation
     Evaluation Criteria and                                                             Reasons for Rating
     CPSFR Quality                    CPSFR Ratings           Validation Ratings            Deviations
     Strategic Positioning         Satisfactory              Satisfactory                      NA
     Program Relevance             Successful                Relevant                          NA
     Efficiency                    Successful                Efficient                         NA
     Effectiveness                 Successful                Effective                         NA
     Sustainability                Successful                Likely sustainable                NA
     Development Impacts           Successful                Satisfactory                      NA
     Overall Rating                Satisfactory              Successful                        NA
     ADB Performance               Satisfactory              Satisfactory                      NA
     Borrowers' Performance        Satisfactory              Satisfactory                      NA
     CPSFR Quality                 NA                        Satisfactory
     ADB = Asian Development Bank, CPSFR = country partnership strategy final review, NA = not applicable.
     Source: Independent Evaluation Department.

108. In terms of strategic positioning, the CPS charted out a strategic direction that was
consistent with the government's plan, particularly the Eleventh Plan. The CPS was also
consistent with ADB's Strategy 2020 and the overarching goal of poverty reduction. ADB
operations were designed with an aim to support rapid growth and inclusive development. ADB
focused about 70% of its operations in the lagging states, and on long-term issues like flood
control, coastal management, and environmental conservation. Most importantly, it helped
augment power generation and build roads to enhance connectivity. Given the repetitive nature
of their activities, the relative performance of energy and transport sector projects has been
better. They also account for a major share of the portfolio. However, the performance of ANR,
water and other municipal infrastructure and services, and finance sectors needs to be further
improved.

109. In terms of program relevance, the ADB program provided during the CPS period was
relevant and adequate to support the CPS objectives. ADB succeeded in extending financial
support to India in the order of $2 billion per annum. The highpoint of ADB's operational
support was that it followed the Finance Plus approach. Among others, innovations included
the introduction of participatory irrigation management, safeguard policies in the power sector,
environmental consideration in railway operations, and greening of roads. ADB was successful
in introducing several innovative features--an approach for inclusive development, PPPs,
TPRMs, and the Finance Plus approach.

110. ADB identified the PPP modality as a principal device to combine the capabilities of the
public and private sectors toward the goals of the Eleventh Plan. The approach has much

52
     The 2007 CAPE assessed ADB's sector and strategic and institutional performance successful, as most ADB
     assistance helped build much-needed infrastructure and contributed to improving sector policy and the
     institutional environment.
28


potential for further application, and has already shown significant results in the energy and
transport sectors. Prominent methods to make PPPs effective in India have included (i) the
setting up of PPP cells and management information systems in states; (ii) the setting up of a
cell in the DEA along with a number of financial experts; and (iii) creating a project
development fund that helps with implementing pilot projects, and establishing advisory panels.

111. However, project implementation in India is challenging as many state and lower level
bodies do not have exposure to or familiarity with international best practices. This has caused
some slippages and delays. Project management offices are not staffed or have suffered high
turnover. Some implementation problems occurred because routine bureaucratic procedures
were not amenable to mutual cooperation among parties involved, especially with
nongovernment stakeholders and the private sector. Sector-specific issues have been
described above (paras. 66­72). Legacy government controls and procedures block synergistic
responses to the development problems. Hence, the capacity building measures led by the
resident mission have been widely appreciated, as they bring basic management practices in
support of the projects. These need to be further expanded. ADB also needs to share its
experience of other Asian economies with the Indian decision makers, especially in states and
at lower levels. ADB TA has performed well and has an important role in this regard.

112. Overall, implementation of operations in India has been done well. In terms of contract
awards and disbursement ratios, the experiences have been better than ADB-wide averages.
Apart from the transfer of funds, this lends much credence to ADB's efforts to improve its
operational efficiencies and engenders confidence in ADB's project proposals.
Notwithstanding, several projects, especially in urban water and sanitation as well as financial
inclusion, have faced some implementation difficulties. These have been mentioned in the
relevant sections above (paras. 71 and 72).

113. An important implication of the government's tight aid agency coordination is that it
leaves little room for development partners to engage in an open-ended reform dialogue. This
partly follows from the organizational structure in which aid agencies are dovetailed through a
centralized desk (i.e., DEA) into the government's committed and planned programs. Given
that the government is keen to improve its economic performance and restore the high growth
trajectory, there is an opportunity to take the ADB­India relationship a notch higher. There is a
need for ADB to strengthen its high-level dialogue with the government and support the policy
reforms at both central and state levels.

H.          Performance of Borrower, Executive Agencies, and Implementing Agencies

114. The government performance in relation to the ADB program is assessed satisfactory.
The government displays complete ownership of the development agenda as enunciated in
different five year plans. It holds detailed sector discussions with different stakeholders and the
private sector. It also factors in the global development thrusts, especially as these relate to
MDGs, the environment, and climate change; and follows a rights-based approach. As
mentioned earlier, the Eleventh Plan, to which the CPS mainly related, adopted a growth
strategy of high and inclusive growth. It monitored progress with the help of predetermined
indicators in the context of the Eleventh Plan's results framework. Some Indian reports not only
noted progress in achieving MDG targets but also linked their achievements to different
programs and activities of the government.53

53
     Government of India, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Central Statistical Organization. 2011.
     Millennium Development Goals: India Country Report 2011. New Delhi.
                                                                                               29



115. The CPSFR notes that the government takes the lead in aid agency coordination and
that it actively encourages cross-learning among the various development partners. For
example, the World Bank and ADB regularly attend each others' meetings on portfolio matters,
sector reviews, and knowledge sharing. The government has also encouraged cofinancing and
innovative mechanisms to leverage nonsovereign resources. During IED's discussions in the
field, development partners echoed similar sentiments.

116. The government follows the concept of Finance Plus to ensure that externally funded
projects provide significant value addition beyond just financing the projects through transfer of
knowledge, introduction of innovative practices and new approaches, reforms of processes and
systems, and capacity development. The government screens and reviews requests from
states and departments proposing new projects based on this approach. These are prioritized
in a specially set up screening committee on the basis of the needs and alignment of the
proposals with Indian planning objectives. Subsequently, the government reviews loan
covenants through loan negotiations and provides counterpart funding.

117. In addition to being a borrower, the central government in India is also a major financier
of development projects for the state government. Therefore, the role of the central government
in ADB operations needs to be viewed in a more nuanced manner. State governments and
local bodies are the executing and implementing agencies in many projects, and are
responsible for project implementation. In this context, the appointment of state nodal officers
by the government has been helpful. These officers facilitate the smooth resolution of issues
that transcend departmental boundaries.

118. Similarly, in a number of cases in India, the private sector is an equal partner in the
implementation of projects. In this connection, the establishment of PPP cells at the central and
state levels has helped in undertaking project appraisals, structuring and financing PPP
projects. These cells also help identify constraints, developing PPP frameworks and policies,
conceptualizing pipelines, and supervising PPP projects. Reflecting these efforts, the share of
the private sector in GDP had grown from 77.1% in FY2004 to 79.0% in FY2010.

I.      Perception Survey on ADB's Performance

119. A client and stakeholder perception survey was undertaken in May 2012. The objective
of the survey was to gather opinions of stakeholders about ADB's responsiveness to India's
development needs and their suggestions for improving ADB's performance in the next cycle of
the CPS. The perception survey was conducted through semi-structured questionnaire that
was sent to a total of 104 clients and stakeholders of ADB selected by IED--mostly central and
state government organizations spread across various sectors and states of India. A total of 49
responses was received (47%). These included 40 clients, five think tank members, academics,
and researchers, and four other aid agencies. Selected findings are listed below (Box 3), while
the detailed survey results are given in Supplementary Appendix A.
30



                     Box 3: ADB Clients and Stakeholders Perception Survey Results

     (i) More than 90% respondents are of the view that Asian Development Bank (ADB) support has
           been useful both in terms of relevance to the country's development priorities as well as in
           terms of achievements and impacts in the main sectors supported. Nearly 70% of the
           respondents (73%) considered ADB support substantial or significant in strengthening
           institutional capacity and improving governance. The remaining one-fourth felt that it was
           moderate. Most of the respondents were highly supportive of ADB's sector selection for its
           operations. More than 90% of the respondents perceive the role of the India Resident Mission
           to be either "very useful" or "useful." Some respondents provided suggestions for enhancing
           the role of the resident mission.
     (ii) About one-third of the respondents identified overly ambitious and complex project designs as
           a main weakness of ADB operations. Other weaknesses cited related to processes such as
           the following: "it takes a long time for preparing and processing loan proposals;" "long-winded
           reports and time-consuming procedures;" "too many levels of decision-making, resulting in
           delays in completing the procurement process;" etc. Some clients also identified the following
           as weaknesses: (a) applying common approach to widely different sectors; (b) delay in
           coordination between various departments at ADB headquarters; (c) lack of follow-up on the
           agreed changes or improvements with the borrower; (d) rigidity in the approach towards
           contract management matters, e.g., continuation of contractors even when they are not
           performing; and (e) overloading of project teams with a number of projects.
     (iii) Respondents gave specific suggestions for improving ADB operations and for improving
           coordination with aid agencies and government agencies. They also identified certain sectors
           (i.e., energy, transport including rural connectivity, water supply, and agriculture) as
           constraints on Indian economic performance and suggested these as candidates for ADB's
           consideration in future operations.
        Source: Independent Evaluation Mission Survey.


J.        ADB's Performance

120. ADB's relationship with the borrower and other development partners has evolved into
one with a high level of trust and mutual dependability. The resident mission's emphasis on
capacity development and introducing knowledge solutions and innovations in project
implementation, following the Finance Plus approach, has contributed to this perception.
However, ADB did not prepare a public and private sector joint strategic framework and could
not utilize the CPS results framework as a key planning tool as it did not have adequate
indicators. Also, it was slow in providing adequate staff resources to the resident mission to
match its rapidly growing role and functions.

121. Given the multilayered character of governance in India, the project processing and
implementation chain in India is long. Below the ministries, there are a number of departments,
commissions, and specially set up corporate offices and public enterprises. These
organizations operate through state governments and local bodies. Their commitments to
project objectives, as well as their understanding and implementation capabilities, vary across
organizations. Many of them are simply not familiar with international practices of project
implementation and ADB's stipulations. Implementing projects in India is a major challenge, as
governance practices vary across different layers.

122. This is a more binding constraint, as the CPS concentrated nearly 70% of its
operations in lagging states where executing and implementing agencies have serious
capacity constraints. ADB took up this challenge and established a comprehensive capacity
                                                                                              31


development program for government officials and staff of executing and implementing
agencies (para. 84). This contribution is widely acknowledged by the government and
development partners. Notwithstanding, the problem of implementing projects in remote
states and locations in India continues to be a major constraint. ADB's strategy to work with
the private sector, through its emphasis on PPPs set up by the government, is a good long-
term strategy.

123. ADB has also done well in building a broad consensus among different agencies in
favor of safeguards, environmental considerations, and greening and conservation policies. A
number of agencies cited this as value addition by ADB. Taking all of the above into
consideration, ADB's performance is assessed satisfactory.

K.     Conclusions

124. The CPS was prepared when the Indian economy was on a high growth trajectory,
following an unprecedented level of performance under the Tenth Plan. However, the
economic environment was already uncertain and volatile because of the 2008 global
economic and financial crisis. The CPS design continued to focus on relieving the binding
constraints--power, roads, railways, and irrigation. During implementation of the CPS,
however, the government's economic and sector policy reforms were sluggish. Fiscal
consolidation could not be realized. The fiscal stimulus that was launched in response to the
global economic and financial crisis yielded a high level of growth but also resulted in
overheating of the economy. Led by the increasing fuel and commodities prices, including food,
the domestic inflationary pressure has been high during the last 3 years.

125. ADB's approach attempted to reduce power and transport infrastructure constraints.
Through PPPs, ADB also encouraged private sector participation in infrastructure
development. In addition, ADB targeted both short- and long-term solutions. Short-term
interventions included participatory irrigation and urban water supply and sanitation while long-
term interventions are best illustrated through infrastructure development, flood control, and
coastal environment and river basin management. ADB remained focused on inclusive
development and pursued its limited objectives through engaging in lagging states. Its
emphasis on constructing rural roads stands out as an important activity, with widespread
benefits to the poor. Likewise, benefits from participatory irrigation management were geared
to increase agricultural production and address poverty reduction. ADB also promoted regional
cooperation, especially through its projects in the northeastern states.

126. As ADB's operational focus moved to lagging states, addressing their weak and uneven
capacities in implementing and supervising the projects became critical to the success of the
ADB-financed program. In this regard, the resident mission developed an effective capacity
development training program for staff of executing and implementing agencies. Further, it
transformed routine portfolio implementation monitoring meetings into a regular forum that has
become a valued venue for knowledge sharing and cross-learning. It supported not only
improvements in implementation but started yielding insights into better design of TA and loan
projects. Finally, ADB decided to engage in human resource development as it considered skill
shortages to be an emerging constraint for rapid growth of the Indian economy. These factors
have contributed to the successful ADB performance. At the same time, this type of work
requires even more staff resources and expertise than has been already provided, particularly
at the field level.
32


L.         Lessons and Recommendations

127. Implementation of 2007 CAPE recommendations. The validation reviewed the
implementation status of the earlier CAPE recommendations. This validation considers that
ADB registered satisfactory progress toward improving the strategic focus, increasing private
sector support through PPPs, and increasing responsiveness to client concerns. Nonetheless,
ADB needs to improve the quality of nonlending services in the form of quality economic and
sector works and policy dialogue. The following measures identified for ADB in the CAPE 2007
need to be strengthened: (i) build ADB's strong knowledge base and expertise in core areas of
support and engage with the government in policy discussions at appropriate times, and
(ii) undertake dialogue regularly with government's senior officials on policy and operational
issues.

128. Lessons identified. The CPSFR identifies a number of lessons. Among others, it
recommends to build on the existing strategy of inclusion through human resource
development, further greening of the program, and promoting regional cooperation. The
CPSFR acknowledges that it needs to do more to be able to deliver on the government's
Finance Plus approach.54 This validation supports underlying rationale of these lessons.

129. Recommendations. Following the lessons identified, the CPS recommends more
specific actions to be taken in the new CPS that aim to improve ADB's performance in each of
the six evaluation criteria. This validation considers that these specific recommendations are
valid and useful. Building on the foregoing discussion and the recommendations of the CAPE
2007, this validation adds the following cross-cutting recommendations for consideration during
the new CPS.

130. Strengthen policy dialogue and direct engagement, particularly at state level, for
better strategic programming. ADB needs to strengthen strategic programming discussions
directly with state governments, and improve strategic dialogue on this front. This is because
(i) state governments are the primary agency for implementing development programs;
(ii) states differ significantly from each other in size, geography, population, infrastructure,
economic levels, and facilities--necessitating development interventions to be localized;
(iii) states' commitment to policy emphases also varies; (iv) states may not develop the same
degree of enthusiasm, ownership, and commitment to implement programs they have not
conceived and designed themselves; and midcourse corrections would be more appropriate
and easier if the state were involved in the program from the beginning; and (v) although states
are given access to centrally funded programs, their inclusion often takes place long after a
broad program design has been fixed at the national level--leaving only the detailed design of
the program to states to suit their particular needs (paras. 44, 128 [ii]).

131. In this regard, ADB can consider the following options. First, once a program has been
cleared with the central authorities (i.e., DEA), further feasibility studies may be prepared for
each state in which the program is to be implemented. Such feasibility reports should not only
adapt the centrally determined core design of the program but should also factor in the state-
specific variations and institutional issues. The studies should identify optional features that
could be included or excluded from the main design to suit the state level situation better. This
would help catalyze beneficial linkages with the local environment. Second, ADB's
programming functions could be strengthened by linking ADB programs with the state


54
     Other recommendations of the CPSFR are given on pp. 31­34, paras 148­161.
                                                                                              33


governments' planning process, especially for weakly performing states (e.g., the northeast
states where ADB operates).

132.     Enhance synergies and impact by better linking outputs to outcomes through
sustained partnerships. ADB's India program is small (less than 1%), compared to the
national gross investment. As such, close partnerships with government, other development
partners, and the private sector in designing ADB's projects are particularly important to
generate synergies and increase the outcomes from ADB operations in India. This is because
both the line ministries and departments, as well as ADB, are organized on sectoral lines and
their operations tend to be on a sectoral basis, lacking cross-sectoral coordination within ADB
or with other development partners. ADB needs to ensure that cross-sectoral issues (e.g.,
liking road projects with social services and agricultural sector programs) are addressed in a
more strategic manner to support the objectives of more inclusive and environmentally
sustainable growth (para. 99).

133. In this regard, ADB needs to ensure that cross-sectoral issues (e.g., liking road projects
with social services and agricultural sector programs and linking finance sector projects with
small industry development) be addressed in a more strategic manner at the country level
through the CPS. ADB can consider (i) putting results and outcome orientation at the forefront
and analyzing (through a problem tree analysis) the constraining elements that need to be
ameliorated or eliminated; (ii) guiding sector analysis and sector road maps by achievement of
outcomes as the main concern; and (iii) identifying target groups and broader multidisciplinary
teams and partners for ADB to work with for such operations.

134. Increase ADB staff resources at the field level to engage better with lagging
states and augment resources for technical work to deliver innovative solutions and to
stay abreast of client requirements. The resident mission has been given more than double
the number of delegated projects since 2009, while the corresponding increase in the staff
resources remained slow, causing substantial overstretching of staff resources. In addition,
often ADB staff have to interact with knowledgeable civil service officials and have policy
related discussions and/or decisions with technical professionals and academics serving on
government committees and boards. Such expanded and policy level engagement should be
backed by adequate technical work and expertise from ADB. These considerations are
particularly important when designing PPPs in different sectors and dealing with sector policy
reforms (especially in fiscal management, power distribution, and urban development); cutting-
edge technologies (solar and wind power, etc.); ultra-mega power projects; and river basin or
coastal management. In this regard, ADB needs to (i) maintain a pool of ADB's top-end sector
professionals (either ADB staff or long-term consultants) who have an aptitude for problem
solving in such positions; (ii) identify and groom national officers and rotate them through the
region to enhance their regional exposure in the resident mission; and (iii) develop case studies
documenting knowledge solution episodes to be used for capacity development in ADB as well
as in executing agencies (paras. 64, 127, 128 [i] and [ii]).

135. Prepare an integrated strategic framework to synergize ADB's public­private
sector operations in India. As the private sector's role in India's economic development is
growing fast and becoming more diverse, ADB's CPS positioning should be broad-based,
understanding the role of private sector and its complementarities with the public sector to find
their implications for ADB interventions. Currently, the CPS is largely public sector-oriented.
Based on a joint public and private sector strategic framework that ensures synergies and
greater impact, ADB should develop suitable roles for ADB's private sector development and
private sector operations. To this end, ADB needs to strengthen its analytical work on various
34


issues linking public-private sector at different levels and prepare a combined strategic
framework, a road map, and action plans for future country operations in India (para. 105).

136.     Improve monitoring of the CPS results framework based on sharper objectives
and tracking of development impact and sustainability. The CPS, as well as the CPSFR,
was weak in providing sharp objectives and monitorable indicators in its results framework. The
design quality of the next CPS results framework should be significantly improved to help
monitor implementation of its various objectives for achieving greater impact and sustainability.
In addition, at the individual project level, indictors that facilitate evaluability need to be
foreseen early in the project cycle; as a project evolves, parallel analytical understanding of this
development needs to be made in terms of the variables that capture this development. The
project's rationale, objective, and design collectively need to be related to the variables and
indicators that capture those intentions. In the Indian case, this results orientation is noted by
the government's Finance Plus approach--adopted to generate better outcomes from
externally financed projects. ADB should develop improved results monitoring in its projects to
prove greater additionality from them under this approach (paras. 128 [iii], 137).


           III.    ASSESSMENT OF THE QUALITY OF THE CPS FINAL REVIEW

137. Quality of the final report. The quality of the CPSFR is satisfactory. It is well written. It
understood evaluation criteria and presents its arguments logically and coherently. However, it
did not provide sufficient evidence to substantiate its arguments on results in terms of
outcomes and did not use the CPS results framework to track progress. Evidence was
provided for certain sectors like energy, but it is missing from other sectors. The CPSFR could
have been used as an opportunity to showcase the achievements of one of ADB's biggest
borrowing countries, but it had a limitation in doing so, having only a few project completion
reviews done. A major gap is the absence of a discussion on the results framework The
CPSFR mentions impact studies under some projects (e.g., rural roads and the Chhattisgarh
irrigation project), but the number of such impact studies used in the report is too few, failing to
demonstrate some generalized impacts. The CPSFR also shies away from explaining why
certain projects like Khadi reform and Uttarakhand power are not doing well.
                                                                                 Appendix 1   35

                     INDIA COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FINAL REVIEW
                  INDIA COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP  STRATEGY FINAL REVIEW
                                    (LINKED DOCUMENT)
                  http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app1.pdf
                                    (LINKED DOCUMENT)
     1.      Supplementary Country Strategy and Program Final Review: India, 2009­2012

      http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app1.pdf

1.        India Country Partnership Strategy Final Review
36   Appendix 2


                  INDIA COUNTRY      COUNTRY ECONOMIC
                               INDIAPARTNERSHIP         STRATEGY INDICATORS
                                                                     FINAL REVIEW
                                          (LINKED DOCUMENT)
                    http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app2.pdf
                                      (LINKED DOCUMENT)
     2.      India Country Economic Indicators, 2002­2011
      http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app2.pdf

     2. India Country Economic Indicators, 2002­2011
                                                                                  Appendix 3   37

                INDIA COUNTRY      PUBLIC SECTOR
                              ADBPARTNERSHIP             LOANS TO
                                                      STRATEGY       INDIA
                                                                   FINAL  REVIEW
                                        (LINKED DOCUMENT)
                  http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app3.pdf
                                    (LINKED DOCUMENT)

     3.      ADB Public Sector Loans to India, 1986-2012
      http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app3.pdf

3.      ADB Public Sector Loans to India, 1986­2012
38        Appendix 4

                       ADB NONSOVEREIGN OPERATIONS PROJECTS IN INDIA
                  INDIA COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP             STRATEGY FINAL REVIEW
                                          (LINKED DOCUMENT)
                    http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app4.pdf
                                   (LINKED DOCUMENT)
     4.       ADB Nonsovereign Operations Projects in India, 1987-2011

      http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app4.pdf

4.        ADB Nonsovereign Operations Projects in India, 1987­2011
                                                                                 Appendix 5   39

               INDIA COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FINAL REVIEW
                     ADB TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO INDIA, 1986-2012
                                       (LINKED DOCUMENT)
                                   (LINKED    DOCUMENT)
                 http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app5.pdf

    5.     ADB Technical Assistance to India, 1986-2012
http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app5.pdf

5.     ADB Technical Assistance to India, 1986­2012
40       Appendix 6

                          ADB ECONOMIC
                INDIA COUNTRY     PARTNERSHIPAND SOCIAL
                                                      STRATEGYWORKS    IN INDIA
                                                                   FINAL   REVIEW
                                         (LINKED DOCUMENT)
                  http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app6.pdf
                                    (LINKED DOCUMENT)
     6.      ADB Economic and Social Works in India
      http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/ind-cpsfrv-2009-2012-app6.pdf


6.      ADB Economic and Sector Works in India
