Evaluation Working Paper

INDIA:
PROMOTING URBAN SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT THROUGH
SELF HELP GROUPS IN
KARNATAKA
A Report to the Operations Evaluation Department
for the Project Performance Evaluation Report of Karnataka
Urban Infrastructure Development Project in India




May 2007
by Shashikala Sitaram
         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                      (as of 23 May 2007)

          Currency Unit      ­      Indian Rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                Re1.00       =      $0.0246
                 $1.00       =      Rs40.59




               ABBREVIATIONS
ADB            Asian Development Bank
BPL            Below Poverty Line
CDP            Community Development Program
KUIDFC         Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance
               Corporation
KUIDP          Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
NGO            nongovernment organization
ODP            The Organization for the Development of People
RLHP           Rural Literacy and Health Program
SHG            Self Help Group
SJSRY          Swarna Jayanthi Shahari Rozgar Yojana
TLF            Town Level Federation
WLARS          Women Liberation and Rehabilitation Society



                           NOTE

             In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
                             CONTENTS
                                                                        Page
SUMMARY                                                                  iii

I.      BACKGROUND                                                        1

II.     THE SETTING                                                      2
        A.    Rationale behind Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
              Development Project
        B.    What are Self Help Groups?
        C.    Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance
              Corporation's Guidelines in Organizing Self Help Groups

III.    SELF HELP GROUPS AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM                9
        A.    Role of Self Help Groups in Slum Improvement

IV.     MICROFINANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS                                  12

V.      IMPACT OF SELF HELP GROUP MOVEMENT ON WOMEN'S                    14
        SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC STATUS
        A.    Impact on Economic Status
        B.    Impact on Social Status
        C.    Impact on Political Status
        D.    Impact on the Community

VI.     EVALUATION OF SELF HELP GROUPS BY OTHERS                         19

VII.    SUSTAINABILITY OF SELF HELP GROUPS                               20

VIII.   THE ROLE OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN THE                   22
        LIVES OF WOMEN

IX.     SOME LESSONS REGARDING POVERTY ALLEVIATION                       25
        AND WOMEN EMPOWERMENT
        A.   Poverty Alleviation
        B.   Women Empowerment

X.      CLOSURE OF THE PROJECT                                           29

XI.     SUMMING UP                                                       29

APPENDIXES
1.   Brief Profile of Nongovernment Organizations                        31
2.   Strategies and Objectives of Community Development Program          33
3.   References                                                          34
This case study was prepared in the context of the Project Performance Evaluation
Report for Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in India. The team
leader for this evaluation was Walter Kolkma, Senior Evaluation Specialist at the
Operations Evaluation Department. He also took the photos. The views expressed in
this report are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views and policies
of the Asian Development Bank, or its Board of Governors or the governments they
represent.

The Asian Development Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in
this report and accepts no responsibility for any consequences of their use. Please send
your comments to wkolkma@adb.org.
                                           Summary
          The Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project (the Project) was implemented from
1996 to 2004, supported by two loans and technical support from the Asian Development Bank.1
The Project combined infrastructural and poverty alleviation components while promoting socioeconomic
development away from the rapidly expanding city of Bangalore. It recognized that poor, vulnerable
groups residing in low-income settlements lack capacity to absorb the benefits of rapid urbanization.
The Project covered water supply, sanitation, road improvements, slum improvement, and poverty
alleviation. The latter components emphasized community development activities, of which the
establishment of Self Help Groups was an important one. The project was implemented in the towns of
Mysore, Maddur, Mandya, Tumkur, Channapatna and Ramanagaram, south and northwest of Bangalore
at distances between 70 kilometers and 140 kilometers.

         This case study evaluates the Self Help Groups and their Federations, as facilitated under the
Project. The study is based on field visits to the project towns in Karnataka during August and September
2005, and was updated during May 2007. It integrates secondary sources of information.

        The Self Help Group concept has been in existence over the last two decades in India, but was
predominantly applied in its rural areas. Initiatives by nongovernment organizations (NGOs), policy
decisions of the government, attention from donor agencies, support by the National Agricultural Bank for
Rural Development--all of these helped the Self Help Group movement take off. This study assesses that
the credit for introducing the concept in urban slums of Karnataka goes to the Project. The Project
started helping the formation of Self Help Groups in the period October 1999--December 2000, and
greatly expanded its efforts in a second phase started in July 2002. Unfortunately, the second phase
lasted only 18 months, as the project closed by mid 2004. Nevertheless, within these two short periods,
722 Self Help Groups were initiated and supported by the Project. The number had risen to 836 by end
June 2005, when this case study started. This was a considerable achievement given the short time that
the Project had pursued the formation of Self Help Groups. KUIDP estimated that the total number of
groups had risen by another 10% by mid 2007.

           The Self Help Group program covered 23,324 families living below the poverty line. This
constituted 40% of all families below the poverty line in the urban areas. Establishment of the groups
was envisaged under the women development and empowerment component of the Project's Community
Development Program. This would be the instrument to provide women with collective access to services
of different governmental programs and schemes that were hitherto usually denied them as individuals.
Although Self Help Groups were originally viewed as a minor component of the Community Development
Program, they gained so much momentum that they were eventually used to launch many of the
awareness and skill training programs under Community Development Program. The groups presented
forums that were highly effective in reaching the overall communities. They were, however, unfortunately
not involved in the slum improvement program. This was because of certain limitations within the Project
structure. Integrating community development activities with infrastructure provision effectively proved
difficult.

        The Self Help Groups were given an option of availing credit through (i) internal lending from
within the groups; (ii) the formal banking system; and (iii) financial agencies other than banks (NGOs,


1
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Two Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance to the Republic of India and the Housing Development Finance Corporation Limited for the
    Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila (Loans 1415 and 1416-IND, for $85,000 and $20,000,
    approved 14 December 1995).
iv


Federations, or microfinance agencies set up by the NGO). Fifty percent of the groups formed under the
Project obtained loans from banks. An indication of the quantity of collective funds being transacted is
that a well functioning Self Help Group with 15 women members would have a sum of Rs50,000 at its
disposal within a period of 3 years. NGOs often played the role of the bank by providing credit to the
women. Some of the NGOs "handed over" the groups to lending agencies after some time. This study,
however, does not consider this as beneficial. In the long run, it may disadvantage poor women and lead
to disempowerment of the groups. Many banks--outside of the program initiatives that are run by
different individuals and NGOs--were luring Self Help Groups with easy money for a variety of purposes,
which, however, had the effect of breaking up some of the groups formed under the Project.

         Membership of the Self Help Groups has contributed to significant changes in the lives of women
in the six towns. The most important has been the escape from the reliance on moneylenders who were
charging exorbitant rates of interest. The interests on loans have reduced from 120% per annum to 24%.
Due to exposure to programs of entrepreneurial development and availability of credit facilities, many of
the women and their families have now ventured into pursuing income generation activities. This has
allowed for an increase in the household income which has resulted in changing the consumption pattern,
thereby improving the quality of life. The family is able to address their basic needs better than before.

         The participation in the Self Help Group movement itself has been an empowering and liberating
experience for many of the poor women. The strongest impact has been in terms of self esteem and
increased social mobility as many women of urban slums had never been involved in such a program
before. Interactions with other women have resulted in building congenial relationships and have reduced
conflicts. It also had the effect of spreading the Self Help Group movement. Since women are exposed to
more programs, such as health programs, their level of awareness has increased. Changes in decision-
making patterns are setting in, although the program is not a panacea: most women continue to be
excluded from many major decisions that concern the households and their lives.

        The common belief was that participation in a Self Help Group would build leadership qualities
among women, thereby building their capacities to participate in the larger political bodies such as the
local governments. Severe constraints to poor women's participation in local bodies, however, persist,
such as lack of family support. There were exceptions: one NGO in Mysore fielded many successful
candidates to the local body elections. The reason for their success may lie in the NGO's long term
intervention in urban slums and emphasis on advocacy.

       Even though the Self Help Groups are not operating in the political arena, many create pressure
on the urban local bodies, for instance, to ensure drinking water supply, clean roads and drainage
systems, installation of community taps, and the removal of liquor shops located in the slums.

        With the completion of the Project, a few Self Help Groups have disintegrated. There have been
no comprehensive evaluations of the Self Help Groups (this case study only met a selection of the
groups). Attempts by the NGOs and Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance
Corporation looked only at the financial status of the groups. The criteria used have varied and data
recording and presentation have not been systematic.

        Federation of Self Help Groups

         Most of the Self Help Groups were only recently created when the Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation decided to federate the various groups in
March 2004, in order to increase their chances of survival in the long run. A three-tiered structure of
Federations was envisaged with 15­20 groups of an area forming the Cluster Level Federation, and
these, in turn, form a Town Level Federation. NGO representatives contacted for the evaluation are of
the opinion that the time given for Self Help Groups to mature before federating them has been
                                                                                                          v


insufficient. The NGOs feel that the federation concept was not fully appropriate. They would have
preferred to draw on their own experiences and processes.

        The results of the federation of the Self Help Groups have been mixed across the six towns.
The problem seems to be one of internalizing the concept which is new, and of mobilizing resources.
A few of the experiments have resulted in disintegration as groups resented handing over a revolving
fund of Rs5,000 to the kitty of the federation.

        The question is whether the Self Help Groups will survive the absence of support by the Project
in the longer run. The Project has attempted to hand over the responsibility for the groups to the
Directorate of Municipal Administration, as the operational cost of maintaining groups, in order to monitor
and track the Self Help Groups functioning and sustain them, was high. But the local authorities claimed
they were not equipped to take charge of the groups. The Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
and Finance Corporation, in practice, covered all the families below the poverty line, even those who
were not listed in the survey conducted by the Directorate of Municipal Administration. The Directorate
may not agree to extend support to groups with families that are not on the list.

        Although local governments and various departments of the State of Karnataka implement
programs for the urban poor and assist the existing Self Help Groups in various ways, there are several
constraints to the progress of these programs. Inputs for group solidarity, group affinity and the like have
been very limited. Urban poverty alleviation programs such as the Urban Stree Sakthi and the Swarna
Jayanthi Shahari Rozgar Yojana emphasize women development and empowerment by forming Self Help
Groups, but suffer from delays, slow release of funds, and slow pace of work. Furthermore, they form
such groups only with the aim of addressing the needs specified by the schemes and not with the
concept of sustaining the groups or strengthening the community. With the spurt of Urban Stree Sakthi
groups, a few of the groups formed under the Project have disintegrated due to frictions within the small
community of a slum. This is unfortunate: there should have been convergence between the different
Self Help Groups instead of conflicting interests. Lastly, the role of elected representatives has been
mixed. They may help NGOs in establishing rapport with the community. However, their focus has been
on getting political mileage from being "visible" during the functions and meetings of the groups. There
have even been some instances where the local administration has obstructed Self Help Groups.

        Impact

         The Project looked at Self Help Groups as a tool which would achieve the twin objectives of
poverty alleviation and women empowerment. Unfortunately, the post project evaluation efforts did not
conduct a survey to establish whether the women of the groups and their families have moved out of
poverty. Neither did the project performance evaluation report for which this case study was conducted.
Whether poor women can exit poverty only by participating in microfinance programs is debatable.
Undoubtedly, Self Help Groups have not enabled many poor women and families to move out of poverty,
especially in an urban area where all daily commodities need to be purchased and the effects of inflation
are felt more acutely.

        It was found that access to microfinance did not always lead to women's control over the funds
obtained. Women member of Self Help Groups often availed loans to invest in family business run by the
male member of the family. This fits the Indian ethos of family being the main social unit. In future
programs, gender concepts should be imbibed so that women are not overtly burdened. A few cases
were heard where the male member of the family had a tendency to withdraw his contribution to the
household owing to an increase in the woman's income. Slowly, credit facilities of Self Help Groups seem
to have become a source of borrowing for men. The amounts are invested in businesses by men who do
not always share the information on profits and losses with the women. A change in attitude needs to be
fostered; otherwise, women would have less opportunity to learn.
vi


         One way of reducing the excessive burden of women inside and outside the household would be
to start Self Help Groups for men. But the practice so far is to avoid forming Self Help Groups for men.
Their non-cohesiveness, and difference in work timings, are put forth to explain this. However, as part of
a experiment conducted by the Project, the NGO at Maddur facilitated the formation of three groups for
men. This had increased to ten by the time of the case study. The Self Help Groups of men even became
a part of the (female dominated) Federation at Maddur.

        With the closure of the project in 2004, the NGOs and the Self Help Groups have suffered a set
back. The groups started during the second phase of the project were barely 2 years old. A few of the
NGOs continue to support the groups, but in a minimal way, in order to ensure that their earlier efforts
are not lost. In effect, the federations of Self Help Groups should have performed these roles, but the
federations did not take off in all the towns.

         The Self Help Group movement has brought certain changes in the lives of the women. It has
allowed poor women to move from their earlier position of silence to one of gaining voice, reduced their
fatalism, improved their living standards, and increased their collective bargaining powers. However,
Self Help Groups cannot be taken as the answer to solve all the problems related to poverty alleviation.

        Self Help Groups provide women with abilities to survive in the worst situations. Whether they
can become sustainable institutions depends not only on their ability to survive, but also the ability to
grow with the changing context. An increase in income without any subsequent increase in access and
control of resources, status and quality of life would restrict the process of empowerment of women.
Although microfinance often targets women and although women use microfinance, there has been
nothing specific that is designed which addresses gender specific aspects of the use of financial services.
There are no concrete ways devised which can meet the distinct demands of poor women for savings
services. Nevertheless, for the 12,000 women in the slums, this development has been a boon.




     Woman in slum in Mandya.
I. BACKGROUND
1.        The process of urbanization in developing countries often leads to variable levels of spatial, social
and economic marginalization of the poorer sections of their urban populations. This is due to such
factors as uneven coverage of urban economies by public and private enterprise, uneven distribution of
benefits of investment in the absence of social safety networks, deficient urban governance, and political
biases against the poor. In India, poverty in urban areas is growing with the liberalization of the
economy, and the forces of globalization. In the decade or so since India adopted its economic
liberalization policies, its reforms have yet to deliver significant benefits in terms of poverty reduction and
employment generation in the slums of cities.1

2.      Supported by a loan of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development Project (KUIDP)2 included a small component which was aimed at spatial, economic and
social uplift of the urban poor through support to community development in selected towns around
Bangalore. The Project, implemented in six towns outside Bangalore between 1996 and 2004,
operationalized this through support for the formation of Self Help Groups (SHGs) of women and creating
federations of these.

3.        The purpose of this study is to evaluate the SHGs and their federations. The study discusses the
formation and development and evaluates the role of the municipal and state government agencies in the
lives of the women. A focus has been to discuss the importance of the groups as a means to poverty
alleviation and development. Specific attention has been paid to the effects of providing microfinance to
SHGs.

4.       The study is based on secondary sources of information and visits to the project towns in
Karnataka during August and September 2005. Further interactions with nongovernment organizations
(NGOs) and some heads of the Federations took place in May 2007, to take note of possible changes
since 2005. The visits included field work in the six towns of Mysore, Mandya, Maddur, Channapatna,
Ramanagaram and Tumkur. The main research instruments included interactions with the women
members of SHGs, one to one interviews, group interactions--sometimes large groups and sometimes
small--and attending the meetings of the SHGs and the Federations. In all, 39 SHGs and 6 Cluster Level
Federations were visited in the six towns, covering more than four hundred women. In addition, one of
the NGOs in Mysore organized a meeting which was attended by 200 women of 23 SHGs. The Directors
of the three Town Level Federations (Tumkur) and at the Resource Center (Maddur) were also met.
Interactions were held with a few women who are pursuing income generating activities. Various field
functionaries of the partner NGOs and the concerned staff of Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC) were interviewed. The reports from KUIDFC and from
the NGOs have been used as reference materials. Other related material, experiments with SHGs in
Karnataka and from other states was also utilized for the purpose of this study.



1
    (i) Many studies discuss the effects of globalization on the poor, albeit often indirectly--by looking at employment
    status, consumption patterns and other aspects (Veerabhadrappa, B.P. 2003. Impact of Globalization on Poverty of
    Karnataka in Globalisation: Dimension and Impact. Edited by C.K. Renukarya and K. M. Veeraiah. JSS College for
    Arts, Science, Commerce and Business Management. Mysore; Aurora, G.S. (Ed). 2004. Poverty and Economic
    Reforms, The Social Concerns, Academic Foundation. New Delhi); (ii) Datt, Ruddar. 2004. Globalisation, the WTO
    and its Impact on India: A Developing Country Perspective in Economic Globalisation: Social Conflicts, Labour and
    Enviornmental Issues. Edited by Clem Tisdell and Raj Kumar Sen, Edward Elgar. Publishing Limited, U.K.
2
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Two Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance to the Republic of India and the Housing Development Finance Corporation Limited for the
    Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila (Loans 1415 and 1416-IND, for $85,000 and $20,000,
    approved 14 December 1995).
2                             India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



5.       The report is organized as follows: In Section 2, the rationale behind the KUIDP is explained,
followed by a brief discussion of the various initiatives in India that have used the SHG concept. The
section also highlights KUIDFC's approach in organizing the SHGs. Section 3 looks at the interrelation
between the Community Development Programs (CDP) and SHGs and the role of the groups in the slum
improvement program. Section 4 discusses the microfinance management systems that relate to this
project. Section 5 discusses impacts of the processes on the economic, social, and political status of the
women, and includes some observations about the effects of the groups on the community. Section 6
summarizes the attempts by KUIDFC and the NGOs in evaluating the SHGs. Section 7 discusses KUIDFC's
attempt in imbibing the concept of sustainability of the groups. Section 8 highlights the role of the state
and the local government in the lives of the women in the groups. Section 9 raises the question whether
participation in the SHG movement allows for poverty alleviation, and women empowerment. In Section
10, the effects of the closure of the project on the community and on the NGOs are discussed. The last
section summarizes the study.




II. THE SETTING
A.       Rationale behind Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project

6.       As per United Nations projections, the population in Bangalore was expected to          grow from
4.2 million in 2001 to 7 million by 2010. The state government took up the KUIDP in order        to upgrade
infrastructure and services in the towns of Mysore, Tumkur, Ramanagaram and Channapatna          (1998) and
in Mandya and Maddur (2002) and thereby promote decentralization of economic growth              away from
Bangalore.

7.      The primary components of KUIDP included (i) environmental sanitation (water supply, solid
waste management, sewerage systems and storm water drainage); (ii) road improvements (roads,
bridges, trunk terminals and bus stands); (iii) poverty alleviation (slum upgrading, low income sanitation,
residential sites and services, and cultural and women's training centers); (iv) industrial sites and
services; and (v) implementation assistance and institutional strengthening.




    Water supply in Mandya slum area.     Maddur,hand pump facility.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                       3


8.        The project recognized that the poor, vulnerable groups residing in low income settlements lack
the capacity to absorb the benefits of rapid process of urbanization and are disproportionately exposed to
its costs. The urban poor lack the wherewithal to access health and education facilities, suffer from poor
sanitation, and lack skills. KUIDP integrated the infrastructure program with an institutional strengthening
program. The latter included a poverty alleviation program which emphasized community awareness and
participation, attempting to make communities self sufficient in managing the facilities provided and carry
out future development activities on their own. The poverty alleviation component of the project was
initially conceptualized in a study by a consultant in the Project Management Cell.3

9.        Implementation of the CDP required collaboration between the Government and the NGOs,
together with the active participation of the communities. The NGOs, by virtue of being small in size,
flexible, innovative and participatory, were considered to be more successful in reaching the poor, and in
poverty alleviation.4 KUIDFC's criteria in selecting NGOs specified that these should be locally based, and
have experience in working with the slum dwellers, if not, with the communities of low income groups.
Those with experience in working on issues like health, education, thrift and credit and income
generating programs were given preference.5 The CDP Component of the project was handled through
the project implementation units, coordinated by the nodal agency (KUIDFC), located in Bangalore. The
various infrastructural components of the Project were implemented by the different stakeholders like the
urban local bodies and the Karnataka Slum Clearance Board.

10.      The infrastructure component of KUIDP started implementation in 1998. The first phase of the
CDP began in September 1999. The second phase, which began in July 2002, was wound up in June
2004.6 The basic difference between the two phases was the re-focusing of the project on CDP activities
in order to "make a significant reduction in poverty levels in the project town limits."7 This meant that
community development activities were to cover all the families living below the poverty line (BPL
families) in the project towns. The earlier focus was on slums chosen by the project for infrastructure
development.

11.     Learning from the shortcomings of the first phase, a comprehensive development plan was
prepared by KUIDFC prior to implementing the second phase. The problems of slow flow of funds, rigid
rules and regulations that were followed earlier were remedied, and this was said to have facilitated a
better working environment for the NGOs. As a result, they could achieve much of the desired results
within a short span of project time.8 By the end of the second phase, 72 slums and 44 poor localities




3
    Cardinalli, Robert. 1997. Strategy Paper for Community Development and Slum Upgradation. Louis Berger
    International, Inc.
4
    Burfield, John. 1997. Urban Government Manual, Procurement and Disbursement Manual for Projects with
    Community Participation. Louis Berger International Inc.
5
    Three reports, brought out at three different points of time, explain the nongovernment organization (NGO)
    selection. Burfield's report (footnote 4) explained the criteria to be used while selecting the NGOs. This was prior to
    the take-off of the project. Another report (Sitaram, Shashikala. 2001. Facilitating Capacity Building and
    Participatory Activities. Submitted to the Asian Development Bank, India Resident Mission. New Delhi) critically
    examined the norms used by the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC)
    while selecting the NGOs. This was for a mid term appraisal of the first phase of the project. The Community
    Development Package of KUIDFC (2004) explained the details of the selection process during the second phase.
6
    This implies the winding up of the Community Development Program activities in all the six towns. However, the
    Community Development wing continues to operate from KUIDFC with minimal staff.
7
    KUIDFC. 2001. Community Development Package under KUIDFC. Prepared by the project Community Development
    Program team. Bangalore.
8
    The initial problems that were faced while implementing the community development activities are explained in
    detail in the study on Facilitating Capacity Building and Participatory Processes (see footnote 5). This study was an
    ADB initiative to understand the problems in implementing the Community Development Program and to suggest
    changes.
4                                India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



were covered.9 In total, as per KUIDFC's report of 2001, 23,324 BPL families were covered in the six
towns under the poverty alleviation component. This covers 40% of the total number of BPL families, i.e.,
59,233 that were listed for the six towns by the Swarna Jayanthi Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) survey.

12.      Selected for the second phase were nine NGOs: Sumana, Rural Literacy and Health Program
(RLHP), The Organization for the Development of People (ODP) (Mysore), Shantha Jeeva Jyothi, Sakthi,
Mamatha Makkala Mandira (Ramanagaram), Parinati (Channapatna) and Bapuji Integrated Rural
Development Society, Society for the Betterment of Human Resources, and Women Liberation and
Rehabilitation Society (WLARS) of Tumkur. Appendix 1 includes a brief profile of these NGOs. The
majority can be categorized as grass roots or operational NGOs. As social action groups focusing on
mobilizing marginalized sections of the population, the NGOs take up a host of social service functions
including savings and credit programs, health and education programs and ensure food security for the
poor.10

                                                  13.      The    NGOs      were      involved    in
                                                  implementing the community development
                                                  package      of   KUIDP       which      included:
                                                  (i) awareness raising in health and sanitation
                                                  (health check up and health and sanitation
                                                  awareness campaigns), education (awareness
                                                  campaigns, tutorial classes to school going
                                                  children, school drop outs and working
                                                  children), and nutrition, legal mediation and
                                                  gender awareness; and (ii) providing skills for
                                                  increased       income         (entrepreneurship
                                                  development program and other programs like
                                                  beautician course, tailoring, light motor vehicle
                                                  driving, etc.) and thrift and credit activities
                                                  (formation of SHGs, providing revolving fund).
Channapatna, slum residents cleaning the drains.  The thrift and credit activities--formation of
                                                  SHGs and the Federations--are categorized
under the women development and empowerment program. Appendix 2 lists the stated strategies and
objectives of CDP.

B.      What are Self Help Groups?

14.      The term Self Help Group is used to describe a small group of 10 to 20 poor women who come
together on voluntary basis to accumulate savings through thrift and self management, in order to prove
their credit worthiness to financial institutions. The concept builds on mutual trust and help, shared
ownership, peer pressure, emphasizing group solidarity and togetherness. It was first introduced in India
during the mid 1980s by MYRADA, an NGO of repute.11 MYRADA's concept was that the poor are credit
worthy and that credit management groups consisting of poor people could manage their affairs
efficiently. All that was needed was transfer of lessons in professional credit management, to encourage




9
   Seventy-two slums being those selected for Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project's Slum
   Improvement Program and an additional 44 poor localities.
10
   Rajasekhar, D. 2000. Non Governmental Organisations in India: Opportunities and Challenges. Working Paper,
   Institute for Social and Economic Change.
11
   MYRADA drew its inspiration from the experiment at Bangladesh but set up a model of its own, for a discussion on
   MYRADA's Indian model (Fernandez, Aloysius Prakash. 2001. Putting Institutions First Even in Micro Finance.
   The Myrada Experience. Bangalore).
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                   5


poor people to engage in networking in order to become agents of change and thereby to empower
themselves in a sustainable way. The credit management groups were called Self Help Groups in 1991.12

15.     MYRADA was instrumental in sensitizing the banks to implement policies which would make it
more responsive to the requirements of SHGs. The Reserve Bank of India Directives requested
commercial banks to convert from lending to individuals to SHGs, i.e. grass root institutions of the poor,
from needing to know the purpose of each loan in advance to needing to be informed of it after the
groups had lent to their members, and so on. The Reserve Bank of India had studied the experiments of
MYRADA in Dharmapuri district of Tamil Nadu and acknowledged that SHGs were credit worthy. This
helped in accelerating the momentum of group formation. The move of the National Agricultural Bank for
Rural Development's to extend loans to the SHGs, through nationalized banks under refinancing program,
was primarily responsible for the gearing up of the movement.13 The Central and State governments
measures of including promotion of SHG of the poor women in their policies has helped in accelerating
the momentum.

16.      The shift in government policy from individual beneficiary programs to the group as a unit in the
early 1990s is said to have contributed to the gearing up of the SHG movement. The failure of programs
that relied on targeting individuals, such as the Integrated Rural Development Program, shifted the
government towards putting its trust more in SHGs as management units. By restructuring self
employment programs, the Government merged the earlier poverty alleviation schemes to bring in a
package covering all aspects of self employment such as organization of poor into self help groups,
training, credit, technology and infrastructure and marketing under one program. This Swarnajayanthi
Grama Swaraozqar Yogana program14 focused on self employment opportunities for SHGs of women and
the disabled in rural India, those who were supposed to be at BPL.

17.      The importance accorded to women's equality and empowerment in the Seventh Five Year Plan
(1985­1990) and the Eighth Five Year Plan (1992­1997), gave further impetus to programs and plans
addressing women specifically. The Ninth Plan states that the early 1990s made an attempt to ensure
that women would become economically independent and self reliant.15 The national policies backed by
international agencies have been complemented by state policies and plans for women. All of this has
helped focus on women's development and empowerment.

18.      At the same time, there was evidence that the record on the repayment of loans by women was
often better than that of men, and that women were also more likely to use the income earned on their
families, leading to improved health and nutrition of the poor population for improving the quality of life.
The wisdom of making available credit to men as heads of households also changed with the realization
that women's participation in economic production had been greatly underestimated, as women were
engaged in small scale activities in the informal sector which were difficult to capture statistically.16

12
     With the increase in the popularity in the concept, the danger has been one of calling all types of groups as Self
     Help Groups (SHGs). In Andhra Pradesh, various types of user groups: Mothers Committees, School Education
     Committees, and Water User's Associations, are all called SHGs. (Sitaram, Shashikala. 2002. Interface of
     Panchayati Raj Institutions and Community Based Organisations in Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction
     Project. Submitted to Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty. Andhra Pradesh). MYRADA prefers to call its groups
   as Self Help Affinity groups in order to make a distinction between the groups that have asked for capacity building
   support and the others.
13
   The Bank's figures show that in Karnataka, there are 236,866 SHGs (rural and urban), the bank linkages have been
   availed by 163,198 SHGs. (SHG Bank Linkage Program, Karnataka, 2004-05, published by the National Agricultural
   Bank for Rural Development).
14
   Swarna = golden, jayanthi = celebrations, grama = village, swaraozgar = self employment, yogana = program.
15
   For an account on women empowerment and development from the first to the ninth five year plan, see
   Rajasekhar, D. 2004. Micro-Finance, Poverty Alleviation and Empowerment of Women: A Study of Two NGOS from
   Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. Institute for Social and Economic Change. Bangalore, Social and Economic
   Monographs.
16
   Leach, Fiona. 1999. The Impact of Training on Women's Micro Enterprise Development. University of Sussex.
6                                India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



Women in many households contribute to household income with activities that generate so little profit
that men would not consider doing them. Micro credit to women came to be seen as an important route
to poverty alleviation strengthening social mobility of women, the first step for their empowerment.

19.       Microfinance oriented credit and savings schemes attracted significant levels of funding by the
major donor agencies and development banks. The World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development supported Tamil Nadu Women Development Corporation in the mid 1990s for
initiating and supporting women SHGs, which was to be done in collaboration with the NGOs. The
Government-NGO collaboration was found to be effective--the Government with its wide area of
coverage, resources, legitimacy and accessibility, and the NGO with its flexibility and mobilization capacity
can complement each other, create strengths in their effort in reaching the poor. Many of the programs
that followed promoted this as a concept. The first of this was the World Bank project--Swashakthi.

20.     Swashakthi Projects were initiated in Karnataka, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Harayana and
Madhya Pradesh, in the late 1990s­1998.17 The states of Jharkand and Uttaranchal were added in 2002.
The projects intended to improve the women's economic and social status within 5 years, and this
underlined the need for women to organize themselves. The projects were praised for building up
women's capacities, establishing support mechanisms for income generating activities managed by
women, establishing mechanism to access social programs and leverage funds for community assets
creation and providing effective project management systems.18 However, the sustainability of the
program was much debated and remained unsure when the project ended. A possible solution discussed
was the institutionalization of SHGs by creating vertically linked federations, at different levels, for their
self-management including accessing resources and influencing policies.

21.     Another World Bank initiative was in Andhra Pradesh, where it supported the Government's Rural
Poverty Reduction Program in 2000 to empower the rural poor by improving opportunities to meet their
social and economic needs. When launched, the project had a coverage of 180 Mandals (rural
administrative units) providing direct benefits to 620,000 poor families. The focus of this project was to
develop self-reliant and self-managed community-based organizations by giving priority in forming
common interest groups and SHGs. The program similarly noted the success of the thrift and credit based
groups of women, and labeled it the most important social innovation of recent times.

22.      A recent intervention is the Karnataka Government's Stree Shakthi (women power) program
launched in 2000. The Government of Karnataka realized that, despite implementing many programs
which aimed at social, economic and overall development of rural women, it could not empower women
or build up their confidence. The Stree Shakthi program led to the formation of 100,000 SHGs, covering 2
million women.19

23.      However, all of this was achieved in the rural areas. The focus of most of the NGOs and other
organizations had been on rural women. Urban women were left out on account of three main reasons:
(i) urban poverty was not considered as acute as rural poverty;20 (ii) there was an apprehension that
making the thrift and credit concept a success in urban slums which usually have a significant
floating/migrating population, could cause further in-migration;21 and (iii) thrift and credit activities were


17
   Swashakthi report has noted that most SHGs have been promoted by the NGOs with more progress being made in
   the south of India than the north.
18
   Details in Rural Women's Development and Empowerment Project, Project Agreement document.
19
   Urban Stree Shakthi program came in much later in 2003.
20
   Urban poverty is considered to be less than rural poverty. The 55th round of National Sample Survey show a
   poverty ratio of 27.1 (rural) and 23.6 (urban) (Datta, K.L. On Measurement of Rural Poverty in India. Occasional
   Paper published by State Institute of Panchayats and Rural Development. West Bengal).
21
   Intra and inter slum migrations are common. People migrate from other areas--both rural and other urban areas
   due to drought, poverty, marriage and also because of caste affinities. The migration between slums is also
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                 7


deemed difficult to organize in slums given that there are so many internal population movements. There
are many instances where slum dwellers sell their dwellings/huts for a high price and rent a hut in other
places, or move from corner to corner.22 Multi-religious, multi-caste, multi­lingual, and multi-livelihood
patterns of urban settlements limit the forming and sustaining of cohesive groups.

24.      KUIDP was the first project that facilitated the formation of the SHGs in urban slums of
Karnataka.23 For many of the NGO partners, this was a new experience, a first time of association with
the urban poor. As the survey bore out, these NGOs are now fully aware that urban poverty also needs
specific interventions.24 The NGOs which worked with KUIDFC have subsequently found that it is easier to
"empower" urban women than rural women. Urban poor women may be more exposed to the
happenings around them. Urban women are more open to participating in new programs, are more
focused, and want social recognition and mainstreaming. However, intrusions by NGOs which are not
genuine, and exploitation by money lenders, are alleged to have made urban women more skeptical of
SHGs. Since most urban women earn their livelihood and do not have assets like land, it is more difficult
for them to save. Their attitude has been one of "live today." Unlike rural women who trust each other,
urban women prefer written statements. Urban women lack the support of the joint family system which
makes their mobility more difficult. Urban poor women have to bear the ill effects of social conflicts and
suspicions which appear to be more frequent in urban areas.

25.     During the initial phase of KUIDP, the SJSRY, as an urban counterpart of Swarnajayanthi Grama
Swaraozqar Yogana, was monitored by KUIDFC and this could have been a contributing factor which
allowed looking at "groups" as entities to work with.25 The concept of community-based organizations
mentioned in the project document prepared by the consultant mentioned earlier (footnote 3) also
emphasized the formation of community development societies.

                                                            26.       The     first    phase      of     KUIDP
                                                            (September/October 1999 to December 2000)
                                                            enabled the formation of 54 SHGs, and was
                                                            considered to be one of the best-implemented
                                                            activities of CDP. A mid-project assessment funded
                                                            by ADB, referred to earlier, has noted that the
                                                            SHGs were successful in inculcating the habits of
                                                            savings, and increasing the mobility and
                                                            participation of women. It also noted that the
                                                            success rate varied between towns and the NGOs.
                                                            There was a noticeable demand expressed by the
                                                            women to enable them to start "more" SHGs
                                                            (footnote 5).

                                                            27.      Under the second phase of CDP, from July
                                                            2002 to December 2003, 722 SHGs were formed
Ramanagaram, self help group.
                                                            in the six project towns by the end of the project


   possible; those living in a slum migrate to other areas in search of better amenities. Rao, K. Ranga and MSA Rao.
   1984. Cities and Slums: A Study of Squatters' Settlements in the city of Vijayawada. Concept Publishing Company.
22
   Desai, A. R. and S.D. Pillai. 1972. A Profile of an Indian Slum. University of Bombay.
23
   Slums (low income settlements) constitute the most important and persistent problem of urban life and face
   problems such as poverty, poor housing, access to basic services, illiteracy, problems associated with health and
   malnutrition, increased burden of debt and poor savings and lack of skills.
24
   Except Rural Literacy and Health Program, Shantha Jeeva Jyothi and Parinithi, for the other NGOs this has been a
   first time in dealing with urban programs of this magnitude.
25
   From September 1997 to May 1999, Swarna Jayanthi Shahari Rojagar Yogana (SJSRY) was monitored by KUIDFC
   but implemented by Directorate of Municipal Administration. SJSRY was later shifted to the Directorate, the reason
   given for this is that the same organization should monitor and implement the program for better results.
8                                India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



period--Mysore (171), Ramanagaram (165), Channapatna (107), Tumkur (145), Mandya (85) and
Maddur (49). KUIDP's target of 678 was exceeded by 44.26 The increase in number was due to the
interest in creating and joining SHGs as shown by the women. The benefits of savings, credit and
linkages with the financial institutions were so obvious that more and more women wanted to avail of
these. Unlike the earlier phase, the NGOs did not have to spend much time in convincing poor women on
the usefulness of joining SHGs.

28.     This field investigation, more than a year after the closing of the component, confirms that the
total number of SHGs in existence reached 836 by June 2005. In addition to the reasons mentioned
above, the number increase has been on account of the working of the Federations of the SHGs in the six
towns. One of the main objectives of the Federations has been to bring more groups/women into their
purview.27

C.      Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development                           and     Finance      Corporation's
        Guidelines in Organizing Self Help Groups

29.    The women development and empowerment component of CDP envisaged the role of SHGs as
one of empowering women in order to achieve social, economic and political strengths which would
enable women to access the hitherto denied services of different governmental programs and schemes
(CDP Package of KUIDFC).28

30.      The concept of SHGs that KUIDP promoted was based on broad guidelines and structures
generally followed by projects emphasizing women empowerment and development. The key concept
was that an SHG is an informal association built on trust and good will. However, the SHG adheres to
certain rules and regulations. Main rules and regulations are that the group should have up to 20
members, hold weekly meetings, selects/elects two representatives, rotates leadership yearly, asks for
members' participation in preparing bylaws, opens an account in the local bank in the name of the SHG
and is to be jointly operated by representatives, and demands weekly savings from its members with a
minimum of Rs10 and a maximum not exceeding Rs100. Most NGOs conduct an internal audit of the
accounts of all the groups in their purview. In order to strengthen the SHGs, the community development
wing of KUIDP enabled a large number of trainings to SHG members (a total of 977 in all the six towns)
specific to the formation and functioning of the SHG--on concept of organizing groups, savings and credit
management, on book keeping, leadership, gender, role of representatives and members of SHG
(footnote 7).

31.    KUIDP had supported 662 SHGs with revolving funds of Rs5,000 each, supplied after the first 6
months of their existence. The total amount of revolving fund distributed by the KUIDFC has been a
modest Rs3,310,000.29 The revolving funds were essential in accelerating the activities of the groups.



26
   The NGOs Vikasa and Vikasana could not reach the specified targets due to constraints of time. They were from
   the new towns of Mandya and Maddur--the towns which were included in the program much later and had only a
   year's time at their disposal.
27
   There has been an increase in the number of SHGs after June 2005 varying from three (Sumana, Mysore) to 40
   (Vikasana, Mandya). The increase is attributed to the NGOs' continued interest in supporting the groups, the
   expanded NGO activities including the area of NGO operation (increase in the number of slums) and more so
   because of the demonstration effect that the well-functioning SHGs have had. The increase, in some ways, reflects
   the "need" for more SHGs. The Project target was 30 SHGs for Shanta Jeeva Jyothi, the number in May, 2007 is
   60; similarly, for Parinati, the numbers are 50 and 140 and for Mamata Makkala Mandira 75 and 240.
28
   Literature on women empowerment is vast. For the present purposes empowerment women empowerment could
   be taken to mean the increase in the women's questioning capacities on the existing strengths and resources,
   gaining control over them to increase the bargaining power.
29
   During the first phase, amounts of Rs20,000 were given to 35 groups. This was reduced to Rs5,000 during the
   second phase of the project since the number of groups increased.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                          9


32.      Some of the methods used prior to forming the thrift and credit groups are household surveys
and mass contact programs that explain the interests of the organization and invite participation of the
needy and the interested. In any of the methods followed by the NGOs, local political and religious
leaders are taken into confidence. In one of the slums in which ODP works in Mysore (Gandhi Nagar), the
NGO animators had to talk to the priests of the area and there was one on every road attached to a
temple. In communities where the religion defines the way of life, confidence building and approval by
religious leaders was necessary.

33.      In many of the areas, NGOs interventions, particularly those related to women development and
empowerment, were opposed by the religious heads of the Muslim community (e.g., in the Fakir Palya
Slum in Tumkur). They also felt that it was against their religion to use interest gained on savings and
lending.

34.    In some of the households, men did not want "fights at home" after the women gained
knowledge and therefore opposed their spouse/s joining the group. At the initial stages of forming the
Sanghas, RLHP regarded it necessary to explain the necessity of forming women Sanghas to the men. It
was found that imbibing gender concepts with men facilitates the formation of women groups.




III. SELF HELP GROUPS AND
     COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
     PROGRAM
                                                          35.      As stated earlier, the KUIDP covered a
                                                          wide range of CDPs, one of which was women
                                                          development and empowerment.30 The concepts
                                                          of thrift and credit were part of the broader
                                                          community development package. The SHG
                                                          program gained so much momentum that they
                                                          were used also to launch many of the awareness
                                                          and skill training programs.

                                                          36.     The forums of SHGs and the Federations
                                                          quickly became effective ways to reach the
                                                          communities. The awareness level and the
                                                          learning capacities of the women had increased.
                                                          The partner NGOs now consider community
     Tumkur: trainees in the Women's Training             development concepts, as designed by KUIDP, a
     Center.                                              must in future interventions, even in those which
                                                          would focus only on the SHGs.




30
     The total amounts spent on all of the above including the women development and empowerment program by
     KUIDFC has been Rs113.53 lakhs and the total amounts on skill training have been Rs13.04 lakhs (Karnataka
     Urban Infrastructure and Development Program [KUIDP]. 2004. Physical and Financial Progress Report of
     Community Development Programs under KUIDP. Karnataka).
10                              India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



37.      SHGs, in most cases, chose the beneficiaries for the skill training programs.31 Trainings on
tailoring, embroidery, computer, home nursing, auto driving, screen printing, beautician, typing, candle
making, home food products were some of the main skill training programs that were taken up.
Entrepreneurship development programs were also prepared, as an important component of skill training
program which facilitated the establishment of micro-enterprise.

38.     Some of the trainings (e.g., medical attendant, beautician's course, entrepreneurship
development program) have been much appreciated, as the beneficiaries have found remunerative
employment and have set up micro-enterprises.32 Some training was less useful as it did not give the
trainees practical experience.

39.     One of the best programs, according to the field investigations, was the special coaching class for
the school going children and the school drop outs. A total of 200 centers were established in the slums.
KUIDFC spent Rs 2,137,750 on this. This helped poor children whose parents were illiterate and could not
tutor them, and who could not afford fees charged by private tutors. More importantly, the households
did not have either the space or the environment that encouraged studies. The tuitions held in the
evenings also helped the children not to while away their time in learning bad habits, a fact that relieved
the working women who could not keep an eye on the children. The program also motivated the women
to send their children to school.

40.     SHGs coordinated the tuition classes. They arranged the place to conduct the tuition (generally
the community hall) and kept vigil on the teacher who was hired (the honorarium was paid for by
KUIDP). At the time of the field work, many of the women expressed the need to continue this program
which was wound up with KUIDP. The SHGs, even those where the money transactions were more
successful, have not been able to continue this program, as not all members wished to subscribe to
paying the teachers. Vikasa has attempted to solve this by forming Child Forums which bring together
children of two to three SHG members. The children, 25 in each Forum, meet once a week--they learn
new things from an activist of the SHG and save a minimum of 50 paisa taken from their pocket money,
usually given by parents to buy biscuits/savories/eatables (eating chocolate is a rarity for poor children).
The saved amount was given to the child at the beginning of the academic year so that it helped in the
purchase of books, pens, etc. There were eight such Forums facilitated by the Town Level Federation
(TLF) (there were nine by May 2007).

41.     A positive aspect of the CDP approach was that it was offered programs to both men and
women. Men could then get acclimatized to the programs and become more open to women joining
SHGs. Some of the skill training programs like computer training and livelihood advancement trainings
provided opportunities for the youth of the BPL families.33




31
   The skills training program in the first phase was implemented through NGOs specialized in this area: Jana
   Shikshana Samasthe in Mysore and Society for the Betterment of Human Resources in Tumkur. In the second
   phase of KUIDP, all the training programs, other than computer training, were conducted by the grass root NGOs
   which implemented the programs.
32
   One hundred six skill training programs, covering 2,600 beneficiaries, have been conducted. The result has been
   employment to 225 trainees and establishment of 300 micro-enterprises (KUIDP. 2004. Consolidated Community
   Development Report of KUIDFC and Project Completion presentation of KUIDFC. Karnataka).
33
   Two Livelihood Advancement Business Schools were set up one in Tumkur and the other in Mysore which have
   trained 485 beneficiaries of which 304 have found placements (according to a progress report submitted by
   Livelihood Advancement Business Schools to KUIDFC in 2005).
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                      11


A.        Role of Self Help Groups in Slum Improvement

42.     Did SHGs performance contribute to the success of the infrastructural programs? Many of the
slum development components, like roads, drains, water supply, and community centers, offered
opportunities for involvement of SHGs. The groups could have played a role by their involvement in
motivational campaigns and in collecting beneficiary contributions, if any were required.34 But the
community development activities were preceded by infrastructural works. The NGOs are of the opinion
that the Low Cost Sanitation component, which subsidized construction of private latrines outside of
houses on plots, and which was one of the most successful of the slum improvement programs, could
have been more easily implemented with prior involvement of the SHGs.

                                                 43.      SHGs could also have been involved in the
                                                 maintenance of some of the infrastructural facilities
                                                 developed.35 However, KUIDP or local governments did not
                                                 consider this. In fact, in many of the slums, women had to
                                                 fight to get permission to use the community halls (part of the
                                                 slum improvement program) for SHG meetings, training, and
                                                 tuition programs.

                                                 44.      The execution and maintenance of the structures
                                                 involved different stakeholders than the SHGs (community
                                                 halls were constructed by the Karnataka Slum Clearance Board
                                                 and maintained by the concerned urban local bodies. SHGs
                                                 have stated that the Karnataka Slum Clearance Board and
                                                 many other engineering departments and wings were
                                                 indifferent to the CDP activities. Even a minimum relationship
                                                 between the stakeholders was not maintained.36 Overall,
                                                 KUIDP was not very geared to integrating the slum
                                                 improvement component with the community development
     Drainage   and         latrines      in     component, and a good opportunity for use of the SHGs was
     Channapatna.                                lost.




34
   Sixteen thousand two hundred sixty-one low cost sanitation units have been built in the six towns as a part of this
   program. The low cost sanitation required a beneficiary contribution of 25% of the total cost of construction.
35
   As per the Inception Report, the community-based organizations were expected to play this role. Whether the
   SHGs can be equated with community-based organizations which are broader institutions than the SHGs is
   debatable. For the present, we are looking at SHGs as professional grass roots institutions of the poor who could
   perform some of the functions of maintenance of the infrastructure. Some would argue that this may overburden
   women and that poor women would have to accept all this in the name of their empowerment (Guerin, Isabelle
   and Jane Palier. 2005. Microfinance Challenges: Empowerment or Disempowerment of Poor? Institute Francais De
   Pondicherry, Collection Sciences Sociales n 10, French Institute of Pondicherry).
36
   The indifference to the soft component of the Community Development Program by the engineering wing at
   various stages in this project is highlighted in the report cited earlier (footnote 5). That this is a general trend in
   most projects was noted at a workshop supported by ADB (Training of Trainers Workshop on Social Development
   and Resettlement, Institute for Social and Economic Change Bangalore with ADB and Sheladia Associates, Inc. held
   in April 23­27, 2001).
12                              India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka




IV. MICROFINANCE
    MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
45.       The women and/or the groups are eligible for borrowing generally after they have proved that
they save regularly every week over a period of at least 6 months. The credit could be availed through
(i) internal lending; (ii) formal banking system; and (iii) financial agencies other than banks (this could be
an NGO, a Federation or microfinance agencies set up by the NGO). Generally, a set pattern is followed.
Initially, women access the internal lending provided by the group. When more funds are needed, the
SHGs can decide to access bank linkages and, if national banks are unwilling, they could opt to look at
other financial agencies. NGO facilitation in this process was viewed as very important. Getting too many
loans at an early stage, at higher rates of interest than the nationalized bank, and from credit institutions
at too generous a scale without a check on the actual needs, all affect survival of the SHG.

46.     The internal lending within each group is decided by the members of the group: who should
borrow, when should the loan be paid back, when should interest be levied, etc. It is mandatory to show
progress in the lending within the group before other types of credits are accepted.

47.     It is of interest to estimate the kind of funds that are being transacted in the SHGs. A woman's
saving of Rs20 per week saves Rs80 in a month. In an SHG with 15 members this adds up to Rs1,200 per
month and Rs14,400 annually. The groups have been functioning over the last 3 years, thereby
possessing Rs43,000 in principle. If interests on this and other fees like the fines on late repayment are
added, this can be rounded to Rs50,000. This is the amount of funds that is being rotated in the SHGs.

48.       The study estimates that around 50% of the total number of SHG formed in the six towns have
accessed bank loans.37 The groups need to go through a process of evaluation-- the records which
pertain to the regular savings, regular transaction with the bank are scrutinized. The groups should
preferably be functioning for 6 to 9 months and internal lending should be practiced for a period of 6
months. A 1:2 ratio of saving to lending is generally practiced by banks when these are approached for
the first time.38

49.      Although the formal banking system is no longer unfriendly to SHGs (i.e., to groups of poor
women who do not have assets), some of the officials are not pro-poor. The list of defaulters with the
bank adds strength to their argument. The procedures with the banks continue to be cumbersome.
However, accessibility of the groups to the banks depends on the credibility and rapport of the NGOs with
the banks. The NGOs take on the role of social intermediary between the bank and the borrowers. For
the banks, the transaction costs and risks are reduced. An example highlights the quantum of
transactions in the banks. In Channapatna, the total savings in the bank by 78 SHGs is Rs19,266,509,
interest on loan adds up to Rs248,241, and from other income is Rs12,805. The loan amount availed
equals Rs3,292,217 and the repayment has been Rs2,282,582.39 Such is the strength of microfinance.40

50.      Such transactions are creating an impetus for the NGOs and the federations to become micro
credit organizations. Sadhana Resource Centre of Maddur is in the process of saving the interest amount


37
   As communicated by a KUIDFC Social Development Officer, almost all groups have gained access to bank loans,
   over time (May 2007).
38
    A minimum of Rs2 lakh is the demand placed by the groups now, unlike before. The internal lending has also
   increased to Rs1 lakh for most SHGs.
39
   Details given by the NGO- Parinati.
40
   NGOs state that there has been an overall increase of 20%­25% in financial transactions over the last 2 years.
   The increase in the number of SHGs has also been responsible for this.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                  13


of Rs18,000 that is being accrued at the bank and using this for lending purposes.(May 2007). This way,
the resources of the centre can be increased as well.

51.     The closure of KUIDP has had the effect of changing the roles of some of the NGOs. This has
affected the SHGs started by them.

         (i)      The NGOs have begun to assist the banks in identifying SHGs those which are sustained
                  and viable. For this, the NGOs are paid Rs5,000 (e.g., Mamata Makalla Mandira of
                  Ramanagaram.) The groups which are not strong on the concepts would be misled.
         (ii)     The NGOs have become microfinance institutions.41 Two examples highlight this trend.
                  One is that of Sumana, which has established a Community Banking System in order that
                  the women get timely help and are not harassed by the procedures of the bank. The
                  Community Banking System was established in 2000 and extended to KUIDP groups in
                  recent times. The other example is that of WLARS, which offers Rs5,000 to the women
                  on an interest of 2%. This has had the effect of attracting very poor households who
                  borrow and spend for consumption purposes as seen in one of the slums at Tumkur.
         (iii)    The NGOs have facilitated the linkages of SHGs with Sangamitra which is a microfinance
                  institution promoted by MYRADA.42 There are allegations against weak NGOs which are
                  considered to be "handing over" the SHGs to other institutions. The NGOs should monitor
                  the quantum of loan availed by groups from different sources, till the groups are
                  sustained. Availing loans at frequent intervals is not considered healthy. Poor women are
                  not equipped to handle huge amounts at this stage. In the long run, it may weaken the
                  process of empowering women.43
         (iv)     The more harmful and glaring trend
                  seems to be that of "other" NGOs
                  which are entering the slums and
                  luring women with money. Such
                  NGOs (e.g., Bharath Samyuktha
                  Sangha and Grammena Kuta) which
                  have turned to be microfinance
                  institutions are not laced with any
                  social concern but are lending as
                  they are attracted by the profits.44
                  They have been responsible for
                  breaking some of the KUIDP
                  groups. This has been apparent in
                  Channapatna. The weak or non-            Ramanagaram: self help group accounts.
                  existing NGO (KUIDP) has made
                  this possible.45


41
   There is more emphasis on microfinance. The NGOs consider this to be necessary to fulfill the financial needs, of
   the SHGs (May 2007).
42
   Sangamitra was set up exclusively to support SHGs by providing finance as MYRADA felt that the Banking System
   could not cope up with the rapidly expanding number of SHGs. The quantum of group financial assistance
   packages varies from a minimum of Rs10,000 to a maximum of Rs125,000 per group. The repayment periods vary
   from a year to a maximum of 3 years. Capacity building exercises, evaluation of the SHGs, are regular features of
   Sangamitra. The NGOs are paid an amount of Rs250 for linking a group to them (to Sangamitra).
43
   Other studies have pointed out that credits if provided in amounts that cannot be absorbed by people's institutions
   tends to weaken the degree of ownership by the members of the group, in turn undermine the process of
   institution building and the potential of empowering the poor (footnote 10).
44
   This trend continues with more organizations creeping-in (e.g., Ujivan in Ramanagaram) (May 2007).
45
   Goutam Nagar Welfare Association worked in partnership with KUIDP in the town of Channapatna from July 2002
   to December 2003 but disappeared from the scene without a trace. For practical purposes the NGO is nonexistent.
   The other NGO working in this town, Parinati, was requested by KUIDFC to follow some of the programs up.
14                                  India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



52.    Studies and experiments elsewhere have pointed out that the potential of credit as an
empowering tool is reduced if the credit management process of savings, lending and repayment is not
developed by the group and controlled by it. One study concludes: "the availability of credit does not
empower but it is the management of the credit and the quality of governance of the institutions set up
by people to manage credit that empowers" (footnote 10).




V. IMPACT OF SELF HELP GROUP
   MOVEMENT ON WOMEN'S
   SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
   STATUS
53.     The membership to a SHG has contributed to significant changes in the lives of women. This was
revealed by focus group interactions and field visits in the six towns undertaken for this study. Most of
the groups visited could be assessed as successful in social and economic terms. Less than 5% of the
SHGs formed under the program can be said to be defunct. Forty percent of the urban poor were covered
by KUIDP's SHGs in the short period that the project was active. The impacts can be looked at as those
bringing in economic changes, impact on the social status and political impacts, and the impacts of SHGs
on the community.

A.         Impact on Economic Status

54.     Increased entrepreneurial skills. KUIDP convened a number of Entrepreneurship
Development Programs for SHG members which facilitated the learning of generic skills such as
bookkeeping. This has allowed women to change from being wage workers to being self employed.
Women also have gained the option to pursue two or three petty businesses, change from one type of
business to another, combine wage employment with small business.46

55.      Increased access to credit. The micro
credit facility of the SHG has encouraged women to
save. They are at ease in their minds as they can avail
monies when they need, without having to pay any
collateral. The most important effect has been the
escape from the clutches of the money lenders.
Pledging on jewelry has also reduced. The interest on
loans has reduced from 120% per annum to 24%.
They can request for adjustment in the duration of
repayment.

56.     Establishment of businesses. At least half
of the members (15­18 generally) have taken a loan
                                                                   Mysore, women in shop.
46
     In reality, the businesses are income generating activities, i.e., they may or may not be micro-enterprises which
     are a more permanent form of economic activity. The income generating activities could be a casual activity (e.g.,
     selling flowers, selling food grains) where women can move in and out as time and need dictate, most often
     supplementing male household income.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                               15


from their SHG to set up a micro-enterprise managed either by the women or by their families. There is
an endless list of businesses established in this way, based on small credits of Rs500 to sell flowers,
vegetables and fruits, up to Rs5,000 to establish petty shops and hotels, food grains, manufacture and
sale of processed food products would need investments amounts varying between Rs500 to Rs5,000.
Many women see advantages in owning a petty enterprise as it allows flexibility in working hours and
helps balance house keeping and child rearing along with earning for the family.

57.      While visiting SHGs, the study found many examples that showed that the women who invested
in businesses through their SHGs are better off. One woman visited, Lakshmi, a member of Siddapaji
SHG at Ram Rahim Nagar in Maddur had a saree (traditional fabric worn by Indian women) business. At
every purchase, she invested Rs5,000, on which she made a profit of Rs1,300. The advantage in this is
her tie up with the traders of Bangalore who were willing to take back the unsold fabric, if any.47

58.     Women now also have the opportunity to change from one income generating activity to
another--Suguna of Srirama SHG at Mandya began with the sale of flowers but changed to selling of
clothes which she found more remunerative. Many women have benefited from the skill training
programs and the Entrepreneurship Development Program that followed. Five beauty parlors48 (one each
in Maddur, Ramanagaram and Tumkur and two in Mysore) and two screen printing units (one in Mysore
and one in Tumkur) have been set up by the women. This has ensured a substantial change in the
incomes, as these are micro-enterprises in the true sense of the word.

59.        The increase in income has allowed poor women to be able to prioritize their requirements and
fulfill these.49 The general trend is to invest in business only after these have been fulfilled. A first priority
is to educate the children.50 Women furthermore spent monies for health purposes, for house repairs and
to purchase kitchen utensils. Some also cleared earlier loans that they otherwise would have to take with
high interest rates. Many shifted from a rented house to a house on lease. It is only later that women
also invest in purchase of consumption goods like televisions, telephones, and house sites.

60.      Changes in consumption patterns. Food items were purchased once a week or once a
month, as and when wages were received was done. This saved not only the time spent but also saved
on amounts as bulk/wholesale purchases are priced lower than retail purchases and ensure better
quality. There is a noticeable change in the consumption pattern and better household nutrition. The
financial mobility due to participation in the SHG has led to an improvement in the quality of life,
according to some of the successful groups. Overall, many families were able to address their basic needs
better than before.

B.      Impact on Social Status

61.      This study found that the participation in the movement by itself has been an empowering and
liberating experience for many of the poor women. The strongest impact has been in terms of self
esteem and increased social mobility as many women of urban slums had never attended such a program
before. The impacts can be summarized as follows:51

        (i)      Increased mobility. This means a lot to poor women and to those who have been
                 restricted by religious taboo. The visit to the SHG has made women more bold and

47
   For more success stories, see Nair, Omana. 2002. Taking Charge. ADB Review, September­October 2002. Manila.
48
   Full-fledged parlors cost an investment of Rs50,000 and more. Five such parlors have been established.
49
    The women currently show more interest in investing in income generating activities, since some of their
   consumption needs have been met (Discussions with NGOs, 2007).
50
   Reduction in child labor and higher enrolment at schools could prove this.
51
    Decision-making within the household, control over income, involvement in major decisions, literacy rates, and
   perception on importance of education and marriage age for girls are some of the social indicators against which
   the impact of SHGs are usually judged (footnote 13).
16                               India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



                   confident. Earlier, women were more confined to the four walls of the kitchen and some
                   to the work place. They were now found to be able to meet each other, and discuss
                   problems.
           (ii)    Increased exposure. This comes from more interactions with other women. Women
                   stated that they are more enthusiastic and positive about their lives. They understand
                   each other's viewpoints and problems. Interaction with other women has resulted in
                   building congenial relationships and have ensured fewer conflicts. It has also had the
                   multiplier effect of spreading the SHG movement.
           (iii)   Increased awareness. Awareness on health related issues--personal hygiene,
                   communicable diseases, effects of malnutrition and sanitation--have increased as a
                   result of training programs. More importantly, awareness of the rights of women--as
                   prescribed by the Constitution and as prescribed by the religious doctrines--has also
                   increased. The membership in the SHGs has allowed many women to come out of
                   boundaries defined by their male companions or relatives. There are now cases
                   submitted for legal mediation by Muslim women, something never heard of before.
           (iv)    Changes in decision-making. Women have stated that they are more involved in
                   decisions that affect their lives and that of their family/household. They have more
                   freedom to decide which of the meetings to attend and how much time they could spend
                   without having to seek permission from the men and worry about the conflicts that might
                   ensue at home as a consequence. Women also felt they have more say in the education
                   of the children, such as which school children were to be sent to. Men involved women in
                   decision-making processes which were purely in the male domain before, such as house
                   repairs and the purchase of a site, non inclusion of women in some major decisions that
                   concern the household, have however continued.
           (v)     Increase in social security. Some of the SHGs have been successful in availing
                   facilities like widow pensions, old age pensions, health and life insurance for its
                   members. This has resulted in the women feeling more secure about themselves and
                   their future. Women abuse is said to have reduced and deserted wives have witnessed
                   the husband return home. There are instances where SHGs have pressured men to put
                   an end to violence/beating. This was revealed by the Focus Group Discussions held for
                   this study. Physical violence has reduced in a few cases due to the collective pressure
                   created by the SHGs. The unequal power relations between men and women, with the
                   increasing economic power and social mobility of women, is changing. However, many
                   more changes are to be achieved, like achieving the rights of women to property, the
                   reproductive rights and many more.

62.     Many SHGs have helped in resolving family disputes. At Mandya, the incidence of harassment of
a member of a SHG was resolved by joint efforts of women of three groups. A member was abused by
the husband and the mother-in-law who poured kerosene on her and threw her out of the house in the
middle of the night on January 4, 2005. Women members of three of the SHGs of the area went to her
rescue and provided her with shelter and requested help of the NGO Vikasana. The NGO workers of
Women Help Line Program which Vikasana runs counseled the family members and have ensured that
the mental and physical torture of women has stopped.

63.     There are a number of less obvious benefits, in the area of soft skills, which are important in the
context of women's empowerment.52 These are highlighted below.

64.      The skills of time management: women have come to value time more. For instance, cooking
skills have become better time managed. Housework which was finished at leisure is completed within a



52
     As corroborated by Sakthi in May 2007, women of the SHGs have become well-versed in financial management,
     accessing information, and resolving conflicts
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                              17


short span of time. (Gender division of labor at the household restricts women; men do not contribute to
the household work of cooking, washing vessels, etc.)

65.    Women have learnt to conduct meetings efficiently, both at the SHG and Federation level. A few
women in a group have also gained proficiency in maintaining documents and recording meetings. More
importantly they have learned the skills of arithmetic which helps in the maintenance of books of
accounts. By attending the meetings and training programs, women have improved their participatory
and management discipline.

66.      One of the mandatory programs of all SHGs, irrespective of who initiates, is the effort made to
teach illiterates how to read and write. Having learnt and practiced this skill, many women feel more
confident and less embarrassed when they are asked to sign their names.

67.       Some women have learnt to speak new languages. The urban conglomeration is a mixture of
different cultural groups speaking different languages, and the interaction between the women has
facilitated the learning of new languages. In Ramanagaram, the Urdu speaking Muslim women have
learnt to speak in the local language.

68.       The skills of managing cultural events--organizing cultural programs and participating in cultural
activities have been learnt and practiced.

69.   The skills mastered by NGOs--that of forming SHGs has been picked up by many poor women.
Women have facilitated formation of more groups in both urban and rural areas.

C.         Impact on Political Status

70.      At times of elections for local bodies, the SHGs become a potential vote bank because of their
large numbers. There were many instances where the NGO coordinator or the animator was offered a
bribe to ensure that the women voted for them. However, this did not mean that a woman would stand
for elections, even given the support of huge numbers of other members. Invariably, family support for
the women to enter the political arena would not be forthcoming. Political representation would call for
interaction with men and also being away from
home for long periods of time. This was not
viewed as a realistic goal for women. More
importantly, elections to the local bodies have
traditionally been fought on political party lines
which in the past did not generally support the
fielding of women candidates.53

71.      The case of the RLHP in Mysore stands in
contrast to this. RLHP successfully fielded many of
the Mahila Sangha members at the urban local
bodies' elections. This was possible because of
RLHPs continued interventions in the urban slums.
For the other NGOs, working in urban areas has
been recent. WLARS has fielded and won many
                                                      Improved road and drainage in Mysore.
seats in the Grama Panchayat (rural local bodies)
rural elections. Most of the NGOs are not keen on gearing women towards political movement, other than
the ones which emphasize on advocacy (Shanta Jeeva Jyothi, RLHP and WLARS).

53
     One third of the seats in local bodies have been reserved for women as per the 74th Amendment to the
     Constitution. The Amendment has brought administration to the doors of the people and has ensured that people
     participate in urban governance. This has also given additional opportunities for women.
18                                  India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



72.     Nevertheless, leadership qualities of the SHG members have improved and, given the right
impetus and opportunities, these may lead to their political integration in the urban local bodies. At
present, many women are being recognized by committees that work in the slums. For example, many of
the School Development and Monitoring Committees constituted at the schools in Maddur have invited
SHG members to be members. Each committee should have seven members who are selected/elected;
and half of the seats are reserved for women.

D.         Impact on the Community

73.     Advocacy to remove liquor shops located in the slums, pressures on urban local bodies to ensure
drinking water supply, clean roads and drainage systems, and getting community taps installed are some
of the collective actions that many groups have successfully taken up. Such actions also point to the
newfound freedom to participate and voice their concern pertaining to social issues.

74.     There are many examples from across all the six towns which can highlight this. In Tumkur, the
SHGs of Shanthinagar struggled and succeeded in 2004 in closing down the liquor shops. At the
Handijogi Palya slum in the same town during 2005, the process of eviction of slum dwellers was stalled
by the SHGs; those evicted were resettled at the same place. At Mariyamma Nagar, the SHGs litigate
against the urban local bodies along with other community-based organizations regarding land acquisition
decisions.54

75.     There are instances where groups of women have been able to fight and get possession of the
community hall as done by Bharathi and Manasa SHGs at Kythamaranahalli, Mysore. The women groups
have been responsible for changing the entire topography and the environment of slums as could be
seen at Kythamaranahalli. This slum is now called a locality because of the efforts of the SHG members
who had to fight to get every basic amenity as they started out from zero level. The women groups have
ensured drinking water facility, street and house lights and an anganwadi (government pre-school)
center.

76.     Internal SHG discussions have also allowed the women to be able to tackle common problems
such as the marital age for girls. The trend earlier was that 90% of the girls were forced into marriage
before 15 years of age. By educating mothers, this percentage has reduced considerably. In the long run,
this would work towards eliminating existing injustice and gender inequalities.

77.     One more case to be highlighted is that of the Federations at Maddur which demanded the
conduct of ward meetings. The reasoning was that the holding of such meetings ensured fair process of
beneficiary selection and would bring in one of the main ingredients of good governance:
accountability.55




54
     The NGOs are finding it easier to mobilize the support of women to fight for social causes.
55
     This is thought of and requested by the people as in effect, the Grama Sabhas (rural local bodies) i.e., the general
     assembly of the village panchayat is a feature of the Panchayati Raj Act, brought in as a result of the
     73rd Amendment, which is said to ensure accountable and transparent ways of selecting beneficiaries. The
     74th Amendment relating to urban governance specifies for the formation of ward committees for municipalities
     having a population of three lakhs or more (Section 243 of the 74th Amendment Act, 1992). Both the 73rd and the
     74th Amendment were passed at the same time in the early 1990s.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                               19




VI. EVALUATION OF SELF HELP
    GROUPS BY OTHERS
78.     Some of the NGOs with which KUIDP worked in partnership, have evaluated SHGs. The three
NGOs of Tumkur, ODP and RLHP of Mysore have evaluated their SHGs. Unfortunately, the results cannot
be used for the present purposes because (i) the evaluation does not pertain only to the KUIDP SHGs but
also covers other initiatives; (ii) data recording and presentation has not been systematic; and (iii) the
evaluation has been more of a financial assessment to gauge the financial status of the SHG, while other
aspects have been overlooked.

79.      Each of the NGOs devised its own set of evaluation questions. But certain criteria were common,
e.g., those regarding regular savings and credit operations, details of bank linkages, loan repayments,
day and time of the meeting, record maintenance, etc.

80.      The SHGs were graded based on the results of the evaluation. Of the total of 1,512 women SHGs
of ODP, (it had also facilitated 100 SHGs for men, rural and urban SHGs have been evaluated together)
86 were graded "A," that is scoring above 76 marks. Whether ODPs scoring pattern would be appreciated
by other NGOs is debatable as most NGOs and other agencies place importance on weekly meetings of
the groups but the women of the SHG started by ODP meet once in a month. Shantha Jeeva Jyothi, in
turn, considered more than 90% of the SHGs that were started by it as falling in the A category, but
again, the question is whether the other institutions would agree. Rotation of leadership at frequent and
regular intervals was marked high but a change in leadership was a very rare phenomenon as seen at the
time of the fieldwork in all the towns except in Maddur.

81.     The KUIDFC also initiated a process of evaluation. A team of five (two from KUIDFC and
three representatives from partner NGOs) evaluated the SHGs during 2004. This was done to assess the
functioning of the SHGs, prior to providing the revolving funds for the SHGs formed during the
second phase of the program.56 However, the evaluation did not help in fine-tuning the project.

82.      As mentioned, this study noted that the number of groups that have become defunct over the
last few years has been minimal. To cite a few examples, the NGO Bapuji Integrated Rural Development
Society noted that three of their groups had disintegrated; the numbers for WLARS and Society for the
Betterment of Human Resources were 3 and 2. This is not alarming and is more than balanced by the
birth of "more" SHGs. 57The disintegration of the groups is due to the lack of support by the NGOs which
have withdrawn from the project with its closure. Dominant leaders' interventions and opening up of
"membership" to other types of SHGs (discussed later) have added to this.




56
   For details of KUIDFC findings, criteria used and the results see: A Report on Evaluation and Audit of Self Help
   Groups brought out separately for (i) Mysore, Mandya and Maddur, and (ii) Tumkur, Ramanagaram and
   Channapatna.
57
   This seems to be the trend even in 2007 when the study went back to some of the groups contacted in 2005. The
   disintegration of the groups was minimal. Inadequate capacity building, failure of leadership, mishandling of
   money, mismanagement, the advent of NGOs that are only into micro credit continue to be cited as reasons. Some
   have pointed out that there is no disintegration but reformation of the groups. Shift in residence of women, a
   common phenomenon in urban slums, occasionally necessitates groups to be disbanded, but they re-form later.
20                                 India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka




VII. SUSTAINABILITY OF
     SELF HELP GROUPS
83.     The concepts of thrift and credit and fellowship are endearing aspects in a poor woman's life and
the common answer given by the women interviewed is that they would like the practices to continue for
as long as they live. But the questions that have hounded the activists and the voluntary sector are
whether the groups need to remain active on their own, whether there should be some other mechanism
by which they can become sustainable, whether they should move on to achieve more things, and for
how long should they depend on the NGOs to support them. There have been attempts by many of the
NGOs to federate the SHGs.58

84.      KUIDFC decided to federate the various SHGs from March 2004 onwards. A three-tiered structure
of Federations was envisaged with 15-20 SHGs of an area forming a Cluster Level Federation and these
in turn forming the TLF.59

85.     The Cluster Level Federations (i) provided a forum for the meeting of the SHGs; (ii) helped in
discussing and deciding on a number of issues, such as selecting the SHGs which need bank linkages,
and facilitating training programs; (ii) helped in selecting the beneficiaries for programs, and (iii) helped
resolve disputes that arise between the SHGs and also the conflicts between the members within the
groups. They also monitor the SHG. TLF performs the larger function of evaluating and grading the SHGs
for Bank linkages, liaisons with the other programs of the state departments and the local government
and facilitates the formation of new groups. Many of the linkages between groups have been made
possible because of the Federations.

86.      The outcome. Have the SHGs become sustainable because of this? The majority of the NGO
representatives are of the opinion that the time given for the SHGs to mature before federating them was
insufficient. The second phase of the community development component was in operation for less than
2 years. For some (Parinti, Vikasa and Vikasana), it was 14 months. The NGOs would have preferred to
develop a concept of Federation drawing by their own experiences and processes rather than accepting
something being "thrust" on them.

87.    The results of KUIDP and its partner NGOs experiments in federating across the six towns have
been mixed:

           (i)      The majority of the NGOs are struggling with the experiment of federating the SHGs.
                    They have been able to facilitate the formation of Cluster Level Federations which are
                    structurally placed and are performing the minimum functions assigned to them. The
                    problem seems to one of internalizing the concept of federation which is new and one of
                    mobilizing the resources. Nevertheless, there is an attempt, however weak, to sustain




58
     The pioneering effort to federate the SHGs was made by MYRADA little more than a decade ago.
59
     Convergence with government programs, linkages with banks and other financial institutions, recognition of SHG
     members in SJSRY are considered as some of the other methods of sustenance (Strategy Paper on Sustenance of
     Self Help Groups formed under KUIDP and Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management
     Project).
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                              21


                 the SHGs (Sakthi, Parinati, Sumana). The TLFs are yet to take shape.60 The sustainability
                 of the federations is still a question mark for NGOs like Sumana (May 2007).61
        (ii)     A few of the experiments have resulted in negative effects on the process of sustenance.
                 NGOs like Sumana and Shantha Jeeva Jyothi have promoted that the revolving fund of
                 Rs5,000 given to each of the SHGs was diverted to the Federation. The rationale behind
                 this was that large amounts of money (e.g., Rs5,000 of 40 SHGs initiated by Sumana
                 with KUIDP would total to Rs2 lakhs) could then be lent to other groups. But the women
                 resented this and the SHGs were beginning to disintegrate. This was vociferously
                 expressed during the discussions with the members of Sarswathi and Sanjana SHGs
                 started by Sumana in Mysore.
        (iii)    A successful experiment has been that of Vikasa at the project town of Maddur which has
                 enabled the formation of a Resource Center run by the women in place of the TLF. The
                 Center had a full fledged office, well defined organizational structure, and clarity and
                 specifications of functions. This enabled the women to access credit facilities extended by
                 the bank and other services, to monitor the financial transactions of the SHGs, and the
                 formation of more SHGs. The Center was financially independent; the operational cost of
                 the center was maintained through service charges levied for book maintenance of the
                 SHGs, auditing of the SHGs, and conducting capacity building programs. The Center has
                 replaced the NGO and proved that the women groups can perform the roles of the NGO
                 including socially responsible tasks like conducting medical camps. May 2007 the Center
                 was in the process of starting a school mainly for children of the SHG members.

88.      An experiment providing legal identity to the Federations was initiated in Tumkur. The TLFs
supported by three of the NGOs--WLARS, Society for the Betterment of Human Resources, and Bapuji
Integrated Rural Development Society, have been registered under the Karnataka Souhardha Co-
operative Societies Act of 1997, with the SHG members as shareholders. The highlight of this experiment
is that the Federations, as they are registered bodies, can perform all functions of a bank: pygmee
collections (small savings), collection of deposits, loans to share holders and borrowings from any
nationalized or cooperative bank extending up to ten times the working capital. In addition, the
Federation also helps its members to start income generating activities and support the marketing of the
products prepared by the SHG members. Such an experiment has also been initiated in Mandya by
Vikasana. A cooperative society, with both rural and urban SHGs, was registered in October 2006.
One hundred SHG members have purchased land by availing of a loan. The land was registered in May
2007. The society plans to get the land alienated and convert it into sites so that these could be made
available for the members at a subsidized price. Possessing permanent residence is of priority to slum
dwellers.

89.     The experiment in Tumkur continues to face blockages, such as for instance the higher rate of
interest offered to the SHGs by the Cooperative Bank, compared to other nationalized banks. The
Cooperative Bank generally lends at 14% per annum, compared to the other banks' 12%. The SHGs do
not prosper under co-operatives, as re-lending to the members of an SHG would become a costly affair.
But the cooperatives are continuing to function, even two years after their formation.

90.      It could be argued that too little time has been spent by the NGOs in strengthening the
Federations. KUIDP was wound up during June 2004 and the Federations were to be formed between
February to May 2004. The comment by the NGOs is that this was looked at more as an extension
activity done on an impulse at the closure of the project. However, lessons can be drawn from the
Maddur experiment which has been effective in forming successful Federations due to (i) clear

60
   This situation continues in 2007 for the above mentioned NGOs, the interest to form TLFs has reduced
   considerably.
61
   Instead of the TLFs, ODP's emphasis on forming central committees in which one or two representatives from each
   SHG finds favor with the people. The Central Committees are closer to the people, enable resolving common
   problems and are easier to manage. ODP has tried out the concept in rural areas.
22                                India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



understanding of the concept by the field functionaries; (ii) choosing local volunteers to work for the
project instead of importing the workers from elsewhere, as usually done by the NGOs; (iii) effective
trainings and capacity building exercises to the field staff; (iv) committed leadership exercised by the
project coordinator; (v) support by the local leaders of the community; and, more importantly, (vi) well
functioning, mature SHGs. Interventions elsewhere can replicate this.




VIII. THE ROLE OF STATE AND
      LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
      IN THE LIVES OF WOMEN
91.      The women of the SHGs (and also the poor women) are in principle to be helped by the state line
departments. The administrative machinery of the state government- the various line departments
devises programs for the SHGs. The departments of Social Welfare and Women and Child conduct
training programs for SHG women. Training programs such as tailoring help women learn new skills and
also aid in increasing their incomes. The department of Social Welfare helps SHG women entrepreneurs
in showcasing their products at various exhibitions. The departments of health and education conduct
health awareness programs and adult literacy programs for the women of the SHGs. But such assistance
is limited to a few programs.62

92.       At the level of the slums, the municipality
plays an important role. The municipality provides
general services like water, sanitation and
infrastructure and other basic amenities to the slums.
The women of the SHGs and the Federations of
KUIDP have become well versed with the functioning
of municipal administration and the services it offers.
There are many instances noted in the six towns
wherein the SHG women have pressurized the
agencies to provide various services. For example,
the SHG members of Dibbur slum (Tumkur)
pressured the City Municipal Council to install taps for
drinking water in 2003. In other areas, the SHGs
gave written petitions to ensure the services such as
                                                         Clogged drain in slum of Mandya.
streetlights, water supply and good drainage
facilities. The usage of community halls for SHG meetings, trainings and tuition classes has also been
ensured by SHGs approaching various stakeholders like the City Municipal Council and the Karnataka
Slum Clearance Board. Increasing access to services is considered an important element of the SHG
movement and this has largely been achieved.

93.    Apart from providing basic services, the urban local bodies also have programs which promote
and support the thrift and credit groups for the poor. The SJSRY urban poverty alleviation program of the

62
     Few groups have been supported by other agencies. Seventeen SHG members residing at Ghousia Nagar were
     assisted to build houses by Caritas. The houses were damaged by heavy rains in 2006. SHGs in Maddur are
     receiving training by NGOs such as DEEDS and CREATE. The training concentrates on women's rights and also on
     The Right to Information Act (2005).
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                 23


Government of India is one such program that is monitored by the Directorate of Municipal
Administration and implemented by the urban local bodies (as mentioned earlier, KUIDFC was the nodal
agency for the entire state to monitor the implementation of SJSRY). SJSRY (which is applicable to all the
towns in India) seeks to provide gainful employment to the urban unemployed poor women through
encouraging and setting up of self-employment ventures or through the provisions of wage
employment.63 The SJSRY however suffers from delays, slow release of funds and slow pace of work.

94.       The elected representatives who form an important part of local self governance in Karnataka as
in the rest of India (the 74th Constitutional Amendment passed in 1994 has ensured that elections are
held at below the state-level units, so that administration is close to the people) have helped in the SHG
movement in various ways. There are instances where elected representatives have been responsible for
motivating slum dwellers to join the SHG movement. In one of the slums of Ramanagaram (Gandhi
Nagar), the formation of the SHG was stalled and the NGO was not allowed by vested interests to even
enter the area, the councilor was proactive in convincing the people to avail the benefits of the program.
The representatives also donate money to the groups to conduct functions such as the celebrations of
the annual day. Their focus is however on getting political mileage from being "visible" during the
functions and meetings of the SHGs. There are many gaps in the Amendment and the Act in Karnataka
which restrict the involvement of the local body/the elected representatives in the lives of the SHG
women and in poverty alleviation programs. It is beyond the scope of this study to discuss these gaps in
detail.64

95.     A few instances have also been noted where the
local representatives have put in spokes which were
detrimental to the groups' interest. For example, as one
of the KUIDP reports notes, there was severe opposition
from the side of the elected representatives of the
Council to the elegantly built Women's Training Center
budgeted at Rs57.1 lakhs in the premises of the Town
Hall at Tumkur during 2001.65 There are also instances
where the local government is indifferent to the SHGs.
The women of the Maddur Resource Center are of the
opinion that the elected representatives would think
twice to get involved in any of its activity, as the
people/community would demand accountability.                     Women's Training Center in Tumkur.


63
   The program has three components: (i) self employment where individual subsidized loans are given through the
   banks; (ii) wage employment which generates employment simultaneously creating basic infrastructure like roads,
   drains and community centers; and (iii) the Development of Women and Children in Urban Area component which
   enables women to form small enterprises. Micro-enterprises are initiated by the thrift and credit groups which are
   supported by revolving funds. The quantum of subsidy for group activities is relatively high (Rs25,000).The
   program relies on establishing and promoting community organizations--neighborhood groups and committees and
   community development societies which form the focal point for purposes of identification of beneficiaries and
   monitoring of recovery and other support. (One of the sustenance strategies of KUIDP that has been specified is
   the link between the SHGs of KUIDP and the Committees of SJSRY but this has not been forthcoming. Both the
   NGOs and the Directorate of Municipal Administration want identification with their groups). The Community
   Development Societies are the nodal agencies as they are a Federation of different community based
   organizations. (Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment. Guidelines to Swarna Jayanthi Shahari Rozgar Yojana.
   New Delhi.)
64
   The inter linkages between the local bodies and the SHGs have been poor in most states other than Kerala. The
   State Poverty Eradication Mission of the Government is run under the leadership of the local governments which
   links the organization of the poor through self help with demand led convergence of available resources to tackle
   the multiple dimensions of poverty. Available: www.kudumbashree.org
65
   Intervention (India) Pvt .Ltd. 2000. A Report: Convergence of Poverty Alleviation Programs with the SJSRY.
   Case Study in Tumkur City Municipal Council.
24                               India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



96.      One of the measures by which the local governments could assist the groups already formed by
KUIDFC is by sustaining them.66 The Urban Stree Sakthi program (which was initiated by a state
department and discussed earlier) has "the handing over" of its group to the Directorate of Municipal
Administration as a strategy for sustenance (of its groups). Such a measure was also thought of by
KUIDFC authorities as the operational cost of monitoring and maintaining the groups is high. KUIDFC
initiated discussions on the modalities, whether it is the SHGs or the Federations or both which are to be
handed over. The members of the groups are said to be not keen on being handed over to the
Directorate of Municipal Administration, as was found during the fieldwork. The local authorities are
deemed not equipped either to take charge of the groups. The other point of relevance is the agreement
on who constitutes the poor. KUIDFC has covered all BPL families, even those who were not listed in the
survey conducted by the Directorate of Municipal Administration. The Directorate may not agree to this.

97.      At the time of fieldwork, more drawbacks than plus points were voiced regarding the Urban Stree
Sakthi program.67 With the spurt of Urban Stree Sakthi groups a few of the KUIDP groups have
disintegrated due to frictions within the small community of a slum. There should have been convergence
between the different SHGs instead of conflicting interests which seem to be the order of the day. The
discussion now focuses on convergence of programs, advocated to create complementarities.68 The
premise behind advocating convergence of different programs of similar kind is that overlap and
duplication which would lead to wastage and inefficiency can be stopped. However, converging programs
which have so many implementation problems with those of KUIDP may not be advisable.

98.     The SHGs of the different groups have created duplicate membership.69 Rich members, or not
very poor members are not uncommon either. Also a few of the KUIDP groups have disintegrated as the
lure of "more" revolving fund and other benefits such as free distribution of sites, cooking gas
connections waned. Some people were misled by statements that it would be better to be associated with
a government program than an NGO as the latter lacks accountability.70




66
   ADB made an effort in this direction during 2006 (TA 3880). A grant of $10,000 was given to Parinati, to provide
   support for such things as capacity building of SHG members, skill development, over a period of 10 months.
67
   The program goes by a fixed target to be reached; the program does not necessarily cover the poor, thus reducing
   its potentially equalizing impact. Those who initiate the program and implement it are not tuned to the mass
   mobilization and sensitization processes. As such, the quality of the mass movement is lost; the members of the
   SHGs meet for the sole purpose of thrift and credit activities. Leadership qualities are not encouraged either and
   often results in single leader dominance with all its repercussions. The programs have not been backed up by
   capacity building exercises. Even limited capacity building such as the strengthening of SHG in bookkeeping and
   account maintenance is not conducted. Also, unlike the NGO supported groups, these groups are deprived of
   monitoring and guidance.
68
   A Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation report discusses the convergence of poverty alleviation program of KUIDP with
   the SJSRY based on a case study in Tumkur City Municipal Council in 2000.
69
   Sakthi considers this as an inevitable trend given the dynamics of SHG movement.
70
   The objection of some of the NGOs is that the government continues to give preference to "its own group"- that is
   the SHGs formed under SJSRY and Urban Stree Sakthi programs, while selecting beneficiaries for government
   programs.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                                25




IX.              SOME LESSONS REGARDING
                 POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND
                 WOMEN EMPOWERMENT
99.       Microfinance programs are often expected to make a significant contribution to poverty
alleviation and empower the members in economic, social and political spheres. KUIDP looked at SHG as
a tool which would achieve the twin objectives of poverty alleviation and women empowerment. In the
following two sections, an attempt is made to gauge whether the project has been able to achieve these
objectives.

A.      Poverty Alleviation

100.      The debate on whether SHGs can be used as tools to lift the poor out of poverty is ongoing in
India. Despite the concept being in existence over the last two decades, there has been no rigorous study
which measures the pre and the post scenario of poor women who would be members of a well
functioning SHG. Generally the women who chose to be members of a SHG are from the BPL families.71
However, whether they have moved out of poverty or not has not been measured so far. Most people do
not want to be taken out of the BPL list as they would no longer benefit from many of the poverty
alleviation programs of the government. However, during interviews for this study, women expressed
that they felt distinctly less poor.

101.    KUIDP insisted on a household survey by the NGOs at the beginning of program implementation
but did not follow up with a post project evaluation.72 Lack of comparable data and lack of coordination
between different stakeholders has made it difficult to reach quantified conclusions. For example,
1,053 families of the 2,000 surveyed at Kanteer Narasimharaja Pura and 153 of the 250 families surveyed
at Giri Bhovi Palya had been identified as those living BPL by Sumana which conducted a household
survey in 2002. Forty SHGs in Kanteer Narasimharaja Pura and 10 SHGs in Palya were formed, which was
the target specified by KUIDP. However, data is missing as to the outcome of the SHG formation process.

102.    The opinions of partner NGOs are divided as to whether the poor women can really get out of
their economic conditions by being in the self help movement. Some consider that this is possible.
Vikasana thinks it is possible to alleviate poverty provided NGOs facilitate advance planning and resource
mobilization. Many of the NGOs agree that the movement has created a greasing effect in the lives of
women. Women and their families will no longer experience the acute hunger and poverty that they had
faced earlier. They now have something to fall back on and at times of crisis will not go back to the
moneylenders as they did earlier. The fact that some money is available to them from the groups even in
the middle of the night in cases of emergency is by itself a boon to the women and should not be
underrated.

103.    Undoubtedly, SHGs have not allowed all poor women and families to move out of poverty,
especially in an urban area where the effects of inflation are felt more acutely. The high and escalating
cost of living, competition in the market place, the inability to start income generating activities which

71
   Poverty line is taken to be the measure of poverty in an urban area as Rs23,124 as per the SJSRY guidelines;
   calculations are based on assets and employment status.
72
   The Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation program was to establish indicators for the performance and socio economic
   impact of the project as per the Social Action Plan Report. Twenty-five slums in the four program towns (Phase I)
   were selected for the benefit monitoring and evaluation study. It does not appear that the same slums were
   selected later to evaluate the results of KUIDP (Final survey in the four KUIDP towns, Jan/March [2003]).
26                                India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



need space, knowledge or exposure, have also made it difficult for women to attain any substantial
changes in the economic status.73

104.     It is important to see how far BPL women were before they joined the SHGs. The take off point is
important. If the family was already in business, doing reasonably well--families which are not very
poor--the thrift and credit activity would help. The attention of most NGOs has been for the poor,
workers who work on daily wages and who pursue petty businesses. However, a few who were above
the poverty line sometimes also got included for various reasons, one of them being the spread effect of
the concept of SHG. While it is acceptable to start SHGs for all those who want to be in it, it needs to be
debated whether the same group should have members from mixed economic category. NGOs such as
Vikasa mix the not-so-poor with the poor members deliberately in order that the poor get helped. The
belief is that the poor learn such aspects as cleanliness. The other factor is a geographical one: building
neighborhood SHGs for purposes of easy accessibility. The families in one locality may not be from the
same economic background.74

105.     RLHP believes that it is necessary to have a cohesive group--of the same class--to enlist any
kind of support and to see the results. The main advantage is one of empowering the lower class of
women, who are doubly disadvantaged by being women and by being poor; this would have the right
implications for poverty reduction. The other advantage is the convenience in fixing of meeting time and
days, amount to be saved, etc.

106.    A relevant question is also the time factor: how long does a woman need to be a member of an
SHG before it can be expected that her standard of living improves? Opinion is divided on this: while
some NGOs consider 15 years to be the required time span (ODP, Society for the Betterment of Human
Resources), other NGOs opt for a 5-year period (Sumana, Vikasa). The KUIDP groups were not yet 5
years old at the time of the case study.75

107.     As has been described in this study, the membership of a well functioning SHG has brought in
supplementary income for the women and her family. There has been some addition to income but not
sufficient to lift the families over the poverty line. Other changes than the creation and support of SHGs
are needed to lift poor people out of the subsistence economy.

108.     Development practitioners estimate that the income needed to move out of the poverty line is for
a couple with two kids is roughly Rs36,000 per year (still well below $1 day per capita) Currently, the
living standard of very poor families is Rs10,000 to Rs12,000 and less per year. For changes of such
magnitude, strategies to scale up do not exist for SHGs. However, there are individual members who
have innate entrepreneurial skills, who have shown enhanced income due to their own efforts and not
necessarily due to the groups.

B.       Women Empowerment

109.   As mentioned earlier, the general belief is that the process of microfinance and women's access
to it would lead to empowerment. Discussion on what constitutes empowerment and whether

73
   A report based on a survey of 2,750 SHGs in 16 states during 2007 even argues that the SHGs perpetuate poverty
   of women (for more details, see www.nirantar.net). Source: Business Standard, 23 February 2007, Bangalore.
74
   That the poor are getting more marginalized because of this has been proved by earlier experiments elsewhere
   and mixed (class) groups have been discarded. The World Bank assisted Rural Poverty Reduction program in
   Andhra Pradesh started in 2001 initiated a participatory approach by which the rural community would identify the
   poorest of the poor in every village/cluster of villages. This was devised in order that the poorest of the poor were
   reached (footnote 11).
75
   This obviously implies a five-year Project intervention. Even with the passage of time, the NGOs are not able to
   commit to an improvement in the living standards of women.
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                           27


empowerment is synonymous with emancipation and such other related issues is vast. To empower
women would mean to give her more control over her life or the situation that she is in, as per the
definition specified by the Government of India during the year of empowerment (2001).

110.     Access to microfinance does not always lead to women's control over its use as seen in the case
of Meharunnisa (member of Ghousia SHG in Mysore which has been active over the last 5 years) has
borrowed three times amounts of Rs3,000, Rs5,000 and Rs7,000--each of the times to "improve" the
business of her son-in-law who runs a bakery. She lives in a joint family with the older daughter and son-
in-law and five grandchildren. If the son­in-law does not pay back the amount, she will have to pay from
her daily wages. Meharunnisa is compelled to humor her son-in-law as she fears that he may desert her
daughter and grandchildren.

111.     The compulsions in favor of allowing men to use the amounts are many. In Muslim community
where the system of purdah is practiced, the reluctance to participate directly in business is more
apparent. The general practice is for women member to avail loans to invest in family business which is
usually run by the husband/son/brother/male member of the family. This fits the Indian ethos of family
being the main social unit. While there is no doubt that uplifting women would help in uplifting the
family, it is important to imbibe gender concepts in future programs so that women are not overtly
burdened. At the time of field work, a few cases were heard where the tendency of the male member of
the family was to withdraw his contribution to the household owning to an increase in the woman's
increase in income. This needs to be tackled to ensure increase in family income.

112.     The credit facilities of the SHGs seem to have become a source of borrowing for men, albeit
indirectly. The amounts are invested in businesses by men who may not consider it necessary to share
the information on profits and losses with the women. They, however, ensure that the interests on loans
are given to the women at the right time. The change in the attitude of men would be important,
otherwise it would reduce the women's opportunity to learn. Parveen Taj of Gulshan SHG (Mysore) has
invested the loan amounts into a food processing business which is run by her husband. Her enrolment
into the SHG has helped in getting the house repaired, in celebrating her daughter's marriage and in
further expanding the business. However, Parveen Taj does not know anything about the investments or
profits.

                                                       113.     With the strengthening of the SHG
                                                       movement, men have started realizing the
                                                       contribution of the women to the household income.
                                                       However, it will take time for them to fully accept
                                                       and appreciate that the better living conditions are
                                                       because of women.76 Greater gender equality is
                                                       important in the process of empowerment. A way by
                                                       which the gender burdening (where roles and
                                                       responsibilities are influenced by gender based
                                                       divisions and social relations resulting in an unequal
                                                       burden of work on women both at the household
                                                       and outside) could be reduced would be to start
                                                       SHGs for men. The trend so far is to avoid forming
                                                       SHGs for men. Though there are other types of
                                                       community organizations in which men are active
Self help group convening in Ramanagaram.              like the youth groups, the development groups
                                                       (of RLHP), it is rare to find thrift and credit groups



76
 NGO Sakthi notes that the women's involvement in financial transactions has improved. With practice, women are
more confident of financial transactions and are therefore more confident.
28                                India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



for men. Non cohesiveness between men, difference in work timings, problems arising because of the
male ego and other reasons are put forth to explain this. 77

114.      As a part of the experiment of KUIDP with the urban SHGs, the NGO at Maddur facilitated the
formation of three groups for men. This increased to ten by end June 2005 and had remained ten in
May 2007. This was considered necessary in order to improve the economic status of the family. There
were some differences compared to women groups: men earn more and save more. Their emphasis was
to improve themselves first, so that people recognized them and only then could they work for the
locality.

115.    Inspired by the functioning of the women's groups, men are showing interest to be a part of the
SHG movement. Many of the Federations of SHGs are also contemplating forming groups for men.
Mubina Begaum, one of the Directors of Sauharadha (Federation), has been responsible for starting a
youth group at Tumkur (September 2005).

116.    The SHGs of men are a part of the Federation at Maddur. But mixed gendered SHGs are not
preferred as the problems and the issues discussed by the women and those that interest men are
viewed as different.

117.    This study would be inclined to support the strengthening of SHGs consisting of men, especially
considering the trend of gender burdening on women that has taken place. All of the attention has been
placed on the women's groups which would, in the long run, overburden women.78 Women have not
stated during the interviews for this study that they feel overburdened by the SHG activities and would
not want men to start groups of their own as men would prevent the women from becoming part of
these.

118.    To conclude, microfinance programs have not always succeeded in achieving their objectives of
sustainable poverty alleviation and empowerment. Other studies have pointed this out as well
(footnote 13). Poverty cannot be alleviated by SHGs on their own. Other ingredients are necessary.
Exclusion of the very poor would continue unless other programs are also implemented. In this, KUIDP
has proved a point by combining other activities of not only skill training and other CDPs but also that of
improving infrastructure which has implications for improved health.

119.    The other word of caution is to look for a linear link between microfinance and women
empowerment. Studies have pointed out that it is complex, it is neither linear nor unequivocal or
systematic (footnote 33). The SHGs can only be the starting point which may lead to women's
empowerment. Many other inputs in changing gender inequalities would be necessary before
considerable results are achieved. KUIDP also included a number of gender sensitization programs but
the results are not known. What is more important for future projects is to be aware of the plus points of
this movement and to be cautious of the repercussions--creating assets in the names of the women,
signing of promissory notes by the male member of the women who would avail SHG loans, are some of
the measures that are experimented and could be imbibed.




77
     ODP admits to this, and is placing less importance on forming more groups for men (May 2007).
78
     In Andhra Pradesh there would be as many as six to eight groups in a village--School Education, Mother's
     Committee, Water Shed Committees, etc., and in all of these women have been given representation. Some of the
     women with leadership qualities are selected; as a result they would have to spend considerable time in
     participating in the meetings of the various groups. This has to be added to house work and child rearing too
     (footnote 11).
India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka                               29




X. CLOSURE OF THE PROJECT
120.    With the closure of the project in 2004, the NGOs and the communities have suffered a set back.
The groups started during the second phase of the project were barely two years old. For the NGOs, the
operational cost of maintaining the SHGs is high. A few of the NGOs continue to support the SHGs but in
a minimal way in order to ensure that their earlier efforts are not lost.79 In effect, the federations of SHGs
should have performed these roles but the federations are yet to take off in all the towns.

121.     The NGOs with women empowerment as their thrust have continued to support the groups
(Sakthi) but would have appreciated a withdrawal strategy and support for another 6 months. The well-
established NGOs (like ODP and RLHP) have been able to continue the support to the SHGs, but with
minimal staff. This has placed a burden on the animators (the NGO staffs who work directly with the
groups) who are pushed to manage around 50 SHGs. Vikasana was supporting 84 SHGs with
13 animators and 13 health workers, it now has 5 animators to meet the requirements of the same
number of groups. On average, a maximum of 30 SHGs could be supported by an animator. Some of the
animators work for half of the salary that they drew earlier but continue supporting the groups (Sumana).

122.     The NGOs are keen on sustaining the groups, as the groups have contributed to the NGOs'
survival and in some ways their reputation. It is felt that NGOs need more time to keep urban groups
together. The urban groups break up easily as the demands are higher.

123.    One of the modes by which the NGO--SHG relationship has continued is that the groups pay for
the services of the animator. The NGO Shantha Jeeva Jyothi has not had any problem in managing the
group as the animators are being paid by the SHGs for their work. This is true in a few other cases.
Vikasa has been able to maintain the SHGs and grow due to the self sustaining concepts imbibed in the
community.




XI.              SUMMING UP
124.    The SHG movement which was started due to the KUIDP initiative in the urban slums of the
six towns in Karnataka has brought changes in the lives of the women. It has allowed poor women to
move from their earlier position of silence to one of gaining voice, has reduced their sense of fatalism,
has improved their living standards, and has increased their collective bargaining powers. Of course,
SHGs cannot be taken as the answer to solve all the problems related to poverty and gender inequality.

125.     Most discussions on SHGs stop at developing mechanisms that guarantee their sustainability. The
SHGs need to move forward fast in order to master the finer aspects of financial management. There is
limited knowledge and technical know how on viable income generating activities, on what sells, despite
so many fares and exhibitions in which women groups have participated.80 This has proved to be a major
lacuna in KUIDP where the period of support was generally very short--even though at present most
SHGs are still functioning.



79
    This continues even after 2 years. Most of the NGOs continue supporting the groups, with minimal monies and
   infrastructure (May 2007).
80
   A recent experiment (November 2006) is tried out in Mandya by an NGO assisting SHGs to open market outlets in
   21 villages. The products of SHG members are replacing products already in the market. It remains a challenge to
   identify the right kind of product, one that is novel and in great demand.
30                            India: Promoting Urban Social Development Through Self Help Groups In Karnataka



126.     The SHGs provide women with abilities to survive the worst situations. Whether they can become
really sustainable institutions depends also on the ability to grow with the changing internal needs and
external developments like globalization and competition from aggressive new markets.

127.   The SHGs need an enabling environment in order to grow and sustain themselves. The
government presently gives conflicting signals, for example the government wants SHG women to oppose
the opening of arrack (cheap liquor) shops in the slums, but continues giving licenses for this.

128.    It would not be reasonable to expect SHGs to be the vehicle for significant changes in the short
run, such as transformed traditional gender relations. But for the 12,000 or so women living in the slums
who have been a part of the SHG program, a mass movement of this kind has been a boon.

129.    Self help promotion is the best strategy for grass roots level development. SHGs can also help
implement development projects at the grass roots. This study regards that projects supporting SHGs
should be of at five years duration, and need a clear withdrawal strategy which is defined from the
beginning.
                                                                                       Appendix 1      31


                 BRIEF PROFILE OF NONGOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS

A.      Mysore

1.      Sumana: Sanaskrit word meaning good will was established in 1989 as a Society for Rural
Development to extend an empowering hand--calling on women to awake, organize and educate,
especially the poor women of rural areas.

2.      Rural Literacy and Health Program (RLHP): RLHP has been working in the urban slums with
the underprivileged, disadvantaged and deprived section of society since its inception in 1984. To
empower the slum dwellers, child laborers, street children and other deprived sections to respond to the
challenges of growing poverty and human rights violations, through collective and affirmative action
leading to sustainable development, self-reliance and economic independence is the mission statement.

3.      The Organization for the Development of People (ODP): ODP, registered in 1984, aims at
enabling the community based people's groups to become self-managed and self reliant. ODP's
concentration has been in the rural area.

B.      Ramanagaram

1.      Shantha Jeeva Jyothi: Eradication of leprosy through health education, rehabilitation of the
disabled and community development has been the focus since its establishment in 2002.

2.      Sakthi: Set up in 1982 to work for the development of socioeconomic disadvantaged women
with the focus on issues related to income, access to health and education and training in gender and
human resources development.

3.       Mamatha Makala Mandira: Founded in 1990 with focus on rural development: rural
sanitation, de silting and other such programs with the motto of service to all. The urban slums program
was taken up with the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project at Ramanagaram.

C.      Channapatna

4.      Parinati: A community development organization working with marginalized groups in the tribal
and the rural areas of Karnataka.

D.      Mandya

5.      Vikasana Institute of Rural Development: A rural development organization working
towards self reliance since 1984, Vikasana has a multisectoral and holistic approach. The organization is
working towards the all round development of marginalized sections of the society like the Scheduled
Caste, Dalits, women and children.

E.      Maddur

6.        Vikasa Rural Development Organization: In order to achieve the long term goal of
establishing an alterative social order, Vikasa was established in 1992. The vision is to work progressively
to improve the livelihood status of rural and urban poor through both non farm development and farming
activities and towards self sustenance through people's participation.
32     Appendix 1



F.     Tumkur

7.      Bapuji Integrated Rural Development Society (BIRDS): BIRDS was started in 1992 with
the aim of providing relief to any form of poverty and creating social justice in India.

8.      Society for Betterment of Human Resources (SBHR): In 1995, the SBHR came into being
to provide holistic development of women, children and youth in both urban and rural areas.

9.      Women's Liberation and Rehabilitation Society (WLARS): WLARS was started in 1985 to
work for the social, economic and political empowerment of the rural people.
                                                                               Appendix 2          33


     STRATEGIES AND OBJECTIVES OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

1.       The Strategies of Community Development Program as visualized by Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development Project were:

       (i)     Organizing urban poor into community based organizations.
       (ii)    Employing community management approach with non-governmental agencies acting as
               key facilitators of the changed process.
       (iii)   Developing and implementing programs relating to non-formal education, health and
               hygiene, gender awareness, consciousness building, entrepreneurship development,
               credit groups, income generation programs.
       (iv)    Empowering community to evaluate and assess the quality of change in physical
               environment.

2.     The objectives of the community development program which follows from above are:

       (i)     Increased awareness among the slum dwellers on issues relating to health, education.
       (ii)    Increased participation of the community in the execution and sustainability of the
               programs.
       (iii)   Increased opportunities for self- employment through the provision of skill based
               training.
       (iv)    The provision of financial assistance through formal and informal financial institutions.
34   Appendix 3



                                       REFERENCES

A.   Self Help Group (SHG) Evaluation Reports

     1.      By nongovernment organizations (NGOs):

     (i)     Empowering Women, an Overview of SHG Program (I Phase), RLHP-KUIDFC Project,
             August 1999­August 2001.
     (ii)    Poverty Alleviation through Socio-Economic Empowerment of Slum Women. Details of
             Self Help Groups. Promoted by Sumana, Mysore, Sponsored by KUIDFC, Bangalore
             (June 2002­November 2003).

B.   Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation SHG Evaluation
     Reports

     (i)     A Report on Evaluation and Audit of Self Help Groups Formed In Mandya and Maddur
             Towns Under Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project (KUIDP). Project
             Implementation Unit, KUIDFC, Subash Nagar, K.R. Road, Mandya
     (ii)    A Report on Evaluation and Audit of Self Help Groups Formed In Tumkur, Ramanagaram
             and Channapatna Towns Under KUIDP. Project Implementation Unit, KUIDFC,
             Sharadadevinagar, Tumkur.

C.   Program Completion Reports submitted by Nongovernment Organizations

     (i)     Program completion report on Implementation of Community Development Program
             under the 2nd Phase of KUIDP in Ramanagaram Town (2004).
     (ii)    Program completion report on Implementation of Community Development Programs,
             Skill Based Training Programs, organized by the Society for the Betterment of Human
             Resources at seven slums in Tumkur Town, Under KUIDP Project from July 2002 to
             December 2003.
     (iii)   Program completion report of second phase of Community Development Program in
             KUIDP Town July to December 2003.
     (iv)    Women Liberation and Rehabilitation Society and KUIDFC, Completion of Community
             Development Program.
     (v)     Completion Report of Community Development Program in Mysore, June 2000 to
             December 2003, KUIDFC/The Organization for the Development of People Project
             Implemented at Ghousiannagr and Gandhinagar.
     (vi)    Program Completion Report of second phase of Community Development Program under
             Asian Development Bank assisted Poverty Alleviation Component of KUIDP Project
             Mandya.

D.   Other Reports, Books and Articles:

     (i)     A Source Book on Self Help Group, Published by State Resource Center, Mysore, Mysore
             (Published in local language Kannada). 2000.
     (ii)    Concept Paper on Slum Upgradation and Development Program Twenty One Class I
             Cities in Karnataka, Volume 2: City Slum Profile Reports, Mysore Slum Upgradation and
             Development Program, Sponsored by Karnataka Slum Clearance Board, May 2000.
     (iii)   Datta. K.L. Joint Adviser, Planning Commission: On Measurement of Rural Poverty In
             India, Occasional Paper published by State Institute of Panchayats and Rural
             Development, West Bengal.
                                                                      Appendix 3          35


(iv)     Project Agreement: Rural Women's Development and Empowerment Project between
         International Development Association and States of Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya
         Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, Credit Number 2942 IN, September 1998.
(v)      Social Action Plan, Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project, Community
         Development Unit, KUIDFC, not dated.
(vi)     Strategy paper on sustenance of self help groups formed under KUIDP and KUDCEMP
         (not dated).
(vii)    Stree Shakthi Training Manual, Women and Child Development Department, Bangalore
         2001.
(viii)   Swarna Jayanthi Shahari Rozgar Yojana, Guidelines, Ministry of Urban Affairs and
         Employment, New Delhi.
(ix)     Urban Stree Sakthi Program, Directorate of Urban Administration, July 2004.
         (In Kannada).
(x)      Women's Training Center, Tumkur, A Mid Term Participative Assessment Report,
         Intervention (India) Pvt., Ltd., Bangalore.
