              ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
            Operations Evaluation Department




         PROGRAM PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT


                                 ON THE


        CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                   (LOAN 1408-IND)


                                     IN


                                  INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by the Management's response.
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                  PPA: IND 26468




        PROGRAM PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT


                      ON THE


        CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                    (Loan 1408-IND)


                         IN


                       INDIA




                      July 2004
                                 CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                           Currency Unit ­ Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)

              At Appraisal             At Program Completion        At Operations Evaluation
              (November 1993)          (December 1999)              (February 2004)
Re1.00    =   $0.0321                  $0.0230                      $0.02208
$1.00     =   Rs31.13                  Rs43.4100                    Rs45.290000

                                     ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB            ­      Asian Development Bank
              BSE            ­      Bombay Stock Exchange
              CCI            ­      Comptroller of Capital Issues
              CCIL           ­      Clearing Corporation of India Limited
              CDSL           ­      Central Depository Services Limited
              EA             ­      Executing Agency
              FIRE           ­      Financial Institutions Reform and Expansion
              G30            ­      Group of Thirty
              IRDA           ­      Insurance Regulatory Development Authority
              IT             ­      information technology
              MOF            ­      Ministry of Finance
              MOJ            ­      Ministry of Law, Justice, and Company Affairs
              NRI            ­      nonresident Indian
              NSDL           ­      National Securities Depository Limited
              NSE            ­      National Stock Exchange
              OEM            ­      Operations Evaluation Mission
              PCR            ­      program completion report
              PPAR           ­      program performance audit report
              PSU            ­      public sector undertaking
              RBI            ­      Reserve Bank of India
              RRP            ­      report and recommendation of the President
              SC(R)          ­      Securities Contracts (Regulation)
              SEBI           ­      Securities and Exchange Board of India
              SRO            ­      self-regulatory organization
              TA             ­      technical assistance
              USAID          ­      United States Agency for International Development
              UTI            ­      Unit Trust of India

                                          NOTES

              (i)     In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
              (ii)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government ends on 31 March.


Director General, Operations Evaluation Department              :      Eisuke Suzuki
Director, Operations Evaluation Division 2                      :      David Edwards
Evaluation Team Leader                                          :      Naomi Chakwin

                        Operations Evaluation Department, PE-645
                                        CONTENTS

                                                                                        Page

BASIC DATA                                                                                  iii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                           iv

I.     BACKGROUND                                                                           1
       A.   Rationale                                                                       1
       B.   Formulation                                                                     2
       C.   Purpose and Outputs                                                             3
       D.   Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                                     3
       E.   Completion and Self-Evaluation                                                  4
       F.   Operations Evaluation                                                           5

II.    PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE                                              5
       A.   Formulation and Design                                                          5
       B.   Achievement of Reform Measures                                                  7
       C.   Cost and Scheduling                                                            10
       D.   Organization and Management                                                    11

III.   ACHIEVEMENT OF PROGRAM PURPOSE                                                      11
       A.   Program Outcomes and Impact                                                    11
       B.   Sustainability                                                                 16

IV.    ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS                                            16
       A.   Socioeconomic Impact                                                           16
       B.   Impact on Institutions and Policy                                              16

V.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT                                                                  17
       A.   Relevance                                                                      17
       B.   Efficacy                                                                       18
       C.   Efficiency                                                                     18
       D.   Sustainability                                                                 18
       E.   Institutional Development and Other Impacts                                    18
       F.   Overall Program Rating                                                         18
       G.   Assessment of ADB and Borrower Performance                                     18

VI.    ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW -UP ACTIONS                                             19
       A.   Key Issues for the Future                                                      19
       B.   Lessons Identified                                                             20
       C.   Follow-Up Actions                                                              20




N. Chakwin, Principal Evaluation Specialist (Team Leader), was responsible for the preparation
of this report, and conducted document reviews, key informant interviews, and guided the
fieldwork undertaken by the consultants, S. Hertel and S. Thomas. R. Lumain, Senior
Evaluation Officer, supported the team with research assistance from Manila.
APPENDIXES

1.    Capital Market Development Program Loan: Status of Reforms                        21
2.    Recommendations of Group of Thirty--Securities Clearance and Settlement Study     43
3.    Excerpts of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Act, 2002      44
4.    Unit Trust of India                                                               49
5.    Joint Parliamentary Commission                                                    51
6.    Elements of Market Design in Indian Securities Market, 1993 and 2004              52
7.    Growth and Distribution of Turnover on Stock Exchanges                            54
8.    New Capital Issues by Nongovernment Public Limited Companies                      55
9.    Number of Listed Securities, Market Capitalization, and Turnover at BSE and NSE   56
10.   Yearly Trends in FII Investment in India                                          57
11.   Transaction Costs in India's Equity Market                                        58
                                           BASIC DATA

                    Loan 1408-IND: Capital Market Development Program

                                                            As per ADB
Key Program Data ($ million)                              Loan Documents             Actual
Program Cost                                                   250.0                 250.0
ADB Loan Amount/Utilization                                    250.0                 250.0
ADB Loan Amount/Cancellation                                     0.0                   0.0

Key Dates                                                    Expected                Actual
Fact-Finding                                                                      7­18 Jun 1993
Appraisal                                                                        16­31 Aug 1993
Loan Negotiations                                                                 8­11 Nov 1993
Board Approval                                                                      28 Nov 1995
Loan Agreement                                                                      29 Nov 1995
Loan Effectiveness                                          27 Feb 1996              8 Dec 1995
First Tranche Release                                       27 Feb 1996             22 Dec 1995
Second Tranche Release                                        Dec 1996              22 Dec 1998
Loan Closing                                                30 Jun 1997             31 Mar 1999
Program Completion                                          30 Jun 1997             31 Mar 1999
Months (effectiveness to completion)                             16                     40

Borrower                        Government of India

Executing Agency                Ministry of Finance

Mission Data
Type of Mission                          Number of Missions               Number of Person-Days
Fact-Finding                                      1                                 84
Appraisal                                         1                                 60
Project Administration
   Project Specific/Consultation                      1                             12
   Review                                             3                             22
   Project Completion                                 1                             21
Operations Evaluation                                 1                             57




____________________________
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        On 28 November 1995, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved a loan of
$250 million to India for the Capital Market Development Program (the Program). The loan was
funded through ADB's ordinary capital resources. The objectives of the Program were to
(i) enhance the country's ability to mobilize internal and external resources to finance economic
growth, and (ii) improve the efficiency of resource allocation through a greater reliance on
market mechanisms. In doing so, the Program intended to promote stable, long-term economic
growth.

        The Program focused primarily on the implementation of the Government's broad capital
market reform agenda. The measures to support this objective were relevant and consistent
with the Program's purpose. The lack of clarity on policy actions to strengthen the regulatory
powers and authorities of the capital market regulator--the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI)--was the only concern about the design of the Program. The Program is assessed
as relevant.

       The Program was successful in meeting most of the anticipated program outputs. Key
accomplishments included (i) establishing an integrated national market system, (ii) modernizing
the market trading infrastructure to support growth and expansion, (iii) eliminating legal or
regulatory impediments to broader market participation, (iv) improving pricing and efficiency
through enhanced competition in the market, and (v) developing a stronger and more
independent securities market regulator.

       The reforms identified in the Program have had a dramatic impact on the efficiency,
transparency, and professionalism in the Indian capital market. The Government has
demonstrated an awareness of, and a commitment to, pursuing longer-term developments in
these areas. Indeed, the Government has supported recent amendments to the SEBI Act and
changes in the regulatory structure (including the addition of the new insurance regulator). While
SEBI still needs to improve market surveillance and monitoring, these reforms are part of an
ongoing process.

        The Program supported the implementation of reforms that are unlikely to be reversed.
Moreover, the Program's contributions to institutional and capital market development are likely
to expand as the market develops. Managing fiscal reforms, sustaining the momentum for
privatization, and pursuing greater independence for all market regulators will require additional
government commitment. However, the scope and objectives of this Program have been largely
accomplished. Based on the Operations Evaluation Mission's assessment, the overall rating of
the Program is successful.

       Key lessons from the Program include:

       (i)     The Government's vision for the development of the market can be traced to a
               small number of fiercely independent civil servants. This vision was needed to
               sustain the implementation of a reform program of this magnitude. Adequately
               developing the institutional, administrative, and regulatory framework required a
               substantial commitment of time and resources. Therefore, the importance of
               government ownership and dialogue cannot be underestimated.
       (ii)    Capital market development also requires a certain depth of human resources or
               skills in the market. Ensuring sufficient skills and capacity to implement complex
                                                                                              v


              reforms, such as the ones specified in this Program, were critical to the success
              of the Program.
      (iii)   Three factors were essential for this market to develop (a) competition, which
              forced good market standards for fairness; (b) transparency and efficiency,
              through an improved clearing, settlement, and depository system, which allowed
              dematerialized trading and better market regulation; and (c) sufficient supply and
              demand to foster market depth and liquidity. The derivative market has played a
              key role in this aspect of market development.

       Since the Program, ADB has continued to be engaged with India. ADB is supporting the
debt and derivative markets, and pension reform. This assessment endorses ADB's approach
and efforts in these areas, and encourages more dedicated assistance for the development of
bond markets. Support for infrastructure development through the use of debt instruments is
needed urgently. Well-structured assistance with concrete deliverables could accelerate
development in this area.




                                                          Eisuke Suzuki
                                                          Director General
                                                          Operations Evaluation Department
                                                        I.       BACKGROUND

A.        Rationale

1.      Following an economic crisis in 1991, the Government introduced a broad ranging
economic reform program that contained immediate stabilization measures and ambitious
structural reforms. Despite some slippage on fiscal consolidation, the stabilization effort restored
external confidence and led a buildup of foreign exchange reserves (Figure 1). 1



                                            Figure 1: Official Foreign Exchange Reserves


                                                             Approval     Completion


                                      100                                                     12




                                                                                                   Months of Imports
                 Billion of Dollars




                                      80                                                      10
                                                             Approval     Completion          8
                                      60
                                                                                              6
                                      40
                                                                                              4
                                      20                                                      2
                                       0                                                      0
                                         90
                                         91
                                         92
                                         93
                                         94
                                         95
                                         96
                                         97
                                         98
                                         99
                                         00
                                         01
                                         02
                                         03
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       19
                                       20
                                       20
                                       20
                                       20

                                              Foreign Exchange Reserves   Months of Imports


       Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.


2.      In the early stages of reform, India emphasized reducing imports temporarily through
administrative controls to ease the current account deficit (Figure 2). Subsequent stabilization
measures focused on monetary tightening and fiscal consolidation, supported by currency
devaluation. Structural reforms, which initially were concentrated in the industrial sector and on
trade liberalization, aimed to eliminate most investment and import licensing requirements. The
foreign investment regime also was liberalized substantially. The focus then shifted to tax
reform, additional trade liberalization, and financial sector reform. As part of its operational
strategy for India in much of the 1990s, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) assisted the
Government in increasing economic efficiency through support for structural reforms, promotion
of competition, and private sector participation. Loan 1208-IND, 2 which included monetary
management and banking reforms, kicked off ADB's support of financial sector reform in 1992.
At the same time, parallel support for capital market development also was considered.



1
    The dramatic increase in reserves from 2001 to present might be partly attributable to global events beyond India's
    economic reforms.
2
    Loan 1208-IND: Financial Sector Program , for $300 million, approved on 15 December 1992.
2




                                    Figure 2: Current Account Balance
                                                 Approval    Completion




                    Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




B.        Formulation

3.      Recognizing the need for an efficient banking system and well-functioning capital
markets in the aftermath of the economic crisis, the Government introduced a broad economic
reform program. After approving the Financial Sector Program loan (footnote 2), ADB sent a
reconnaissance mission in March 1993 to continue discussions on the development of the
financial sector and possible capital market reforms.3 A fact-finding mission in June 1993 and an
appraisal mission in August 1993 led to an understanding with the Government on a number of
policy actions for the Capital Market Development Program (the Program).

4.      This was ADB's first attempt at capital market reforms in a developing member country,
and it coincided with strong momentum for reform within the Government. Program approval
was delayed due to concerns about the policy and macroeconomic environment in India. The
report and recommendation of the President (RRP) for the Program was circulated to the Board
of Directors in November 1993, withdrawn, and re-circulated in November 1995 (using the same
RRP as in 1993 with an addendum supplement and corrigendum updating the status of
compliance with upfront program actions).

5.     When the Program was designed, the country had 23 active stock exchanges, all of
which traded the same stocks. The Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) took the lead in price
discovery. (Before the National Stock Exchange [NSE] was established, the BSE accounted for
about 80% of the total turnover in the country.) Even exchanges such as Delhi and Calcutta
used to trade the same stocks at different prices. Thus, investors in different parts of the country
could pay different prices for the same stock at the same time. Furthermore, practices at the
exchanges were not transparent. The time was not stamped on transaction documents.
Investors could not verify when and at what price their trades had been executed, and
complained that stockbrokers sold shares at the lowest price and bought at the highest price.

3
    Despite the fact that capital market reforms were pursued as part of an overall financial sector reform strategy
    within ADB, payment system issues (which links the banking and capital markets) were not discussed.
                                                                                                              3


Moreover, prices did not faithfully reflect market conditions, since many trades were unreported.
Kerb trading--trades between brokers outside the floor of the exchange before or after trading
hours--still was practiced despite its prohibition.

6.      A number of government-appointed committees formed in response to persistent market
manipulation and abuse was the basis for the Government's priority reforms in the capital
market. The economic crisis provided the opportunity to undertake powerful reforms in the
financial markets. While the Narasimham Committee identified extensive banking sector
reforms, a number of other important committees discussed capital market reforms. Based on a
comprehensive review of the operations of the exchanges, the Pherwani Committee prepared a
set of recommendations in June 1991 on the establishment of a new stock exchange. In June
1992, the Government appointed the Nadkarni Committee to look into the trading of public
sector undertaking bonds and mutual fund shares. Former Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Deputy
Governor A. Janakiraman led a committee investigating irregularities in securities transactions
of banks. The Malhotra Committee was established in 1993 to provide a comprehensive review
of the operations of insurance companies. The United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) also made a commitment to support government efforts in reforming the
capital market.

C.        Purpose and Outputs

7.      Classified as an economic growth activity, the Program included a detailed policy matrix
with time-bound policy actions and a development policy letter, but no logical framework. 4 The
purpose of the Program was to (i) enhance the country's ability to mobilize internal and external
resources to finance economic growth, and (ii) improve the efficiency of resource allocation
through a greater reliance on market mechanisms.

8.       The policy matrix, containing 44 policy measures under five broad areas, was consistent
with this purpose. Anticipated outputs included (i) the establishment of an integrated national
market system (3 conditions), (ii) modernization of the market trading infrastructure to support
growth and expansion (9 conditions to automate trading and reduce transaction costs),
(iii) broader market participation by eliminating impediments (20 conditions), (iv) better pricing
and efficiency through enhanced competition in the market (6 conditions to expand market
participation), and (v) a strong and independent market regulator (6 conditions to strengthen the
role of the security regulator). For the release of the second tranche of the Program, 12 core
conditions were identified. No technical assistance (TA) was attached to the Program (para. 10).

D.        Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

9.     On 28 November 1995, ADB approved a program loan to the Government of India for
$250 million 5 from its ordinary capital resources. The loan had a maturity of 15 years, including
a 3-year grace period, and the interest rate was determined by pool-based variable lending rate
system for US dollar loans and included a commitment charge of 0.75% per annum. It was
disbursed in two tranches of $125 million. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) was the Executing
Agency (EA), and the proceeds of the loan were available for financing eligible imports procured
under ADB guidelines, determined by a negative list.



4
    The logical framework preparation became mandatory for program loans in 1997.
5
    Loan proceeds were not tied to specific government budget allocations under the Program. However, there were
    significant adjustment costs for the trading and clearance and settlement infrastructure.
4


10.      USAID's considerable efforts and resources 6 directed at capital market reforms during
this period obviated the need for TA to support the implementation of the Program. USAID
approached ADB to formalize this cooperation in 1993, but cooperation remained informal
during the program period. From 1994 to 1998, the Financial Institutions Reform and Expansion
Project (FIRE), funded by USAID, focused on institution building in the capital markets. Support
was provided to (i) modernize the stock exchange; (ii) develop a national depository;
(iii) improve clearance and settlements systems; and (iv) create a strong trade association for
mutual funds, which has become a model for such organizations and includes a code of conduct
and testing for its members. The FIRE project also included a large component that assisted the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) in strengthening its internal operations and
educating management and staff on the responsibilities of a securities regulator. Assistance for
designing and developing the National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) was the most
visible and far-reaching outcome of the FIRE project.

E.      Completion and Self-Evaluation

11.     The program loan closed on 31 March 1999. A program completion report (PCR),
prepared by ADB's Infrastructure, Energy, and Financial Sectors Department (West), was
circulated to the Board of Directors in December 2000.

12.      The PCR rated the Program successful under a three-category rating system. (ADB now
uses a four-category rating system.7) The PCR stated the Program successfully supported the
Government in undertaking much-needed market reforms. The noted reforms included
(i) implementing an integrated national market system; (ii) introducing an automated trading,
settlement, clearing, and depository system; (iii) introducing competition in capital market
sectors; (iv) enhancing private sector participation and reducing government crowding out of
private investments; (v) liberalizing mutual funds and stock brokerage industries; (vi) improving
the efficiency of primary and secondary markets, and establishing mechanisms to enhance
market liquidity; and (vii) enhancing the regulatory and supervisory powers of SEBI as the
capital market's sole regulator. The PCR also noted that the reforms resulted in an increase in
operational and market efficiency, a reduction of costs and risks, improved market accessibility,
and strengthened investor protection, which were necessary for building investor confidence
and the sustainable growth of the capital market.

13.     The PCR identified four conditions that were not fully met at the time: two conditions on
reducing investment restrictions for institutional investors (insurance, pension, and provident
funds);8 and two conditions on increasing SEBI's powers as the capital market regulator. 9 While
the quality of the PCR was generally high, the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) found that
the two policy actions on automated trading in debt 10 were reported in the PCR (and in the
progress report11) as implemented. However, automated trading in the debt market did not exist
as of February 2004. In India, trading debt instruments remains a private placement market, as
in most places in the world. Despite the importance attached to one of these conditions for
release of the second tranche of the Program, the importance of an automated debt market can
be debated. However, increasing the role of institutional investors and strengthening market

6
   USAID's FIRE project, and its successor FIRE-R, were supported by a $44 million grant, planned for 12 years
   starting in 1993. The program was suspended from 1998­2000 due to India's nuclear weapon tests.
7
   ADB. 2000. Guidelines for the Preparation of Project Performance Audit Reports. Manila.
8
   Appendix 1, conditions 16 and 18.
9
   Appendix 1, conditions 40 and 41.
10
   Appendix 1, conditions 9 and 20.
11
   ADB. 1998. Progress Report on the Capital Market Development Program Loan to India. Manila.
                                                                                                                       5


regulation are continuing challenges that require additional effort and commitment by the
Government.

14.     Except for its assessment of the conditions on the development of the debt market, the
PCR was comprehensive. Of the four end-of-program policy actions, two were fully complied with
before the release of the second tranche. The PCR reported that the National Clearance,
Settlement, and Depository System could not fully meet the recommendations of the Group of
Thirty (G30) as of December 1999, because the same-day payment system was not in place.
While RBI was considering this initiative, the rolling settlement period could not be reduced
effectively until all scrip was dematerialized.12 Subsequently, this was accomplished (paras. 24
and 36). The PCR also cited the importance of two legislative acts to further capital market
development: the consolidated SEBI bill and the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority
(IRDA) Act. The OEM concurred with the PCR on the importance of these pieces of legislation
for sustainable development of the capital markets.13 In addition, capacity building for SEBI and
IRDA is needed to strengthen the supervision of the capital market.

F.       Operations Evaluation

15.     An OEM was undertaken from 26 January to 12 February 2004. The OEM met with
MOF; Department of Economic Affairs; key stakeholders, including SEBI and the two major
stock exchanges (the BSE and the NSE); NSDL; the Clearing Corporation of India Limited; and
other market institutions and participants. The primary purpose of this evaluation was to identify
the strengths and the weakness of the Program to learn lessons for future operations in India,
as well as in similar sectors in other countries. The assessment was based on (i) the need for
the Program and the effectiveness of its design (relevance), (ii) the achievement of program
purpose and production of outputs (efficacy), (iii) efficiency, (iv) the sustainability of outcomes,
and (v) the contribution to institutional strengthening and other impacts. The draft program
performance audit report (PPAR) was circulated interdepartmentally within ADB and to the
Government and other stakeholders. Comments received were considered in finalizing the
PPAR.

                    II.      PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE

A.       Formulation and Design

16.    The Program was formulated at a time of financial and policy crisis within India (paras.
1­2). A complex system of industrial licensing, protection against imports, and extensive
government intervention in financial intermediation contributed to disappointing growth
compared to other countries in Asia during the 1980s. Before 1991, capital flows to India
consisted mainly of aid flows, commercial borrowing, and nonresident Indian deposits.

17.      Three important elements underpinned the formulation and design of the Program:
(i) rapid deployment of program proceeds for immediate balance of payments support,
(ii) support for the implementation of the Government's reform agenda in the capital markets,
and (iii) a reduction in India's economic vulnerability through the development of the domestic
capital market to mobilize internal and external resources to finance economic growth. From the


12
   Dematerialization is a process of shifting securities from physical or scrip form to scripless form, with records kept
   only in the computer and transfers effected by electronic book entry.
13
   The IRDA Act was passed in 1999, but a consolidated SEBI bill has not been adopted. Recent amendments (2002)
   to the SEBI have helped address some of the weaknesses of the previous 1992 Act.
6


Government's point of view, the most important objective of the Program--liquidity support--
was not met due to a 2-year delay in program endorsement by ADB (para. 30).

18.     The policy matrix included 44 policy actions (para. 8), of which (i) 16 were to be
completed before program approval for the release of first tranche loan proceeds, (ii) 12 were
core or second tranche release conditions, and (iii) 16 conditions were to be completed by the
end of the Program (Appendix 1). The conditions provided in the policy matrix and the
Program's design were appropriate to meet the last two elements (ii) and (iii) identified in para.
17. However, the Government and ADB continued to discuss the best way to create an
integrated national market until the final loan negotiations. Concerns over the efficiency and
transparency of a proposed second nationwide exchange--the NSE--were expressed. The
main issue was the Government's potential influence, given the shareholding structure of the
NSE. As a result, ADB maintained policy actions under the Program that called for an electronic
network linking India's regional stock exchanges, but also included conditions for the
establishment of the NSE. In many ways, these were parallel efforts to achieve similar
objectives--better governance and efficiency in the capital market. In light of ADB's views, the
Government agreed not to use loan proceeds in the establishment of the NSE.

19.      Proceeds from the $250 million loan were used for the adjustment costs of the Program
(excluding the NSE). The intent was to compensate the Government for the fiscal costs of a
clearing and settlement and depository system that required standardization of practices and
procedures to ensure the accuracy, transparency, and timeliness of investor information. This
meant changing traditional practices, eliminating privileges, improving inefficient systems, and
upgrading the support infrastructure. The changes required capital outlays, estimated in the
RRP at about $300 million, to (i) draft new legislation, standards, and regulatory practices;
(ii) upgrade skills, and (iii) educate investors. The OEM requested cost estimates for the
clearing and settlement and depository system, but no records were available.

20.      While the design generally identified major areas of reform well, it was weak in three
specific areas: (i) clarifying the conditions for SEBI's independence and enforcement powers,
(ii) eliminating impediments to market growth or market liberalization, and (iii) improving the
payments system. The actions contained in the policy matrix were necessary but not sufficient
to support SEBI as the sole regulator for the capital markets (para. 27). Policy conditions
supporting the elimination of impediments to market growth or market liberalization lacked the
cohesion of other areas of the Program. A stronger focus on a few select areas (e.g., debt
market development or institutional investors)14 might have improved results. Finally, excluding
conditions to improve the payments system was a design omission. Electronic funds transfer
capability and real time gross settlement continue to be a significant bottleneck for market
development, especially for short-term debt market (repos) (para. 24[iii]). 15




14
   ADB followed up with TA in debt market development in the next few years. Three TAs were provided to support
   debt market development: TA 3367-IND: Reform of the Private Pension and Provident Funds System Reform and
   the Employees' Provident Fund Organization, for $1,000,000, approved on 26 December 1999; TA 3460-IND:
   Policy and Operational Support and Capacity Building for the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, for
   $800,000, approved on 22 June 2000; and TA 3473-IND: Development of Secondary Debt Market, for $600,000,
   approved on 28 July 2000. Although these were not integrated into the Program, this sequencing may have better
   reflected the Government's priorities and capacities at the time.
15
   The RBI has started to test a real time gross settlement system in a set of banks starting in February 2004.
                                                                                                                7


B.         Achievement of Reform Measures

21.     The RRP identified the key risks, including (i) the Government's ability to pursue the
required policy reforms in a timely manner; (ii) the legislation required to establish a national
automated depository system and enhance the power and authorities of the regulatory and
supervisory agency; (iii) opposition to the required changes by vested interests, such as
stockbrokers and other affected sectors; and (iv) the complicated national coordination
envisaged with multisectoral and geographic challenges. Given the nature of the identified risks
and ADB's inexperience in capital market reform, the Government's ability to meet the program
conditions was a topic of concern at the management review, staff review, and loan and TA
coordination committee meetings.

22.    The OEM revisited the Government's progress in satisfying the policy actions identified
in the matrix, especially the conditions the PCR identified as not having been fully met (para.
13). Appendix 1 contains a table describing the steps taken by the Government, and an
evaluation of the Government's status of compliance with 44 policy reform conditions. A
summary discussion is in paras. 23­27.

           1.      Establishing a Framework for an Integrated National Market System

23.     Three conditions were intended to support an electronic network linking India's regional
stock exchanges. The network was meant to provide investors with a fair, efficient, and
continuous market with the required liquidity and depth. 16 All the conditions have been satisfied,
primarily due to the success of the NSE. Two of these were key second tranche conditions:

           (i)     Ensure an efficient and competitive interface among the stock exchanges.
                   Standards were introduced that supported uniformity of practices, operating
                   standards, codes of conduct and ethics, reporting requirements, and quicker
                   dissemination of information and prices across all exchanges. These standards
                   were in preparation for the introduction of automated trading in debt and equity
                   securities, and automated settlement of trades on the exchanges.
           (ii)    Ensure automated trading facilities for securities of large, medium, and
                   small enterprises. Today, all exchanges trade-listed equities using the
                   electronic limit order book market structure. The same system is used to trade
                   large, medium, or small capital stocks. Such an integrated nationwide market
                   ensures that all investors can access a single market price. To ensure safe
                   trading among all participants, nationwide trading on a rolling settlement basis
                   must be backed by a robust clearing and settlement system. Two important
                   aspects to ensure continuous market growth and expansion were (a) anonymous
                   trading, and (b) elimination of market fragmentation across participants. In 1998,
                   for example, all institutional orders had to be exposed to the (transparent)
                   electronic order book (paras. 34­35). Thus, while a trade might be negotiated
                   outside the market, it had to be put on the exchange limit order book to avail of
                   the clearance and settlement systems of the clearing corporation and the
                   depositories. By pooling all the orders into one trading platform, liquidity and
                   pricing transparency on the exchanges were increased.


16
     Continuous market means securities can be traded at any time the market is open. The required liquidity means
     the price difference is minimal from one transaction to the next. Depth means the market can absorb a large
     volume of trades.
8


           2.       Modernize the Market Infrastructure

24.     The policy matrix included nine conditions to support the implementation of a clearance
and settlement and depository framework in accordance with the G30 recommendations on
securities clearance and settlement (Appendix 2). All conditions have been satisfied. Drafting
and enacting appropriate legislation and investing in the systems were the two key policy
measures. Specific actions were:

           (i)      Establish and operate a national automated depository system. This
                    included (a) title transfer and registration, (b) recognition of ownership, (c) voting
                    rights, (d) rights to dividends, (e) the creation of liens, (f) liabilities of the
                    depository, and (g) settlement of disputes. This core condition of the Program
                    was required for the release of the second tranche, and was initially addressed
                    by the Depository Act, 1996.
           (ii)     Regulatory guidelines for the establishment and operation of automated
                    depository. The Depositories Act, 1996 (the Act) established the legal
                    framework for a nationwide depository system in India. The Act included
                    amendments to certain areas of the Companies Act, the Securities Contracts
                    (Regulation) (SC[R]) Act, the Income Tax Act, and the Benami Transac tions
                    (Prohibition) Act.17 While the SEBI Act of 1992 gave the securities regulator
                    authority to register and regulate the working of the depositories, the
                    Depositories Act clarified the authority to make regulations, conduct inquiries and
                    inspections, and enforce regulations through directions from SEBI on the
                    activities of depositories. SEBI subsequently issued Depositories and
                    Participants Regulations, 1996 (the Regulations) to address processes within the
                    depository environment. The Regulations extend to automated processing and
                    electronic connectivity requirements. The Act and the Regulations became the
                    basis for the internal rules, policies, and procedures of the depositories (first
                    NSDL; then Central Depository Services Limited [CDSL]).
          (iii)     Establish an automated clearance, settlement, and depository system for
                    securities trading. This policy builds on the establishment and operation of
                    national depository systems. The policy requirement to establish systems in one
                    or more exchanges in all major centers of the country has been addressed
                    through terminal access by all system users. This capability has evolved so that
                    the systems of NSDL, CDSL, and National Securities Clearing Corporation
                    Limited (NSCCL) can be accessed via a single terminal. Daily cash settlement
                    and delivery versus payment meet G30 requirements to the extent possible in
                    India (Appendix 1[12]). Risk is mitigated through guarantee funds at NSCCL and
                    BSE and other risk-management methods. However, inter- and intra-bank
                    connectivity need to be improved through an electronic payments system that
                    would simplify cash movements for settlement purposes. (Where funds cannot
                    be transferred easily, cash is collected before entering the trade order.) The
                    OEM was informed of plans to make cash settlement directly through the RBI,
                    refining delivery versus payment. However, this has been planned for a number
                    of years with little action.



17
     A Benami transaction is where a property is bought in the name of one party, but paid for and used by a second
     party. The simplest form is where a husband purchases property in the name of his wife, pays for it, and benefits
     from its use.
                                                                                                       9


        3.      Eliminate Constraints that Inhibit Market Growth, Improve Market Access,
                and Strengthen the Role of Financial Intermediaries in the Capital Market

25.      Twenty policy actions have been grouped together under this category. They constitute
an assortment of conditions for (i) market participants, (ii) issuers, (iii) institutional investors, and
(iv) instruments. All conditions, except those for the investment of pension and provident funds
(para. 13), have been satisfied. Some of the key conditions for the development of the derivative
markets are:

        (i)     SEBI to review the key issues for developing a market in options and
                futures to facilitate the development of a strategy for the operation of such
                a market. In 1996, the NSE approached SEBI with a proposal to start trading in
                equity futures and options on a trading platform separate from the equity market
                platform. SEBI set up a 28-person committee (Gupta Committee) to examine this
                issue. In 1998, the committee report recommended products, prudential
                regulation norms, and risk management at the clearing corporations that had to
                be in place before derivatives could start trading. The committee's key
                recommendation was that derivatives trading should be permitted only on
                exchanges that had strong online monitoring and surveillance systems, and
                could settle derivatives trades through an independent clearing corporation
                and/or clearing house.
         (ii)   Lift the restrictions and establish a regulatory framework to enable the
                operation of a trading system in options and futures. This was a core
                condition for the release of the second tranche of the Program. The Gupta
                Committee also made recommendations on the governance of an exchange that
                could trade derivatives. SEBI accepted the recommendations of the committee
                and issued regulations. The Government amended the securities bill to include
                derivatives in the definition of securities that could be traded on an exchange. In
                December 1999, an amended bill was enacted and became the SEBI
                (Amendment) Act, 2002 (Appendix 3).

        4.      Enhance Competition and Level the Playing Field

26.     Six conditions focused on increasing competition in the market, including among the
stock exchanges, brokerage firms, and mutual funds. All conditions have been satisfied. Key
conditions were:

        (i)     Permit 51% foreign ownership of corporate stock brokerage firms. Foreign
                firms have entered the market and can now acquire up to 100% ownership of
                brokerage firms.
        (ii)    SEBI to regulate Unit Trust of India (UTI) mutual funds. Before October 2002,
                UTI mutual funds were not required to comply with SEBI regulations, although
                certain funds did so voluntarily. A liquidity crisis in 2001 created a potential
                default in the payment of dividends by one of the funds (Unit Scheme 1964) and
                triggered some of the changes (Appendix 4). The Government repealed the UTI
                Act in 2002, and UTI was split. UTI-I now comprises funds that are guaranteed
                by the Government and will be phased out as they mature (predominantly
                closed-end funds). UTI-II includes funds that have been transferred to a new
10


                   company that is under the regulatory authority of SEBI (predominantly open-
                   ended funds). 18

           5.      Strengthen Market Regulation and Supervision

27.    Six conditions were intended to strengthen the regulatory powers of SEBI. While SEBI
powers have increased, these conditions have not been fully satisfied. Specific measures
included:

           (i)     Transfer through legislation regulatory and supervisory powers more fully
                   to SEBI. This was a core condition triggering release of the second tranche of
                   the Program. In 1997, SEBI established a committee under former Justice D.R.
                   Dhanuka to examine areas of deficiency in the SEBI Act 1992, the Depositories
                   Act 1996, and the SC(R) Act 1956. Based on that review, the Dhanuka
                   Committee concluded that the number of authorities regulating the Indian
                   securities market should be limited. The committee found that the existence of
                   multiple authorities might create confusion and inconsistent results. The Dhanuka
                   Committee recommended that SEBI become the single regulatory authority.
                   However, regulatory responsibility continues to be shared by SEBI, the RBI, and
                   the Department of Company Affairs. The situation might be changing slowly as
                   SEBI gains more credibility.
           (ii)    Rationalize all pertinent laws, rules, and regulations in a manner consistent
                   with SEBI's designation as the principal regulator of the capital market. The
                   Dhanuka Committee also made recommendations on consolidating Indian
                   securities laws. The committee recommended that the SC(R) Act and the SEBI
                   Act be consolidated into a single act. As noted in the PCR, the Dhanuka
                   Committee drafted a proposal for a new securities law. However, the laws still
                   have not been rationalized and/or consolidated. Regulation of the securities
                   industry continues to be fragmented among SEBI, the RBI, and the Department
                   of Company Affairs. Regulatory ambiguity creates an environment where
                   confusion as well as duplicate and inconsistent regulations are possible
                   (Appendix 5). In addition, some of the regulatory responsibilities need to be more
                   clearly defined.

28.     In summary, some of the policy actions included in the program were either delayed or not
fully implemented. The investment guidelines for insurance companies and pension funds were
relaxed somewhat, though directed investments continue. In addition, the full delegation of powers
to SEBI contained in the SC(R) Act and Companies Act is languishing in Parliament. However,
the findings of the Joint Parliamentary Commission (Appendix 5), and the subsequent 2002
amendments to the Securities Act (Appendix 3 contains selected amendments), have provided
SEBI with some of the necessary powers to regulate the market more effectively.

C.         Cost and Scheduling

29.    The program loan of $250 million became effective on 8 December 1995. The first
tranche of $125 million was disbursed on 22 December 1995, consistent with the provision that
funds were to be disbursed upon loan effectiveness. However, slow implementation of policy
actions, such as the delay in the resumption of the use of repurchase agreements, delayed the

18
     Competition also has increased with domestic firms now being permitted to raise resources from abroad through
     the issuance of American depository receipts and/or global depository receipts.
                                                                                                        11


release of the second tranche, scheduled for December 1996.19 An extension of the loan closing
date was granted, and the second tranche of $125 million was disbursed on 22 December 1998
upon satisfaction of the second tranche release conditions. As EA, MOF was responsible for the
administration and disbursement of the proceeds and the maintenance of records.

D.         Organization and Management

30.     An agreement with the Government was reached initially in November 1993, but
program approval was delayed due to concerns regarding the policy environment in India. The
RRP for the Program was circulated to the Board of Directors in November 1993, withdrawn,
and re-circulated in November 1995 (using the same RRP as in 1993 with an addendum note
and supplement 20 updating the status of compliance with program actions). Twelve policy
actions were specified for release of the second tranche of the program loan. An additional
16 end-of-program conditions were added. At the time of Board approval of the Program, the
supplement to the RRP reported that the Government had implemented all first tranche
conditions, 7 of 12 second tranche release conditions (3 of the remaining 5 conditions had been
partly met), and 9 of the end-of-program conditions. The timetable for the Program was revised
accordingly (para. 29). The delay did not impact significantly the reform agenda, and allowed
the Government to demonstrate its commitment and capacity to implement this far-reaching
reform program.

31.    Program management was satisfactory. Three review missions were fielded in
December 1996, October 1997, and March 1998. The second tranche was released on
22 December 1998 (a 1.5-year delay from the revised 1995 schedule) after the required policy
actions were met substantially. The loan was closed in March 1999, and the PCR mission was
undertaken in October 1999 and completed in December 1999.

32.    The OEM noted the contribution of USAID to the outcomes of this Program. The FIRE
team was comprised of talented and experienced professionals, who worked well with
government counterparts and achieved tangible results in specific areas (para. 10). Although
ADB and USAID did not formally coordinate, ADB staff and the FIRE project team frequently
consulted with each other. Direct USAID consultations were less frequent. This arrangement
appeared to have worked well, although more formal arrangements might have resulted in
greater dialogue and information sharing that would have benefited the institutions and the
Borrower.

                          III.    ACHIEVEMENT OF PROGRAM PURPOSE

A.         Program Outcomes and Impact

           1.      Outcomes

33.     The RRP did not specify performance indicators to capture the program impact or
monitoring mechanisms. However, the depth and breadth of reform undertaken by the
Government and supported by this Program are striking. The capital market has been
transformed radically since the Program was designed in 1993 (Appendix 6). The Government
transcended the risks identified in the RRP (para. 21), and in some areas exceeded program
expectations. New standards for trading, trade comparison and trade resolution, clearance and
19
     The operation of the automated depository for debt securities was delayed.
20
     ADB. 1995. Supplement to the Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a
     Proposed Loan to India for the Capital Market Development Program . Manila (Addendum 1).
12


settlements, registration and transfer of securities, and trade reporting were adopted. Some of
key outcomes of the Program are listed in paras. 23­27.

34.     The Establishment of the NSE. The NSE, which was backed indirectly by the
Government through a number of powerful financial institutions, effectively changed market
practices (para. 5). A national market system requires listing nationally traded securities in one
market that is accessible to all accredited brokers and members of existing exchanges. By
accumulating orders for each traded security on a nationwide basis, trades have been matched
more efficiently and the liquidity of each security has improved. This was made possible through
the use of more efficient information technology (IT), which was made readily available to
exchange members. Automated facilities linked exchange members electronically, providing
them with up-to-the-minute displays of bid and offer price quotes as well as match orders, and
allowing them to execute market transactions instantly. The use of more advanced IT improved
transparency of market transactions by generating market information about volume, prices, and
time of transactions. The NSE was created to compete with the small club of stockbrokers who
effectively controlled the stock market in India. Nationwide anonymous electronic bookmaking at
the NSE established new market standards (para. 23).

35.    As more market participants chose to list and transact business through the NSE, the
market was revolutionized. The efficiencies of all processes have increased dramatically, while
investor confidence in the safety of the markets has grown significantly. The BSE was forced to
adopt the new market standards or go out of business. The success of the NSE proved that the
Government was correct to create a national market system (para. 18). The two large active
exchanges, the NSE and the BSE, essentially have replaced 98% of the trading in the
23 regional exchanges. The NSE accounted for about 86% of the trading volume in 2002­2003
(Appendix 7).

36.     The Clearance, Settlement, and Depository System. The development of a national
automated depository system in India was critical to address problems in trade settlement
processing. In the early 1990s, the settlement of trades through the movement of physical
securities certificates at the stock exchanges had become extremely cumbersome and time
consuming. Transfer agent operations were highly inefficient, causing significant delays in
transferring the ownership of traded securities. High volumes of paper and inefficiencies in the
settlement and transfer processes led to theft, forgery, mutilation of certificates, and other
irregularities. An excessive amount of bad deliveries in the market was the result. With the
development of the NSDL (and later the CDSL for the BSE), dematerialization of securities, and
automated securities settlement through the clearing organizations, these problems and related
risks for the individual investor virtually were eliminated. The two depositories (NSDL and
CDSL) now interface electronically, with automated links to their respective clearing
organizations.

37.     In addition to improvements in trade settlements, other benefits have been realized.
Securities can be pledged to secure a bank loan through NSDL. This has simplified the process
of market participants borrowing cash from banks. Since accounts at the depository are held by
individual investors, beneficial ownership information is immediately available from the
depositories to issuers or their agents to support payment of entitlements. Changing an address
on company books can be done easily through an individual investor's account at the
depository. Beneficial owners, therefore, are not only assured that they will receive entitlements,
but will receive them in a timely manner. All of these benefits, combined with the safe and
efficient system for trade settlement, have increased significantly the confidence of individual
and institutional investors in the Indian markets.
                                                                                                   13


38.     Derivatives. When the Program was designed in 1993, the impact of derivatives trading
on the market could not have been foreseen. In 1995, equity markets were trading on a 5-day
settlement cycle, which effectively meant that traders were taking (up to) 5-day forward
positions. This increased the systemic risk of the trading system, resulting in the exchanges
demanding higher capital margins and charging higher trading fees. This translated into
excessive entry barriers for markets. A safer market structure would be a separate spot and
derivatives market. However, for the markets to move toward true spot trading (with rolling
settlement), the 1969 prohibition on trading forwards on securities would have to be repealed.

39.     In January 1995, an amendment to the Securities Laws lifted the ban by repealing
section 20 of the SC(R) Act. Agreement was reached to regulate the derivatives markets at two
levels: at the exchange and at SEBI. Of the 23 exchanges in the country, the BSE and the NSE
were the only two that satisfied the SEBI requirements for exchange regulation of derivatives.
When the IT market crashed in March 2001, volumes were still small and trading was not being
done on a rolling settlement basis. As a result, all exchanges were forced to adopt rolling
settlement on a trade date plus 5 days (T+5) basis, and trading on index and single stock
options commenced in June and July 2001, respectively. In June 2002, the accounting and
taxation questions regarding derivative positions held by investors also were clarified. However,
it was the move to trading on rolling settlement and the introduction of individual stock
derivatives that spurred the growth of the derivatives market. Volumes on the derivatives
markets rose from Rs23 billion in 2000­2001 to more than Rs1 trillion in 2001­2002. Single
stock futures accounted for more than 50% of the volume. This growth has continued into 2002­
2003 as well, with volumes of Rs4.4 trillion. Another leap in volumes appears to be occurring in
2003­2004. In December 2003 alone, volumes reached Rs3 trillion, compared to Rs0.5 trillion
in December 2002, making India the second-largest market for stock futures in the world.

       2.      Impact

40.      The purpose of the Program was to (i) enhance the country's ability to mobilize internal
and external resources to finance economic growth, and (ii) improve the efficiency of resource
allocation through a greater reliance on market mechanisms. The types of indicators normally
used to assess the impact of capital market development programs (market capitalization,
turnover ratios, new issues, etc.) are not robust. Indeed, they are extremely sensitive to
business cycles and other worldwide events that affect international capital flows. When the
economy is growing, these indicators tend to be positive; when the economy is not performing
well, they are less impressive. In others words, these indicators reflect others factors, such as
the economy, more than the health of the capital market. The causality usually goes from the
economy to the capital market. Therefore, these indicators can be used only as proxies that
reflect the institutional capacity to channel resources as the economy develops.

41.     Table 1 provides information on the new capital issues by nongovernment companies.
While market-based finance had been gaining greater importance for new companies, it has not
replaced bank financing, especially following the debilitating effects of the IT crash that hit global
markets (especially emerging markets) in 2000­2001. Appendix 8 provides a more detailed
disaggregation. New private sector capital issues still lag considerably behind what they were in
the mid-1990s, possibly due to the slow pace of the Government's divestment activities. This
has limited startups in some sectors and constricted the release of new issues on the market
(para. 58). As such, encouraging government divestment might have been considered as a
parallel reform linked to this Program.
14


                    Table 1: New Capital Issues by Nongovernment Public Limited Companies
     Item                        1992­          1994­        1998­      2000­        2001­        2002­          2003­
                                 1993           1995         1999       2001         2002         2003           2004
     Number of                    1,040          1,678          48         138          33            16            29
     Issues
             a
     Amount                    19,803.4       26,416.7      5,013.0    6,144.3      5,741.9      1,022.6     2,290.0
     (Rs crore)
     Note: Crore = unit of value equal to Rs10 million.
     a
       The large values reported in 1992­1994 can be explained largely by two factors. In 1992, the Comptroller of
       Capital Issues (CCI) was abolished and SEBI took over the market for initial public offerings (IPOs). This
       meant that firms started getting their IPO prices determined by the market, rather than set by the CCI. The
       most firms in recent memory listed on capital markets during the IPO boom in India in 1993­1995. These
       two factors led to IPO overpricing in the first few weeks after the issue got listed and started trading. Prices
       normally stabilized after the first few weeks on the market.
     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission

42.     Other indicators of company resource mobilization provided in Figure 3 (details in
Appendix 9) show that the number of listed companies has increased, the market capitalization
(value of resources mobilized through the market) has doubled, and turnover (liquidity) on the
NSE and BSE has been impressive. Mobilizing external resources also has assumed greater
importance in the past few years, as shown in Figure 4 (details in Appendix 10). The
participation of foreign institutional investors in the market has exploded from the early 1990s,
with cumulative net investment steadily increasing despite the IT bubble. In addition, the
reduction in transactions costs has increased market efficiency dramatically, as shown in Figure
5 (details in Appendix 11). In almost all respects, the impact of these reforms has been
exceptional in increasing the mobilization of resources through the market.



                            Figure 3: Number of Listed Securities, Market Capitalization, and
                                              Turnover at BSE and NSE

                   12,000                                                                                    12,000




                                                                                                                      Number of Companies
                   10,000                                                                                    10,000

                    8,000                                                                                    8,000
      Rs billion




                    6,000                                                                                    6,000

                    4,000                                                                                    4,000

                    2,000                                                                                    2,000

                       0                                                                                     0
                                1992­93              1994­95            1998­99               2002­03

                                          Market Capitalization of Companies Listed in BSE and NSE
                                          Turnover at BSE and NSE
                                          Number of Companies Listed in Indian Stock Exchanges
                                          Number of Listed Companies in BSE and NSE

BSE = Bombay Stock Exchange, NSE = National Stock Exchange, Rs = rupees.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                                                                                  15



                             Figure 4: Yearly Trends in Foreign Institutional Investments
                                                        in India

                          800,000
                          700,000
                          600,000
             Rs million




                          500,000
                          400,000
                          300,000
                          200,000
                          100,000
                              -
                                    /93


                                              /94


                                                        /95


                                                                  /96


                                                                            /97


                                                                                      /98


                                                                                                /99


                                                                                                          /00


                                                                                                                    /01


                                                                                                                              /02


                                                                                                                                        /03
                                  92


                                            93


                                                      94


                                                                95


                                                                          96


                                                                                    97


                                                                                              98


                                                                                                        99


                                                                                                                  00


                                                                                                                            01


                                                                                                                                      02
                                19


                                          19


                                                    19


                                                              19


                                                                        19


                                                                                  19


                                                                                            19


                                                                                                      19


                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                    20
                                    Cumulative Net Investment                     Gross Purchases                   Gross Sales

  Rs = rupees.
  Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




                                    Figure 5: Transaction Costs in India's Equity Market

              6.0

              5.0

              4.0
   Percent




              3.0

              2.0

              1.0

              0.0
                             India 1993                       1997 (NSE)                          2004 (NSE)                           New York
                           (Before NSE)                                                                                                  Stock
                                                                                                                                       Exchange
                                                                                                                                        (1997)

               Trading-Brokerage            Trading-Market Impact Cost            Settlement-Back Office          Settlement-Bad Paper Risk

NSE = National Stock Exchange.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
16


43.      While the efficiency of transactions has increased, ascertaining the efficiency of
allocation is more difficult. With bank finance, one can look at nonperforming loans, insolvency,
and bankruptcy as indicators. In the capital markets, a comparable indicator might be the
number of companies delisted. However, companies are rarely delisted in emerging markets. In
India, delisting has occurred primarily because (i) the MOF withdrew a provision in April 2003 for
mandatory listing of companies in their respective regional stock exchanges, and (ii) foreign
companies obtained 100% ownership of their subsidiaries and decided to take their shares off
the Indian market. Neither case provides an example of delisting due to economic distress.
Therefore, delisting in India is not a good indication of inefficient mobilization of resources.
These companies, in fact, are saving significant listing fees. The OEM was not able to assess if
the efficiency of resource allocation has improved under the Program.

B.     Sustainability

44.     In many ways, the reforms have succeeded beyond expectations. The key outcomes of
the Program (paras. 34­39)--automated trading and dematerialization of stock shares; the
clearance, settlement, and depository framework; and the introduction of derivatives markets--
can be considered irreversible. They have resulted in cost-effective changes and stronger
market institutions. The Indian stock market has been quite volatile in recent months, but the
impact of the Program is sustainable mainly due to the institutional development and the
Government's ownership and leadership in the reforms. The establishment of the NSE, based
on high governance standards and transparent market practices, is the best example. The result
has been a changed trading environment and new culture in the financial markets. The systems
and the professionalism of market participants are expected to continue to be in line with
international markets.

               IV.      ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

A.     Socioeconomic Impact

45.     The Program allowed India to learn by doing, an important side effect. The
demonstration effect of these reforms also was important. Strong market institutions have grown
with the support of market professionals who created and, in many cases, are still involved in
their operation. The support of international professionals (such as the FIRE team) was critical,
but the vision and initiative came from a handful of proactive civil servants. The result has been
a confidence to continue the evolution of market institutions, and more openness to change and
innovation as demonstrated by the continued development of the depositories and increasingly
open markets for foreign investors. This innovation and openness will continue to support
growth and development in the economy.

B.     Impact on Institutions and Policy

46.     Before the creation of the NSE, the country had 23 stock exchanges, all of which traded
the same stocks. The closing price differences were large enough to fuel inter-exchange
arbitrage, generating risk-free returns of up to 2.5% a month for a large number of the brokers.
These price differences persisted until the NSE became the dominant exchange for price
determination in early 1996. Eventually, most of the trading in the country became concentrated
in the NSE or the BSE. However, even though the price premia dropped, significant price
differentials remained between the NSE and the BSE due to different settlement cycles at the
two exchanges. When trading at both exchanges became rolling settlement, those differentials
                                                                                                  17


were eliminated (paras. 38­39), though intra-day price differences could occur. All investors
access one common price for a given stock, a fundamental change in the market.

47.      Recent amendments to the SEBI Act addressed some of the limitations in the original
1992 Act, which established the regulator (Appendix 3). These amendments included providing
SEBI with the authority to (i) issue "cease and desist" orders; (ii) significantly increase fines and
penalties for violations; and (iii) obtain evidentiary documents from third parties, which was
especially helpful in seeking information from banks. The amendments also specifically prohibit
market manipulation and insider trading, allowing SEBI to regulate and take appropriate actions.
While laws, rules, and regulations might still need to be rationalized (para. 27), SEBI has been
granted far-reaching powers as a regulator. Recent amendments to the SEBI Act (Appendix 3)
have enhanced that power. In addition, SEBI has continually increased the number of securities
that are required to be settled in dematerialized form, so that 99% of all trades now are settled
in that form.

48.    One unforeseen positive impact was the introduction in 1997 of a second depository for
BSE. CDSL was linked to the BSE clearinghouse, BISL, for settlement of trades on BSE. Today,
the two depository systems are fully electronically interfaced. Security positions move between
NSDL and CDSL every 15 minutes. Securities are then immediately available for redelivery at
the receiving depository. This fluid system accommodates the need for members to quickly and
safely move security positions to meet settlement obligations at NSCCL or BISL.

49.     With all systems operating well and interfaces between systems established, the
depositories are taking on new projects. SEBI recently outsourced to NSDL the design,
development, and implementation of a registration database using biometrics.21 The plan is to
fingerprint everyone involved in the capital market. The fingerprints, in addition to photographs,
will become part of an individual's profile in the database. NSDL will manage the database, but
it will be owned by SEBI. NSDL is developing another system to collect information on
taxpayers and tax obligation information. Initially, the database will carry details as reported by
tax withholding agents. CDSL is working with mutual funds to develop a system that will create
a consolidated holdings report for owners of mutual funds. CDSL also is looking at facilitating
the settlement of commodities through the depository.

                                         V.        OVERALL ASSESSMENT

A.          Relevance

50.      The Program was consistent with ADB's development strategy in India and in line with
the Government's development strategy. The important question regarding the relevance is
whether the Government would have proceeded with these reforms without the Program. The
answer is yes. Indeed, the Government proceeded with the majority of these reforms for 2 years
(1993­1995) without support of loan proceeds. Most of the second tranche release conditions
were met at the time of program approval. However, the Program helped (i) define and shape
the scope of the reform program; and (ii) facilitate continuing dialogue with the Government in
difficult reform areas, such as SEBI independence, institutional investor involvement, and debt
market development. As a result, the Program was relevant.




21
     Fingerprint and face recognition for optimal security.
18


B.     Efficacy

51.    The Program supported the goal of achieving a higher rate of economic growth, meeting
the program purpose of (i) increasing the country's ability to mobilize internal and external
resources to finance economic growth, and (ii) attaining the outputs of a more efficient and
transparent market-based financial system. The Program was efficacious.

C.     Efficiency

52.     This was the only Program in the history of ADB where a negotiated document was
circulated to the Board of Directors, withdrawn, and approved 2 years later. Given the history
and processing of the Program--and the additional delays in meeting tranche release
conditions--the Program was less efficient.

D.     Sustainability

53.      Sufficient demand and resources exist to sustain the services offered by the institutions
created under the Program. In addition, the operating and financial performance of these
institutions has become the market standard that new entrants must emulate. The sustainability
of the Program is likely.

E.     Institutional Development and Other Impacts

54.      Laws, regulations, and procedures continue to be revised and updated to meet the
needs of the markets. The market culture and trading environment is virtually unrecognizable
from what existed at the start of the Program 10 years ago. The professionalism of market
participants also continues to expand. A market-based financial industry has blossomed in the
past decade, and institutions, skills, and capacity have grown to meet the demand. The
institutional impact of this Program has been substantial.

F.     Overall Program Rating

55.    The overall rating of the Program is successful.

G.     Assessment of ADB and Borrower Performance

56.     ADB's oversight of the Program was satisfactory. Three review missions were fielded.
The first review mission was in December 1996, approximately 1 year after loan effectiveness.
The second review mission in October 1997 assessed the Government's progress in meeting
the Program's conditions for the second tranche release. The mission identified issues with
policy actions for repurchase agreements (repos), granting SEBI sufficient regulatory powers,
and investment limits of institutional investors. The third review mission in March 1998 assessed
the progress in meeting the remaining conditions, and recommended the release of the second
tranche of the loan in the progress report circulated in October 1998. The second tranche was
released on 22 December 1998.

57.     The MOF served adequately as EA for the Program. It oversaw the implementation of
capital market reforms, provided guidance and supervision, and administered the loan
disbursement and use of counterpart funds. A report was prepared under the provision of Article
IV, Section 4.05c, of the Loan Agreement between ADB and the Government. However, the
                                                                                                                  19


report was not as comprehensive as expected, primarily due to frequent personnel changes in the
Government during the program period.

                      VI.      ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.       Key Issues for the Future

         1.       Fiscal and Structural Reform

58.      A significant amount of attention has been given to support fiscal reform in India in areas
such as tax collection and fiscal management.22 Even more has been written about the topic, so
it will be noted only briefly. Continued success in diversifying and spreading risk in a market-
based financial system will depend upon sustained efforts to reform the economy. Reducing the
large budget deficit and reviving structural reform will be the most critical factors over the
medium term. The Government has been unable to correct the large budget deficit, which has
remained around 6% of gross domestic product since the late 1990s. The need to maintain a
pool of low-cost captive funds from institutional investors has resulted in inefficient investment
with costs to the economy and to policyholders. Low international interest rates and large
private capital inflows have underpinned the exchange rate and provided ample domestic
liquidity. However, this is unlikely to be sustained. In addition, limited progress in privatizing
state-owned enterprises 23 continues to limit the restructuring of key sectors and opportunities for
new investment and growth.

         2.       Independence of the Financial Market Regulators

59.     A lack of genuine independence for the financial market regulators (RBI, SEBI, and other
regulators, such as the newly established insurance regulator, IRDA) continues to inhibit the
market-based decisions needed for the financial system to function effectively. Keeping market
regulators at arms length from monetary and fiscal policy issues and ensuring sufficient
autonomy to pursue market misconduct and regulatory abuse would contribute greatly to more
efficient and transparent markets. In addition, inconsistencies in regulations governing the
financial sector has created gaps and regulatory overlaps. For example, commercial banks fall
under the regulatory authority of the RBI, which affects the manner and scope of positions
banks can take in any exchange-traded securities or contract. SEBI, however, has regulatory
authority over exchange-traded securities. This can be a serious issue in creating exchange-
traded derivatives (or spot) instruments in asset classes where banks are the largest natural
participants, such as interest rate or foreign exchange derivatives.

60.    The concept of self-regulatory organizations (SROs) is another area of regulatory
confusion where SEBI and market participants disagree. SEBI has taken the position that
monitoring, supervision, and enforcement are the responsibilities solely of the exchanges. The
exchanges believe that SEBI should be responsible for oversight and enforcement. The
exchanges, however, perform routine monitoring of their members and take actions based on
exchange rules. In this situation, SEBI fails to recognize its responsibility as the principal

22
   ADB has provided substantial TA for tax reform in India. A TA performance audit report on Selected Technical
   Assistance for Fiscal Management and Tax Administration in India is to be completed in 2004, identifying many of
   the recurring issues with tax reform.
23
   Recent aggressive sales (February­April 2004) lifted privatization proceeds to Rs154 billion in FY2004, exceeding
   the target of Rs132 billion and well above Rs34 billion ($0.8 billion) in 2002/03. Last year's result was only the
   second time that the annual target was exceeded in the 13-year history of privatization. This represents a small
   fraction of the assets that need to be privatized.
20


regulator. SEBI also would like to see all trade organizations become SROs. This position
reflects SEBI's lack of understanding of a proper SRO environment in which SEBI is the ultimate
regulator. A clear delineation of duties and responsibilities in the SRO relationship, codified
through an agreement, would simplify some of these regulatory issues.

61.     If market regulators had been truly independent, they would have been able to detect
earlier recent market irregularities involving banks misusing funds to finance multiple stock
market operations, which eventually ended in bankruptcy. A Joint Parliamentary Commission
(detailed in Appendix 5) was convened to investigate these irregularities. Rather than
strengthening the High Level Committee for Capital Market Development--comprised of the
governor of the RBI, chairman of SEBI, chairman of IRDA, and the finance secretary--the terms
of reference have been weakened to eliminate responsibility for anticipatory market regulation.

B.     Lessons Identified

62.    Key lessons from the Program include:

       (i)     The Government's vision for the development of the market can be traced back
               to a small number of fiercely independent civil servants. This vision was needed
               to sustain the implementation of a reform program of this magnitude. Adequately
               developing the institutional, administrative, and regulatory framework required a
               substantial commitment of time and resources. Therefore, the importance of
               government ownership and dialogue cannot be underestimated.
       (ii)    Capital market development also requires a certain depth of human resources or
               skills in the market. Ensuring sufficient skills and capacity to implement complex
               reforms, such as the ones specified in this Program, were critical to the success
               of the Program.
       (iii)   Three factors proved to be essential for this market to develop: (a) competition,
               which forced good market standards for fairness; (b) transparency and efficiency,
               through an improved clearing, settlement, and depository system that allowed
               dematerialized trading; and (c) sufficient supply and demand to foster market
               depth and liquidity. The derivative market has played a key role in this aspect of
               market development.

C.     Follow-Up Actions

63.    Since the Program, ADB has maintained a constructive engagement with India. ADB is
supporting the debt and derivative markets, and pension reform. This assessment endorses
ADB's approach and efforts in these areas, and encourages more dedicated assistance for the
development of bond markets. Support for infrastructure development through the use of debt
instruments is urgently needed. Well-structured assistance with concrete deliverables could
accelerate development in this area.
                                                         CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM LOAN
                                                                    STATUS OF REFORMS
                   a
Policy Actions                                             Progress Report                         Program Completion Report                     Status of Reforms
                                                          Status of Reforms                            Status of Reforms                           February 2004
                                                            October 1998                                 October 1999
A. Establish the framework for an
   integrated national market
   system
   1. Government, in consultation            Implemented. Action completed before
      with Securities and Exchange           Board consideration (October 1993).
      Board of India (SEBI), to
      complete a review of trading,
      clearance, settlement, and
      depository systems and
      practices across all
      exchanges, including National
      Stock Exchange (NSE) and
      OTC Exchange of India
      (OTCEI). (First tranche
      release condition)
   2. Formulate and adopt firm               Implemented. As a first step, SEBI carried        The National Securities Depository      Of the 23 regional exchanges in India,
      strategies for ensuring an             out for the first time an examination of all      Limited (NSDL) has successfully         seven are active and interface with the
      efficient and competitive              Indian stock exchanges. Based on this             implemented the "inter-depository       depositories for clearance and
      interface among the different          examination and following international           transfer securities module," which      settlement purposes. ICSI has been
      stock exchanges and                    norms, measures were adopted during the           allows NSDL to transact with other      structured as a single broker member at
      harmonizing the trading,               program period to harmonize trading,              depositories.                           the exchanges.
      clearance, settlement, and             clearance and settlement, and depository
      depository systems to bring            systems. These measures were (i)                  A group of 15 regional stock            NSDL has links with nine stock
      about greater uniformity of            automated trading systems were                    exchanges also established the          exchanges, including NSE and Bombay
      practices, operating                   introduced in all stock exchanges; the            Inter-connected Stock Exchange of       Stock Exchange (BSE) plus the seven
      standards, codes of conduct            systems provide a more transparent,               India (ICSI). Therefore, all regional   active regional exchanges.
      and ethics, reporting                  efficient, and faster means for executing         stock exchanges participating in
      requirements, and quicker              trades and disseminating information; all         ICSI will conform to a uniform          BSE has also developed a depository,
      dissemination of information           stock exchanges except two today have             trading and settlement cycle and        Central Depository Services Limited




                                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 1
      and prices across all                  automated trading facilities; (ii) the cash       practices.                              (CDSL). It received its Certificate of
      exchanges in preparation for           settlement period was standardized and                                                    Commencement of Business on 8
      the introduction of automated          reduced from 14 days to 7 days for all            NSE also took over the management       February 1999. Basic services are
      rating in debt and equity              stock exchanges; for scripless transfers,         of OTCEI, and OTCEI will conform        similar to those at NSDL. Some
      securities and automated               SEBI introduced a T+5 (trade date + 5             to prevailing NSE standards. The        variations have been developed by
      settlement of trades on the            days) rolling settlement cycle; the               integration of the stock exchanges      CDSL to provide competitive services to




                                                                                                                                                                                 21
      exchanges (December 1996).             objective is to further shorten the               will help bring about uniformity of     those of the other depository.
a
    Second tranche release conditions highlighted in bold, while end-of-program conditions in italics.
Policy Actions               Progress Report                      Program Completion Report                     Status of Reforms
                            Status of Reforms                         Status of Reforms                           February 2004




                                                                                                                                                  22
                              October 1998                              October 1999

                 settlement cycle and move toward rolling       practices and operating standards.   Competition from CDSL may have
                 settlement and delivery versus payment                                              contributed to significant reductions in




                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 1
                 as suggested by the Group of Thirty                                                 fees as charged by NSDL.
                 (G30); (iii) to ensure effective clearing of
                 transactions, all stock exchanges were                                              NSDL and CDSL are fully interfaced,
                 required to set up a clearinghouse or                                               meaning the same securities are eligible
                 clearing corporation; this has been                                                 at both depositories. The automated
                 implemented by the stock exchanges; (iv)                                            system that moves securities positions
                 uniform "good and bad delivery" norms                                               between the two depositories is updated
                 were prescribed for all stock exchanges;                                            every 15 minutes throughout the business
                 (v) a time-bound procedure for resolution                                           day. This allows for same-day redelivery
                 of "bad deliveries" was introduced; (vi) all                                        of securities as needed by members.
                 stock exchanges were advised to set up a                                            The two depositories are linked to their
                 trade or settlement guarantee fund to                                               respective clearing organizations,
                 reduce counterpart risk by ensuring that                                            completing the settlement cycle. All of
                 adequate funds are available for timely                                             these interfaces have led to a
                 completion of settlements in the event                                              standardization of processes.
                 that member brokers are unable to fulfill
                 their obligations; and (vii) studies were                                           Regional market participants are linked
                 undertaken to streamline and standardize                                            electronically to the exchanges, clearing
                 share legislation, transfer and allotment,                                          organizations, and depositories. Besides
                 and delisting of securities from the stock                                          transaction processing, these links have
                 exchanges, and to strengthen continuing                                             resulted in more timely dissemination of
                 disclosure standards by listed companies                                            price data and other market information.
                 and timely dissemination of price-                                                  Codes of conduct have been
                 sensitive information to the public;                                                established by exchanges and certain
                 measures are being undertaken to carry                                              trade associations. Reporting
                 out the recommendations of these                                                    requirements for members have also
                 studies.                                                                            been established by exchanges. SEBI
                                                                                                     regulates the reporting requirements for
                                                                                                     the exchanges. While intermediaries
                                                                                                     may be registered through their
                                                                                                     exchange memberships, they still are
                                                                                                     not properly certified (see 33).

                                                                                                     The number of securities eligible for
                                                                                                     dematerialization through the
                                                                                                     depositories has continually increased.
                                                                                                     Trades in all securities that are eligible
                                                                                                     for dematerialization through the
Policy Actions                                 Progress Report    Program Completion Report             Status of Reforms
                                              Status of Reforms       Status of Reforms                   February 2004
                                                October 1998            October 1999

                                                                                              depositories must now follow the
                                                                                              standard rolling settlement process.

                                                                                              The rolling settlement cycle has been
                                                                                              gradually and successfully reduced to
                                                                                              T+2 days. The smooth transition to T+2
                                                                                              was largely due to the dematerialization
                                                                                              of securities through the depository. The
                                                                                              plan is to reduce this time further once
                                                                                              electronic funds transfer is operational.

                                                                                              The Indian securities market has
                                                                                              achieved the most effective cash
                                                                                              settlement process possible in India
                                                                                              under current banking norms (see 12).

                                                                                              With the increased usage of the
                                                                                              depositories, the clearing corporation
                                                                                              (NSCCL) and clearing house (BISL)
                                                                                              now operate substantially more
                                                                                              efficiently. This is a direct result of
                                                                                              expanded automation of the clearance
                                                                                              and settlement process and
                                                                                              dematerialization. Another extremely
                                                                                              important impact of settlement through
                                                                                              the depositories is that "bad deliveries"
                                                                                              are virtually non-existent.
  3. Adopt a firm action plan to    Implemented (see 9).                                      In 1996, the NSE became the first stock
     ensure the availability of                                                               exchange in India to provide a
     automated trading facilities                                                             nationwide, order-driven, screen-based,
     for securities of large,                                                                 anonymous trading system. All
     medium, and small                                                                        exchanges now have implemented




                                                                                                                                          Appendix 1
     enterprises across the                                                                   screen-based trading systems. As of
     country (December 1996).                                                                 1998, the BSE also provides nationwide
                                                                                              access to that exchange. In addition to
                                                                                              the trading systems of the exchanges,
                                                                                              SEBI has allowed use of the Internet for
                                                                                              submission of orders to brokers by their




                                                                                                                                          23
                                                                                              clients. To perform Internet-based
                                                                                              trading, brokers must be registered with
Policy Actions                                   Progress Report              Program Completion Report             Status of Reforms
                                                Status of Reforms                 Status of Reforms                   February 2004




                                                                                                                                                 24
                                                  October 1998                      October 1999

                                                                                                          SEBI, fulfill minimum regulatory
                                                                                                          requirements, and receive permission




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 1
                                                                                                          from the stock exchanges where they
                                                                                                          are members.
B. Modernize existing
   infrastructure to support
   market growth and expansion
   4. Appoint a technical group with   Implemented. Action completed before
      broad representation from        Board consideration (February 1993).
      users, Stock Holding
      Corporation of India Limited
      and SEBI, to examine in-depth
      all relevant issues regarding
      the NCDS in order to develop
      a firm strategy and clear
      approach to the
      implementation of the NCDS.
      (First tranche release
      condition)
   5. Complete report by               Implemented. Action completed before
      international consultants on     Board consideration (May 1993).
      the NCDS, considering the
      regulatory, structural and
      technological aspects of the
      NCDS. (First tranche release
      condition)
   6. Based on the                     Implemented.                                                       See 23 and 10.
      recommendations of the
      Technical Group for
      establishing a national
      clearance, settlement, and
      depository system (NCDS),
      determine the conceptual
      framework of the NCDS and
      prepare a phased program
      for setting up automated
      trading, clearance,
      settlement, and depository
      systems based on an
      agreed timetable aiming for
      an integrated market
Policy Actions                                              Progress Report                         Program Completion Report                              Status of Reforms
                                                           Status of Reforms                            Status of Reforms                                    February 2004
                                                             October 1998                                 October 1999

        system (December 1996).
     7. Enable through legislation             Implemented. A Presidential Ordinance,
        the establishment and                  promulgated on 21 September 1995,
        operation of national                  defines the legal basis for the establishment
        automated depository                   and operation of national automated
        systems, taking into account           depositories and provides for their
                                                          b
        issues related to, inter alia, title   regulation. Parliament passed the
        transfer and registration,             Depositories Act, 1996, which received
        recognition of ownership,              the assent of the President on 10 August
        voting rights, rights to               1996.
        dividends, the creation of
        liens, liabilities of the
        depository, and settlement
        of disputes (December 1996).
     8. Issue regulatory guidelines            Implemented. SEBI issued depositories
        for the establishment and              and participants regulations on 16 May
        operation of automated                 1996.
        depository systems
        incorporating the views of
        the main users of the
        systems (March 1997).
     9. Commence automated                     Implemented. Automated trading on a               The Wholesale Debt Market (WDM)                 Screen-based trading in government
        trading in debt securities at          screen-based system is fully operational.         commenced its operation in June                 debt instruments does exist although
        the NSE (December 1996).                                                                 1994 with 224 securities worth                  trades are made primarily through
                                                                                                 Rs1.35 trillion. Operations have                phone calls. The agreed-upon trades
                                                                                                 increased to 852 securities with                are then reported to one of two NSE
                                                                                                 outstanding value of Rs3.43 trillion            trade-reporting systems:
                                                                                                 in March 1998. The daily trading
                                                                                                 volume increased from Rs24 million              (i) NSE WDM ­WDM reporting system
                                                                                                 to Rs3.5 billion in the same period.            for government debt instruments.

                                                                                                                                                 (ii) NDS­Negotiated dealing system for




                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 1
                                                                                                                                                 corporate debt.

                                                                                                                                                 The two trade-reporting systems are
                                                                                                                                                 linked to the Clearing Corporation of




                                                                                                                                                                                          25
b
    The Asian Development Bank fielded a staff consultant at the request of the Government to review the draft bill prior to its finalization.
Policy Actions                                       Progress Report                      Program Completion Report                      Status of Reforms
                                                    Status of Reforms                         Status of Reforms                            February 2004




                                                                                                                                                                          26
                                                      October 1998                              October 1999

                                                                                                                               India Ltd. (CCIL) for settlement
                                                                                                                               purposes.




                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 1
  10.Establish an automated              Implemented. Pursuant to SEBI                  The CDSL, a depository                 Continued progress (see 2).
     clearance, settlement, and          (Depositories and Participants)                established by BSE and a few other
     depository system for securities    Regulations, 1996, SEBI, granted a             commercial banks, started              SEBI has continually expanded
     trading in one or more              certificate of registration as depository to   operating in 1999. The transaction     mandatory settlement in dematerialized
     exchanges in all major centers in   the NSDL on 7 June 1996. The NSDL              cost of India's equity markets         form. Today, more than 99% of 4.6
     the country.                        became operational from 8 November             dropped dramatically from 5% in        securities delivered against trades is
                                         1996, providing depository services for        1993 to 2.2% in 1997.                  through the depositories.
                                         equity shares. Today, NSDL has 65
                                         depository participants, providing service     As of May 1999, NSDL participants      NSDL has 214 depository participants
                                         at 400 locations around the country.           had increased to 88. These             (DPs). At the client level, 6.2 million
                                         Listed securities registered at the NSDL       participants provided services at      accounts are open and 4.6 million are
                                         number 251, of which 238 are in scripless      831 locations in 178 cities around     active. These accounts represent
                                         form. The National Securities Clearing         the country. The number of             individual investors nationwide.
                                         Corporation Ltd. (NSCCL), which handles        investors' accounts increased from
                                         the clearing and settlement functions of       11,000 in March 1998 to 435,000        CDSL has 196 DPs and more than
                                         the NSE, interfaces with the NSDL and          and 557,000 in March and May           500,000 accounts, linking members
                                         the clearing banks to provide delivery         1999, respectively. The number of      nationwide through computer terminals.
                                         versus payment settlement for trades           corporate securities available for     The CDSL system differs slightly from
                                         within the depository. The NSCCL started       dematerialization at NSDL              NSDL in that individual investors are
                                         operating in April 1996 and set up a           increased to 375.                      allowed to give instructions directly to
                                         settlement guarantee fund contributed by                                              the depository rather than going through
                                         the clearing members of the corporation.       Of 7,000 stocks, SEBI required 104     a DP.
                                                                                        securities to be traded only in a
                                         The clearing banks are attached to the         dematerialized form. This covers       The depositories are interfaced to
                                         NSCCL and electronic transfer of funds is      around 80% of market capitalization    facilitate electronic movement of
                                         made for pay-in and pay-out. The NSCCL         and 50% of the settlement volume.      positions between them. They are also
                                         has implemented a nationwide clearing          The value of dematerialized            linked to their respective clearing
                                         and settlement system since September          securities increased from Rs225        organizations to facilitate settlement
                                         1996. It also has in place an online           billion in March 1998 to Rs1,110       (see 2).
                                         monitoring and surveillance system. The        billion in March 1999. The
                                         NSCCL proposes to provide a securities         settlement volume in dematerialized
                                         lending and borrowing facility to its          form increased from around 100
                                         clearing members, and clear and settle all     million shares in May1998 to 400
                                         trades once trading in options and futures     million shares in March 1999.
                                         are introduced at the NSE. All stock
                                         exchanges have their own                       The number of monthly settlements
                                         clearinghouses. The Stock Exchange,            in NSCCL increased from 2 million
                                         Mumbai (BSE), also has set up a                trades in the second half of 1996 to
Policy Actions                                       Progress Report                       Program Completion Report                        Status of Reforms
                                                    Status of Reforms                          Status of Reforms                              February 2004
                                                      October 1998                               October 1999

                                        settlement guarantee fund and proposes to       around 3.5 million trades in the first
                                        set up its own depository.                      half of 1998. Bad deliveries are less
                                                                                        than 0.3%, compared with the
                                                                                        market standard of 10%. The
                                                                                        settlement guarantee funds of
                                                                                        NSCCL stood at Rs7.6 billion as of
                                                                                        August 1999.
  11.Commence automated trading         Implemented. The NSE is linked to 206           NSE expanded its links to 283 cities      Debt in India is not yet traded through
     in debt and equity securities in   cities throughout India, which include the      and 2,238 VSATs (terminal) as of          an exchange. Trades are still made
     all major centers in the           major centers of Ahmedabad, Chennai,            August 1999. Some local stock             through telephone calls. Agreed-upon
     country.                           Kolkata, Mumbai, and New Delhi, and 141         exchanges have set up subsidiaries        trades are reported to one of two NSE
                                        cities with no stock exchanges. The OTCEI       to link trading with NSE.                 systems that feed the clearing
                                        operates out of 42 offices outside Mumbai.                                                corporation for settlement purposes (see
                                        Following a SEBI directive requiring stock                                                9).
                                        exchanges to initiate online trading by 30
                                        June 1996, all but two stock exchanges                                                    The infrastructure of India's debt market
                                        started online trading.                                                                   has been enhanced with the development
                                                                                                                                  of The (CCIL) (see 20).
                                        In a recent directive, SEBI also granted
                                        permission to BSE to offer its online trading
                                        facility called the BSE On-Line Trading
                                        System (BOLT) to investors outside
                                        Mumbai via satellite links with other stock
                                        exchanges or with brokers where no
                                        exchanges exist. BOLT is linked to 189
                                        centers in various states of India.
  12. Move toward compliance with       Continual progress. The implementation          Continual progress. The                   Continual progress. The Indian
     the G30 recommendations on         of automated national depositories in India     implementation of national                equities market has achieved the most
     securities clearance and           and the standards enforced will determine       depositories according to G30             effective cash settlement process
     settlement.                        how close to international norms present        recommendations has progressed            possible in India under current banking
                                        systems can get and the extent and nature       since the last review. Trade              norms. Cash settlement is effected by
                                        of links possible with global financial         comparison is done after each trade       the NSCCL (NSE's clearing house) and




                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 1
                                        markets. Five of the nine recommendations       between brokers. However, it is not       BISL (BSE's clearing corporation). As
                                        of the G30 have been introduced. They           extended to other market                  prescribed by G30 and the International
                                        relate to the depository system, trade          participants. The settlement has          Organization of Securities Commission
                                        netting, use of delivery versus payment,        moved to a voluntary T+5 rolling          (IOSCO), this includes the final transfer
                                        securities lending, and adoption of             settlement or weekly netting              of securities only upon receipt of the
                                        International Organization for                  settlement, and 10 dematerialized         related cash payments, cash payments




                                                                                                                                                                              27
                                        Standardization (ISO) standards 7775 and        securities will follow a compulsory T+5   in "same day funds, and finality of
                                        6166. Compliance with the remaining             rolling settlement in December 1999.      payment. Risk management practices are
Policy Actions                Progress Report                        Program Completion Report                      Status of Reforms
                             Status of Reforms                           Status of Reforms                            February 2004




                                                                                                                                                       28
                               October 1998                                October 1999

                 conditions will depend on how soon all            The same day funds payment            used by the exchanges, depositories, and
                 securities are in scripless form and how son      system and T+3 rolling settlement     clearing entities to offset any remaining




                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 1
                 facilities for electronic transfer of funds are   system are not in place yet. The      risks (including guarantee funds). Market
                 in place.                                         former depends on RBI initiatives.    participants and their regulator want DVP
                                                                                                         to be perfected through the exchange of
                                                                   Remarks: Many countries in Asia       cash and securities at precisely the same
                                                                   still do not comply with G30          moment. Part of the objective is to use the
                                                                   recommendations, especially on        RBI to effect money transfers for trade
                                                                   same day funds and the T+3 rolling    settlement.
                                                                   settlement. However, better and
                                                                   cheaper information technology will   Liquidity to support cash settlement has
                                                                   induce countries in the region to     been enhanced through NSDL's pledge
                                                                   shorten the period of payment and     loan program. Depository participants
                                                                   settlement.                           pledge securities to lending banks through
                                                                                                         the depository. Only the lending bank can
                                                                                                         release the securities back to the borrower
                                                                                                         once the loan is paid. Mark-to-market
                                                                                                         (market price) on pledged securities is
                                                                                                         performed by the lender.

                                                                                                         India has moved to a T+2 rolling settlement
                                                                                                         cycle for all securities eligible for
                                                                                                         dematerialization through the depositories.
                                                                                                         (Virtually, 100% of deliveries are now in
                                                                                                         dematerialized form.) Banking constraints
                                                                                                         are currently being overcome through the
                                                                                                         collection of funds by brokers from their
                                                                                                         clients prior to the entry of trade orders
                                                                                                         (generally, T-2). Improved banking
                                                                                                         systems are needed before India can
                                                                                                         move to T+1.

                                                                                                         In addition to the original G30
                                                                                                         recommendations, India also has
                                                                                                         implemented most of the recommendations
                                                                                                         under International Securities Services
                                                                                                         Association 2000 and Bank for
                                                                                                         International Settlements (BIS)-IOSCO.
                                                                                                         They continue to work on areas of
                                                                                                         governance, messaging standards, and
                                                                                                         risk management.
Policy Actions                                         Progress Report                       Program Completion Report                       Status of Reforms
                                                      Status of Reforms                          Status of Reforms                             February 2004
                                                        October 1998                               October 1999


C. Eliminate constraints that
   inhibit market growth, improve
   market access, and strengthen
   the role of financial
   intermediaries in the capital
   market
   13.SEBI to commence approval           Implemented. Action completed before
      of registration of foreign          Board consideration (December 1992).
      institutional investors (FIIs) to
      invest in all securities traded
      in the capital market based on
      guidelines issued by the
      Government. (First tranche
      release condition)
   14.Government to create a              Implemented. Action completed before
      committee (the Malhotra             Board consideration. (July 1993)
      Committee) to examine the
      workings of the insurance
      sector and scope of reforms.
   15.Review Malhotra Committee           Implemented.
      recommendations regarding
      the reduction in directed
      investments of insurance
      companies (June 1994)
   16.Reduce directed investments         Substantially implemented. The                  Although investment restrictions         The status of reforms has not changed
      of insurance companies from         proportion of investible funds of the GIC       have been relaxed, LIC has not           substantially since 1998. The limits on
      70% for General Insurance           and its subsidiaries devoted to directed        effectively reduced the portion of       the amount of investment in
      Corporation (GIC) and 75%           investments has been reduced from 70% to        directed investment to total assets      Government securities remain at 50% of
      for Life Insurance                  45%. GIC and its subsidiaries are now           due to two main factors: (i) the lack    funds. Only 5% of these bonds can be
      Corporation (LIC) based on          allowed to invest 55% of funds in the open      of capability and financial skills to    traded; the rest are kept as permanent
      the review of the Malhotra          market. The Malhotra Committee                  invest in private sector projects, and   portfolio. The insurance companies are




                                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 1
      Committee recommendations           recommended a target level of aggregate         (ii) slow progress in developing         allowed to invest up to 25% in
      (December 1996).                    directed investments out of total investments   infrastructure projects resulting from   infrastructure projects. LIC has been
                                          of 35%. The Government has enlarged the         the economic slowdown.                   able to invest about 10% of its portfolio
                                          scope of investments under the socially                                                  in these projects due to the limited
                                          oriented sector to include private sector       Parliament passed the IRDA bill on       number of viable projects coming to
                                          infrastructure projects. Thus, in the case of   7 December 1999. The bill seeks to       market. The Government retains the




                                                                                                                                                                               29
                                          LIC, directed investments have been             provide statutory status to IRDA         ownership and management of most of
                                          reduced from 75% to 50% of its annual           and to privatize the sector by           the infrastructure in the country. Small
Policy Actions                                  Progress Report                         Program Completion Report                      Status of Reforms
                                               Status of Reforms                            Status of Reforms                            February 2004




                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                 October 1998                                 October 1999
                                   investible funds, and 25% of the annual            amending the exclusive privilege      public offerings in state-owned
                                   increase in funds has to be invested in the        granted to GIC and LIC, and to        enterprises started last year and are




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
                                   infrastructure sector either in public or          allow the establishment of domestic   planned for this year. LIC will take
                                   private sector companies. The scope of             private insurance companies and       stakes in these offerings as they
                                   infrastructure projects also has been              foreign participation of up to 26%.   become available. LIC also keeps about
                                   widened to include projects in ports, roads                                              10% of its funds in equity distributed
                                   and highways, railways, and airports.                                                    among approximately 300 top stocks
                                   Additionally, LIC will be allowed to form joint                                          listed on the exchanges. Lack of
                                   ventures for managing pension funds that                                                 investment partners and viable
                                   could be invested in the capital market. On                                              infrastructure projects coming to market
                                   insurance reforms, the Malhotra Committee                                                constrain the efficient use of institutional
                                   has recommended that the level of directed                                               funds.
                                   investments of LIC be reduced to no more
                                   than 50% of total investments.

                                   Beyond the liberalization of investments,
                                   the Government announced its policy of
                                   opening up the insurance industry to private
                                   sector and foreign participation to promote
                                   competition. Accordingly, the Government
                                   established a new regulatory authority for
                                   the insurance industry, which was approved
                                   by the Cabinet in September 1995, in
                                   preparation for the liberalization of entry into
                                   the domestic insurance business. The new
                                   Insurance Regulatory Development
                                   Authority (IRDA) is to be given statutory
                                   powers. The IRDA bill was introduced in
                                   Parliament in December 1996, but was not
                                   passed in August 1997. The IRDA bill, with
                                   modifications, will be reintroduced by the
                                   Government in the coming winter session of
                                   Parliament.
  17.Government to review          Implemented. Provident and pension funds                                                 The Asian Development Bank (ADB)
     restrictions on provident     were covered in the Malhotra Committee                                                   provided TA 3367-IND: Reform of the
     and pension funds to invest   Report.                                                                                  Private Pension and Provident Funds
     other than in bank deposits                                                                                            System Reform and the Employees'
     and government securities                                                                                              Provident Fund for $1 million, approved
     (December 1996).                                                                                                       on 26 December 1999 to examine
                                                                                                                            issues related to the Employees
                                                                                                                            Provident Fund Organization (EPFO)
Policy Actions                                Progress Report                    Program Completion Report                       Status of Reforms
                                             Status of Reforms                       Status of Reforms                             February 2004
                                               October 1998                            October 1999

                                                                                                                       and the development of private pension
                                                                                                                       funds, including investment guidelines.
                                                                                                                       This TA is part of a technical assistance
                                                                                                                       performance audit report (TPAR)
                                                                                                                       focused on the pension sector
                                                                                                                       (www.adb.org/evaluations). The TA to
                                                                                                                       India was viewed as partly successful.
                                                                                                                       Overall, the TA was relevant, but it was
                                                                                                                       implemented too early for India. Had the
                                                                                                                       TA been implemented even a year later,
                                                                                                                       its impact would likely have been more
                                                                                                                       substantial.
 18. Based on the review of       Partly Implemented. Based on the             Although the provident funds were       The guidelines that govern the asset
     investment restrictions on   review of investment restrictions on         allowed to invest in private sector     allocation of the EPFO have evolved
     provident and pension        provident and pension funds, the             bonds, the risk-averse investment       over time. Currently, the guidelines
     funds, Government to adopt   Controller of Insurance issued               committee declined to invest in         require that almost all the EPFO assets
     a more liberal policy for    instructions that the Controlled Fund of     such securities. Discussions have       be invested in government bonds
     allowing investments to be   the LIC will exclude non-linked pension      been held with the Government and       (central or state government bonds, or
     made out of provident and    business comprising group super-             the EPFO on technical assistance        public sector firms). A maximum of 10%
     pension funds (December      annuation and group and individual           for the reform of the private pension   of the assets can be invested in
     1996).                       annuities. Up to 60% of these funds may      and provident funds system and the      corporate bonds, although actual
                                  be invested in approved investments          modernization of EPFO.                  investments in this asset class are
                                  other than central government and state                                              negligible. Therefore, more than 90% of
                                  securities. For FY1997, these funds                                                  the funds of the EPFO are invested in
                                  totaled RS 59.09 billion. Funds of group                                             government securities. Only a small
                                  schemes other than group super-                                                      fraction of these funds are available for
                                  annuations (lump-sum benefit and death                                               the private sector in the country.
                                  benefit schemes) totaled Rs52 billion.                                               Historically, the government has set
                                  The management of investible funds of                                                returns paid on EPFO funds annually.
                                  the EPFO, which is the largest fund, was
                                  also entrusted to the State Bank of India                                            The rate of return paid on government
                                  by the central bank, RBI. The investment                                             bonds over the past decade has been




                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 1
                                  pattern for EPFO has been relaxed                                                    about 12% This rate was largely
                                  slightly, The most recent guidelines                                                 independent of market rates. Since the
                                  issued in March 1997 allow for 25% of                                                provident funds finance a significant
                                  provident funds investments to be made                                               portion of the Government's budget
                                  in government securities, 15% in central                                             deficits such an administratively
                                  government and state government                                                      determined rate was a convenient way




                                                                                                                                                                   31
                                  securities, 40% in the bonds of public                                               for the government to obtain low-cost
                                  sector units and public sector financial                                             financing in an environment of high
                                  institutions, and the balance of 20% to be                                           market interest rates. Since July 2000
Policy Actions                                     Progress Report                  Program Completion Report              Status of Reforms
                                                  Status of Reforms                     Status of Reforms                    February 2004




                                                                                                                                                               32
                                                    October 1998                          October 1999

                                       deployed freely in any of the above three                                the government has been lowering the
                                       categories. In the Union Budget for                                      interest payable to EPFO contributions,




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 1
                                       FY1999, provident funds have been                                        and the rates now are around 9.5%.
                                       allowed to invest up to 10% of their                                     Recent moves to lower this further have
                                       incremental accretions in private sector                                 met with political opposition. However,
                                       bonds and securities as part of the 20%                                  the real issue is that the rates have little
                                       balance. requested ADB assistance in                                     to do with the prevailing market rates of
                                       reforming the EPFO system and for                                        return on funds. If the universe of asset
                                       capacity building, particularly in the                                   classes is expanded to include domestic
                                       Malhotra Committee recommended                                           equities, the cost in terms of lost
                                       allowing investments of these provident                                  revenue is quite high. The equity market
                                       and pension funds of up to 60% of their                                  index shows returns of around 18­20%
                                       investible funds in other than government,                               for a period of more than 2 decades.
                                       state government, and government-                                        This implies an equity premium of
                                       guaranteed securities. The EPFO has                                      around 10% (assuming a real rate of
                                       undertaking investments and overseeing                                   return of around 10% for the same
                                       the functions of fund managers.                                          period). Even if a small amount of funds
                                                                                                                were invested in equity funds,
                                                                                                                contributors would have gained
                                                                                                                significantly.



 19. Adopt accreditation guidelines    Implemented. Action completed before
     for market makers in equity       Board consideration. (July 1993)
     securities and provide
     adequate access to bank
     credit and financing by fixing
     appropriate margin
     requirements. (December
     1996). (First tranche release
     condition)
 20. Begin trading operations in       Implemented. Action completed before                                     An exchange-based trading system for
     debt securities in at least one   Board consideration. (May 1993)                                          debt does not exist yet. Trades are
     exchange with a view to                                                                                    typically negotiated via phone call.
     developing a sound and active                                                                              When agreement is met, trades are
     market in debt securities.                                                                                 reported to one of two systems at NSE
     (First tranche release                                                                                     (NSEWDM for governments; Reserve
     condition)                                                                                                 Bank of India's Negotiated Dealing
                                                                                                                System [NDS] for corporate debt) (see
                                                                                                                9).
Policy Actions                                   Progress Report                       Program Completion Report                        Status of Reforms
                                                Status of Reforms                          Status of Reforms                              February 2004
                                                  October 1998                               October 1999
                                                                                                                              CCIL has been established to address
                                                                                                                              the need for an integrated clearing and
                                                                                                                              settlement system for government debt
                                                                                                                              and foreign exchange transactions.

                                                                                                                              CCIL clears and settles trades of its
                                                                                                                              members transacted on NDS and
                                                                                                                              NSEWDM. The settlement of these
                                                                                                                              trades is guaranteed by CCIL through
                                                                                                                              novation, whereby CCIL becomes
                                                                                                                              central counter party for each trade.

                                                                                                                              CCIL also clears and settles inter-bank
                                                                                                                              foreign exchange trades in India. CCIL
                                                                                                                              guarantees settlement of trades of its
                                                                                                                              members concluded in the debt and
                                                                                                                              foreign exchange market. Foreign
                                                                                                                              exchange trades carried out by the
                                                                                                                              dealers on their respective trading
                                                                                                                              systems are reported to CCIL for
                                                                                                                              settlement.
 21. Establish prudential           Implemented. The use of repos for               Satellite dealers have been               The use of repos will remain limited until
     guidelines for resumption of   government securities was resumed for           permitted to enter the repo market        the payment system moves to electronic
     the use of repurchase          banks and accredited primary dealers            since March 1998. Since July 1999,        funds transfer.
     agreements (repos) for         following RBI's strengthening of the            the Government has permitted 35
     ready forward deals in order   subsidiary general ledger (SGL) system to       nonbank entities to undertake repos
     to enhance liquidity in the    track transactions more effectively.            in treasury bills of all maturities and
     secondary market for public                                                    approved dated securities.
     undertaking bonds and
     government securities
     (December 1996).
 22. Establish prudential           Implemented. RBI further relaxed its            A subgroup of the Technical
     guidelines for extending the   monetary policy, announced in October           Advisory Committee on the




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
     use of repos to cover          1997, to permit repo deals in public sector     Government Securities Market
     private debt securities        undertaking bonds and private corporate         submitted a report on repos in April
     (December 1996).               debt securities, provided these securities      1999. The Group proposed several
                                    are in scripless form and transactions are      changes to the repo market
                                    completed in recognized stock exchanges.        including (i) introduction of




                                                                                                                                                                           33
                                    These repos initially are to be permitted for   exchange-traded and over-the-
                                    those entities undertaking repos in             counter repos, (ii) allowing rollover
                                    government securities.                          of repos, and (iii) expansion
Policy Actions                                Progress Report                      Program Completion Report                        Status of Reforms
                                             Status of Reforms                         Status of Reforms                              February 2004




                                                                                                                                                                       34
                                               October 1998                              October 1999

                                 However, implementation remained difficult      of the repos market in users and
                                 because of the stamp duty attached to the       instruments.




                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 1
                                 transfers of debt securities.
                                                                                 Under the Union Budget for 1999­
                                 This issue had been examined closely, and       2000, the Government abolished
                                 the Solicitor General of India and the          the stamp duty on transfer of debt
                                 Ministry of Justice had rendered their          instruments within the depository
                                 opinion that under the Depositories Act,        mode.
                                 1996, such stamp duty does not apply to
                                 transfers made within the depository.
 23. Adopt accreditation         Implemented. RBI issued the Guidelines          The number of primary dealers has
     guidelines for market       for Primary Dealers in Government               increased from the original 6 to 14,
     makers in debt securities   Securities on 29 March 1995, and                while the number of satellite dealers
     (December 1996)             accredited six primary dealers in               is 9.
                                 government securities: Discount and
                                 Finance House of India, Ltd., Securities
                                 Trading Corporation of India Ltd., SBI Gilts
                                 Ltd., PNB Gilts Ltd., Gilt Securities Trading
                                 Corporation Ltd., and ICICI Securities and
                                 Finance Company Ltd. The first two
                                 became operational on 3 January 1996 and
                                 the four others on 1 June 1996. RBI also
                                 decided to create a second tier of "satellite
                                 dealers" that can provide support to primary
                                 dealers as well as diversify and expand the
                                 investor base. RBI has granted permission
                                 to nine firms to serve as satellite dealers.
 24. Discontinue the badla       Implemented. A SEBI directive to this                                                   Effective 1 July 2001, badla has been
     system (December 1996)      effect was issued on 13 December 1993. A                                                banned in the Indian markets. This ban
                                 revised carry forward system with safety                                                resulted from the potential risk through
                                 features became operational in January                                                  possible abuse of the badla system. The
                                 1996. This was modified in October 1997.                                                settlement of trades could be extended
                                                                                                                         indefinitely, delaying delivery to the
                                 On 6 February 1997, the Securities Lending                                              individual investor. Settlement failures
                                 Scheme, 1996, as approved by SEBI,                                                      were possible. After the ban, brokers
                                 became operational. The scheme provides                                                 complained about liquidity problems.
                                 for lending of securities by an approved                                                However, most have adjusted. Activity in
                                 intermediary to a borrower under an                                                     securities lending in India is relatively
                                 agreement for a specified period, with the                                              low. FIIs are permitted to loan securities,
                                 condition that the borrower would return the                                            but cannot borrow. NSDL has
                                 equivalent securities of the same class or                                              developed a stock lending model.
Policy Actions                                  Progress Report                       Program Completion Report                     Status of Reforms
                                               Status of Reforms                          Status of Reforms                           February 2004
                                                 October 1998                               October 1999

                                   type at the end of the specified period along                                         However, it is not used. All lending is
                                   with the corporate benefits on the securities                                         done over the counter. Lending against
                                   borrowed.                                                                             securities faces another fundamental
                                                                                                                         limitation because the RBI prohibits
                                                                                                                         banks from having more than 5%
                                                                                                                         exposure to securities in their portfolio.
                                                                                                                         This includes exposure to either equity
                                                                                                                         or debt.
 25. SEBI to complete a review     Implemented. SEBI organized an
     of issues on developing a     international seminar on options and futures
     market in options and         to consider the key issues in the operation
     futures in order a strategy   of a derivatives market.
     for operation of such a
     market (December 1996).
 26. Lift the restrictions and     Implemented. The prohibition on options          The SCR (Amendment) bill was         Derivatives trading has become one of
     establish a regulatory        was lifted on 25 January 1995. However,          passed by the Parliament on 1        the most active areas in the market,
     framework to enable a         a provision in an old Indian law, the            December 1999. This will allow the   approaching Rs3 trillion in December
     trading system in options     Indian Contracts Act, which prohibits            trading of derivatives to start.     2003.
     and futures to operate        wagers (and options have been
     (December 1996).              considered a form of wager) had
                                   prevented the introduction of options and
                                   futures. This provision has since been
                                   clarified. On 17 March 1998, the Gupta
                                   Committee finalized its study and
                                   submitted its report on the introduction
                                   of derivative products in India and on a
                                   regulatory framework for options and
                                   futures. On 4 July 1998, the Government
                                   introduced a bill in Parliament seeking to
                                   amend the Securities Contracts
                                   (Regulation) Act, 1956. The bill will redefine
                                   securities to include all types of derivative




                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 1
                                   instruments and derivatives trading will be
                                   formally introduced. As far back as
                                   December 1996, the NSE filed with SEBI
                                   an application to introduce futures contracts
                                   based on its NSE-50 index.




                                                                                                                                                                      35
Policy Actions                                    Progress Report                    Program Completion Report   Status of Reforms
                                                 Status of Reforms                       Status of Reforms         February 2004




                                                                                                                                     36
                                                   October 1998                            October 1999

 27. Permit market-driven and        Implemented. The SEBI (Merchant
     risk -related lead              Bankers) Rules and Regulations, 1992




                                                                                                                                     Appendix 1
     management and                  does not include a fixed lead management
     underwriting fees to be         fee. However, Section 76 of the Companies
     charged (June 1996).            Act, 1956 does establish a fixed ceiling on
                                     the underwriting commission. SEBI has
                                     removed the requirement for the mandatory
                                     underwriting of issues, and the modified
                                     Companies Bill, 1997 was introduced in
                                     Parliament.

 28. Define the responsibilities     Implemented. The total underwriting
     of lead managers and            obligations of an underwriter will not exceed
     underwriters of securities      20 times its net worth. The minimum capital
     with respect to the extent of   requirement for a lead manager to an issue
     permissible commitment          is currently Rs50 million.
     relative to a minimum
     capital base (December
     1996).
 29. Allow pricing for public        Implemented. To reduce the risk to
     offerings to be fixed at a      underwriters, SEBI permitted the use of a
     date closer to the actual       price band of 20% instead of a single fixed
     offering period by the lead     price in the document to be submitted to it
     manager(s) to reduce the        for vetting. The actual price is to be set
     price risk and ensure such      only at the time of filing of the offer
     price is relayed to all         document with the Registrar of Companies
     distribution channels and       and/or stock exchange, which should be
     ultimately to investors,        within the indicated price band. Filing is
     allowing for at least the       normally 21 days before the opening of
     normal stipulated time          the public issue. An option to use so-
     within which investors may      called bought-out deals has also allowed
     reasonably respond              issues to be priced close to the issue
     (December 1996).                date. Under a bought-out deal, an issuer
                                     arranges with a lead manager, who
                                     organizes an underwriting syndicate, to
                                     buy a large portion of the issue or the
                                     entire issue outright. The underwriters
                                     would proceed to sell the issue to other
                                     investors at prices that will clear the
                                     market. With automated trading, pricing of
                                     an issue can be moved even closer to the
                                     offering date to reduce, if not eliminate,
Policy Actions                                        Progress Report                    Program Completion Report             Status of Reforms
                                                     Status of Reforms                       Status of Reforms                   February 2004
                                                       October 1998                            October 1999

                                          the price risk to the underwriters. SEBI
                                          also has allowed the book-building
                                          method for public issues, which enables
                                          issuers to fix a price based on a survey of
                                          investors. Today, however, listing on a
                                          stock exchange has been made
                                          mandatory for public issues. A price risk
                                          thus arises between the time subscription
                                          is made and the time an investor is able
                                          to sell the subscribed issue, which is
                                          during allotment of the issue and listing
                                          with the stock exchange. SEBI has been
                                          able to reduce the time period from about
                                          70­85 days to 30­35 days, and further
                                          improvements are contemplated. In
                                          addition, with the introduction of hedging
                                          instruments, investors will be in a position
                                          to cover their risk exposures.
  30. Allow allocation of shares in       Implemented. Action completed before
      the case of oversubscription to     Board consideration. (October 1993)
      be made on a pro-rata basis
      to avoid multiplicity of
      applications. (First tranche
      release condition)
  31. Increase minimum application        Implemented. Action completed before
      size for equity issues offered to   Board consideration. (October 1993)
      investors. (First tranche release
      condition)
  32. Streamline the public issue         Implemented. Action completed before
      process by reducing the             Board consideration. (October 1993)
      number of nationwide centers
      where issues must be offered.




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 1
      (First tranche release
      condition)
D. Enhance competition and level
   the playing field
  33. Allow expanded membership           Implemented. Action completed before                                       Progress has been limited in this area.
      through clear qualification         Board consideration. (October 1993)                                        NSE and BSE have broker member




                                                                                                                                                               37
      criteria. (First tranche release                                                                               requirements. These include some
      condition)                                                                                                     training and testing of applicants.
Policy Actions                                    Progress Report                Program Completion Report              Status of Reforms
                                                 Status of Reforms                   Status of Reforms                    February 2004




                                                                                                                                                            38
                                                   October 1998                        October 1999

                                                                                                             Primarily, these are at the operational
                                                                                                             level to ensure that members and staff




                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 1
                                                                                                             know how to use the exchange systems.

                                                                                                             SEBI recently outsourced to NSDL the
                                                                                                             design, development, implementation,
                                                                                                             and management of a registration
                                                                                                             database of market participants. The
                                                                                                             database will be owned and accessed
                                                                                                             only by SEBI, and is expected to
                                                                                                             ultimately contain information down to
                                                                                                             the individual investor level. This does
                                                                                                             not address, however, the need for
                                                                                                             proper certification and licensing of
                                                                                                             intermediaries by the regulator. Testing
                                                                                                             related to certification ensures that
                                                                                                             intermediaries have a minimum
                                                                                                             standard of knowledge about products
                                                                                                             they are selling, related regulations, and
                                                                                                             markets. Licensing is tied to testing
                                                                                                             levels. With testing and certification,
                                                                                                             intermediaries become more professional
                                                                                                             and are better able to assist customers in
                                                                                                             selecting appropriate investments.
                                                                                                             Individual investors have a higher level of
                                                                                                             trust with proper testing, certification and
                                                                                                             licensing. For the protection of individual
                                                                                                             investors, such a program is needed in
                                                                                                             India to fully identify and subject all
                                                                                                             intermediaries to the regulatory system,
                                                                                                             including ultimate oversight by SEBI.
 34. Remove legal impediments to      Implemented. Impediments have been
     permit 51% foreign               removed. Eleven stock brokerage firms
     ownership of corporate           and 17 asset management companies
     stock brokerage firms by         with substantial foreign stakes now
     reputable foreign institutions   operate in India. Meanwhile, 22 foreign
     upon SEBI registration so that   brokers registered with SEBI are allowed
     these firms can acquire          to service investments made in India by
     membership in the stock          foreign institutional investors (FIIs).
     exchanges (December 1996).
Policy Actions                                       Progress Report                     Program Completion Report                      Status of Reforms
                                                    Status of Reforms                        Status of Reforms                            February 2004
                                                      October 1998                             October 1999

 35. With regard to NSE, ensure          Implemented. Action completed before
     that future ownership is            Board consideration (October 1993).
     independently determined and
     that management remains
     autonomous. (First tranche
     release condition)
 36. Approve the operation of            Implemented. Action completed before
     private sector mutual funds.        Board consideration (February 1993).
     (First tranche release condition)
 37. Subject to regulation by SEBI       Implemented. UTI has been brought under      SEBI supervises 84 UTI schemes,        In 2001, UTI funds came under scrutiny
     the closed-end mutual fund          the regulatory ambit of SEBI. Accordingly,   but 20 schemes still are not covered   when problems arose with one of the
     operations of the Unit Trust of     new schemes of UTI were required to be       by SEBI: 10 will be transferred to     funds, US-64. The price at which it was
     India (UTI) as they related to      submitted to SEBI for approval. Since UTI    SEBI in November 1999, 4 will be       being traded far exceeded the value. It
     closed-end schemes and              has evolved as a distinct and hybrid         closed, and 5 will be reviewed and     became apparent that the fund did not
     opened-end schemes                  financial institution, it received certain   transferred by July 2000.              have enough money to cover
     regulation. (December 1996)         special dispensations under the UTI Act                                             guaranteed dividends. Subsequent
                                         in keeping with its special character.       UTI's share of cumulative assets of    actions by the government led to the
                                         Certain operations have, therefore,          mutual funds decreased from 86%        repeal of the UTI Act in 2002, and the
                                         remained within the scope of the UTI Act.    to 78%, while other public sector      bifurcation of the UTI funds. UTI-I
                                         SEBI has vetted around 20 UTI schemes.       and private sector mutual funds        comprises those UTI funds that are
                                         UTI has been subjected to SEBI               asset increased their share from       guaranteed by the government. UTI-II
                                         examination for the first time under the     10% and 4% to 12 and 10%,              (as deemed by the market) includes
                                         provisions of Regulation 60(1) of the SEBI   respectively.                          those funds that have been transferred
                                         (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1993, in a                                              to a new company. As such, the new
                                         directive issued 7 June 1995.                According to the Union Budget for      company is under the regulatory
                                                                                      1999­2000, the tax on UTI schemes      authority of SEBI. Previously,
                                                                                      and that on other mutual funds were    compliance with SEBI regulations and
                                                                                      equalized. The US-64 Scheme and        oversight was voluntary for these UTI
                                                                                      all open-ended equity schemes of       funds.
                                                                                      UTI and other mutual funds were
                                                                                      exempted from dividend tax for 3       The Union Budget 2003­2004 provides
                                                                                      years. Income from holding UTI and     that, under the restructuring of the




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
                                                                                      other mutual funds also was            funds, UTI-I will be exempt from the
                                                                                      exempted from income tax.              dividend distribution tax. However, as a
                                                                                                                             company, the UTI-II funds will be
                                                                                                                             subject to the standard 12.5%
                                                                                                                             distribution tax. Dividends are tax free to
                                                                                                                             the shareholders.




                                                                                                                                                                           39
 38. Introduce in a phased manner        Implemented. Action completed before
     parity in the dividend tax          Board consideration. (May 1993)
Policy Actions                                      Progress Report                       Program Completion Report             Status of Reforms
                                                   Status of Reforms                          Status of Reforms                   February 2004




                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                     October 1998                               October 1999

      between UTI and other mutual
      funds. (First tranche release




                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 1
      condition)
E. Strengthen market regulation
   and supervision
  39. Transfer through legislation     Implemented. SEBI was given the power to         See below.                    See 40.
      regulatory and supervisory       regulate issuers or companies with respect
      powers more fully to SEBI        to the issuance and transfer of securities, to
      (December 1996).                 exact compliance with respect to the
                                       conditions of the listing agreement by a
                                       company with any stock exchange; and to
                                       register and regulate depositories, securities
                                       custodians, FIIs, and credit rating agencies,
                                       including venture capital funds. SEBI was
                                       also empowered to levy monetary penalties
                                       for various forms of offenses, to issue
                                       summonses, to subpoena any person, and
                                       to call for submission of documents relating
                                       to an inquiry. Securities Appellate Tribunals
                                       were created by the Central Government to
                                       expedite the resolution of cases involving
                                       securities. A Presidential Ordinance to this
                                       effect was issued.
 40. By notification in the Official   Substantially implemented. Except for the                                      While certain powers have been
     Gazette, delegate to SEBI,        powers vested in the Central Government                                        delegated to SEBI over the years, the
     more fully, powers of             under Sections 118(2), and 133(2) of the                                       securities regulator continues to be
     regulation and enforcement        Companies Act, 1956, all powers vested in                                      inhibited through lack of authority in a
     relating to the capital           the Central Government contemplated to                                         number of areas. This was significantly
     market currently contained        be delegated to SEBI under the Program of                                      improved in October, 2002 when SEBI
     in (i) the Securities             policy actions and reforms under the                                           was given additional powers, such as
     Contracts (Regulation) Act,       Capital Market Development Program Loan                                        the authority to issue cease and desist
     1956, and (ii) the Companies      (CMDPL) have been delegated. Powers                                            orders, significantly increase fines and
     Act, 1956 (December 1996).        that have yet to be delegated relate to (i)                                    penalties, and obtain evidentiary
                                       failure by a company to furnish a copy of                                      documents from third parties (helpful
                                       the trust deed within the time specified for a                                 with banks). The amendment also
                                       debenture issue, and (ii) willful omission by                                  specifically prohibits market
                                       a company of the endorsement of the                                            manipulation and insider trading,
                                       certificate of registration of any debenture                                   allowing SEBI to regulate and take
                                       issue where payment is secured by the                                          appropriate actions (see 41 and 42).
                                       charge registered. However, Sections
                                       118(2) and 133(2) were incorporated in the
Policy Actions                                      Progress Report                        Program Completion Report                   Status of Reforms
                                                   Status of Reforms                           Status of Reforms                         February 2004
                                                     October 1998                                October 1999

                                       Companies Bill, 1997, which had already
                                       been introduced in Parliament. Under the
                                       proposed Companies Bill, 1997, SEBI is to
                                       be entrusted with the administration and
                                       supervision (including powers to prosecute)
                                       of matters relating to the issue of securities
                                       and listing of public companies to avoid
                                       overlapping of functions. Clause 47 of the
                                       proposed Companies Bill provides that the
                                       provision of Part IV of the Companies Bill
                                       relating to prospectus, allotment, listing, and
                                       other matters concerning the issue of
                                       securities of listed public companies and
                                       companies proposed to be listed be
                                       administered by SEBI.
 41. Rationalize all pertinent laws,   Partly implemented. SEBI formed a                 The unified SEBI and SCR bill is   SEBI still shares regulatory authority with
     rules, and regulations in a       committee in February 1997 chaired by             expected to be introduced to the   the RBI and Department of Company
     manner consistent with SEBI's     former Justice D.R. Dhanuka to review the         Parliament.                        Affairs. This continues to create
     designation as the principal      Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;                                         confusion periodically in the marketplace,
     regulator of the capital market   the SEBI Act, 1992; and Depositories Act,                                            where regulations and/or directives are
                                       1996, to enable SEBI to more fully regulate                                          not consistent among regulators.
                                       and develop the securities market. The
                                       Dhanuka Committee also examined the                                                  While laws, rules, and regulations may still
                                       provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, to                                            need to be rationalized, SEBI has had far-
                                       enable SEBI to improve market regulations                                            reaching powers as a regulator, further
                                       concerning, in particular, the issue of                                              enhanced by the recent amendments to
                                       capital, listing of securities, transfer of                                          the SEBI Act (see 40). However, in some
                                       securities, and investor protection. The                                             cases, SEBI has not effectively applied
                                       Dhanuka Committee recommended that                                                   those powers. A Joint Parliamentary
                                       the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,                                           Committee (JPC) investigation that
                                       1956, and SEBI Act, 1992, be consolidated                                            resulted from the identification of severe
                                       into a composite securities legislation,                                             market irregularities recently highlighted




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
                                       making SEBI the sole regulatory agency as                                            weaknesses in regulation and oversight at
                                       envisaged under the CMDPL. The report is                                             SEBI. These weaknesses are directly
                                       being reviewed by the Ministry of Finance                                            related to SEBI's position on SRO
                                       (MOF) before seeking the approval of                                                 responsibilities.
                                       Parliament.
 42. Make rules and regulations        Implemented. Action completed before                                                 The amendment to the SEBI Act in




                                                                                                                                                                           41
     under the SEBI Act covering       Board consideration. (November 1992­                                                 October 2002 (see 40) strengthens
     insider trading, merchant         October 1993)                                                                        SEBI's powers through the addition of a
Policy Actions                                      Progress Report                      Program Completion Report                        Status of Reforms
                                                   Status of Reforms                         Status of Reforms                              February 2004




                                                                                                                                                                           42
                                                     October 1998                              October 1999

     bankers, portfolio manager,                                                                                               new section titled "Prohibition of




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
     mutual funds, appeals against                                                                                             Manipulative and Deceptive Devices,
     SEBI rulings, registrars to the                                                                                           Insider Trading and Substantial
     issues and securities transfer                                                                                            Acquisition of Securities or Control."
     agents, and underwriters.                                                                                                 This section of the amendments defines
     (First tranche release                                                                                                    market manipulation and insider trading,
     condition)                                                                                                                increases penalties to be levied by
                                                                                                                               SEBI, strengthens the Securities
                                                                                                                               Appellate Tribunal (SAT) that hears
                                                                                                                               such cases, and provides for appeals.
 43. Make rules and/or                  Implemented. Pertinent regulations have
     regulations under the SEBI         been issued.
     Act covering corporate
     takeovers; bankers to an
     issue, and debenture
     trustees (December 1996)
 44. Establish high-level inter-        Implemented. Action completed before                                                   The High Level Committee for Capital
     agency committee composed          Board consideration. (October 1993)                                                    Market Development (HLCC), formed
     of representatives from MOF,                                                                                              following the JPC (A ppendix 5), was an
     RBI, and SEBI to coordinate                                                                                               attempt to coordinate regulation over the
     policy at the Government                                                                                                  entire capital market environment.
     level. (First tranche release
     condition)                                                                                                                The committee members are the
                                                                                                                               governor of the RBI, the chairman of
                                                                                                                               SEBI, the chairman of IRDA and the
                                                                                                                               finance secretary from MOF. The joint
                                                                                                                               secretary in charge of capital markets at
                                                                                                                               MOF is the member secretary of the
                                                                                                                               HLCC.



 Sources: ADB. 1999. Program Completion Report on the Capital Market Development Program Loan to India. Manila; and Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                  Appendix 2    43


                     RECOMMENDATIONS OF GROUP OF THIRTY--
                   SECURITIES CLEARANCE AND SETTLEMENT STUDY

Recommendation 1: Trade Comparison on T+1
"By 1990, all comparisons of trades between direct market participants (i.e., brokers,
broker/dealers and other exchange members) should be accomplished by trade date plus 1."

Recommendation 2: Trade Comparison for Indirect Participants
"Indirect market participants (such as institutional investors, or any trading counterparties which
are not broker/dealers) should, by 1992, be members of a trade comparison system which
achieves positive affirmation of trade details."

Recommendation 3: Central Depository
"Each country should have an effective and fully developed central securities depository,
organized and managed to encourage the broadest possible industry participation (directly and
indirectly), in place by 1992."

Recommendation 4: Netting
"Each country should study its market volumes and participation to determine whether a trade
netting system would be beneficial in terms of reducing risk and promoting efficiency. If a netting
system would be appropriate, it should be implemented by 1992."

Recommendation 5: Delivery versus Payment
"Delivery versus payment (DvP) should be employed as the method for settling all securities
transactions. A DvP system should be in place by 1992."

Recommendation 6: Same Day Funds

"Payments associated with the settlement of securities transactions and the servicing of
securities portfolios should be made consistent across all instruments and markets by adopting
the `same day' funds convention."

Recommendation 7: T+3 Rolling Settlement
"A 'Rolling Settlement' system should be adopted by all markets. Final settlement should occur
on T+3 by 1992. As an interim target, final settlement should occur on T+5 by 1990 at the latest,
save only where it hinders the achievement of T+3 by 1992."

Recommendation 8: Securities Lending
"Securities lending and borrowing should be encouraged as a method of expediting the
settlement of securities transactions. Existing regulatory and taxation barriers that inhibit the
practice of lending securities should be removed by 1990."

Recommendation 9: Use of ISO Standards 7775 and 6166

"Each country should adopt the standard for securities messages developed by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO Standard 7775). In particular, countries should adopt the
ISIN numbering system for securities issues as defined in the ISO Standard 6166, at least for
cross border transactions. These standards should be universally applied by 1992."
44   Appendix 3


                          EXCERPTS OF THE
     SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2002

A.   Amendment of Section 11

1.   In section 11 of the principal Act,--

     (a)     Information and record(s) from any bank or any other authority or board or
             corporation established or constituted by or under any Central, State, or
             Provincial Act in respect of any transaction in securities which is under
             investigation or inquiry by the Board;"
     (b)     Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the Board may
             take measures to undertake inspection of any book, or register, or other
             document or record of any listed public company or a public company (not being
             intermediaries referred to in section 12) which intends to get its securities listed
             on any recognized stock exchange where the Board has reasonable grounds to
             believe that such company has been indulging in insider trading or fraudulent and
             unfair trade practices relating to securities market;"
     (d)     The Board may, by an order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in the
             interests of investors or securities market, take any of the following measures,
             either pending investigation or inquiry or on completion of such investigation or
             inquiry, namely:--
             (a)      suspend the trading of any security in a recognized stock exchange;
             (b)      restrain persons from accessing the securities market and prohibit any
                      person associated with securities market to buy, sell, or deal in securities;
             (c)      suspend any office-bearer of any stock exchange or self-regulatory
                      organization from holding such position;
             (d)      impound and retain the proceeds or securities in respect of any
                      transaction which is under investigation;
             (e)      attach, after passing of an order on an application made for approval by
                      the Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction, for a period not
                      exceeding one month, one or more bank account or accounts of any
                      intermediary or any person associated with the securities market in any
                      manner involved in violation of any of the provisions of this Act, or the
                      rules or the regulations made thereunder:

B.   Insertion of New Sections 11C and 11D

2.   11C.    Investigation.--

     (1)     Where the Board has reasonable ground to believe that--
             (a)   the transactions in securities are being dealt with in a manner detrimental
                   to the investors or the securities market; or
             (b)   any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market has
                   violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations
                   made or directions issued by the Board thereunder;
                   it may, at any time by order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this
                   section referred to as the Investigating Authority) specified in the order to
                   investigate the affairs of such intermediary or persons associated with the
                   securities market and to report thereon to the Board.
                                                                         Appendix 3     45


(2)   Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 235 to 241 of the Companies Act,
      1956 (1 of 1956), it shall be the duty of every manager, managing director,
      officer, and other employee of the company and every intermediary referred to in
      section 12 or every person associated with the securities market to preserve and
      to produce to the Investigating Authority or any person authorized by it in this
      behalf, all the books, registers, other documents, and record of, or relating to, the
      company or, as the case may be, of or relating to, the intermediary or such
      person, which are in their custody or power.
(3)   The Investigating Authority may require any intermediary or any person
      associated with securities market in any manner to furnish such information to, or
      produce such books, or registers, or other documents, or record before him or
      any person authorized by it in this behalf as it may consider necessary if the
      furnishing of such information or the production of such books, or registers, or
      other documents, or record is relevant or necessary for the purposes of its
      investigation.
(4)   The Investigating Authority may keep in its custody any books, registers, other
      documents, and record produced under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) for six
      months and thereafter shall return the same to any intermediary or any person
      associated with securities market by whom or on whose behalf the books,
      registers, other documents, and record are produced:
      Provided that the Investigating Authority may call for any book, register, other
      document, and record if they are needed again:
      Provided further that if the person on whose behalf the books, registers, other
      documents, and record are produced requires certified copies of the books,
      registers, other documents, and record produced before the Investigating
      Authority, it shall give certified copies of such books, registers, other documents,
      and record to such person or on whose behalf the books, registers, other
      documents, and record were produced.
(5)   Any person, directed to make an investigation under sub-section (1), may
      examine on oath, any manager, managing director, officer, and other employee
      of any intermediary or any person associated with securities market in any
      manner, in relation to the affairs of his business and may administer an oath
      accordingly and for that purpose may require any of those persons to appear
      before it personally.
(6)   If any person fails without reasonable cause or refuses--
      (a)      to produce to the Investigating Authority or any person authorised by it in
               this behalf any book, register, other document, and record which is his
               duty under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) to produce; or
      (b)      to furnish any information which is his duty under sub-section (3) to
               furnish; or
      (c)      to appear before the Investigating Authority personally when required to
               do so under sub-section (5) or to answer any question which is put to him
               by the Investigating Authority in pursuance of that sub-section; or
      (d)      to sign the notes of any examination referred to in sub-section (7),
               he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
               one year, or with fine, which may extend to one crore rupees, or with
               both, and also with a further fine which may extend to five lakh rupees for
               every day after the first during which the failure or refusal continues.
(8)   Where in the course of investigation, the Investigating Authority has reasonable
      ground to believe that the books, registers, other documents and record of, or
      relating to, any intermediary or any person associated with securities market in
46     Appendix 3



               any manner, may be destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the
               Investigating Authority may make an application to the Judicial Magistrate of the
               first class having jurisdiction for an order for the seizure of such books, registers,
               other documents, and record.
       (10)    The Investigating Authority shall keep in its custody the books, registers, other
               documents, and record seized under this section for such period not later than
               the conclusion of the investigation as it considers necessary and thereafter shall
               return the same to the company or the other body corporate, or, as the case may
               be, to the managing director or the manager or any other person, from whose
               custody or power they were seized and inform the Magistrate of such return:
               Provided that the Investigating Authority may, before returning such books,
               registers, other documents, and record as aforesaid, place identification marks
               on them or any part thereof.
       (11)    Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search or seizure made under
               this section shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code
               Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to searches or seizures made
               under that Code.

11D.   Cease and desist proceedings.--If the Board finds, after causing an inquiry to be made,
       that any person has violated, or is likely to violate, any provisions of this Act, or any rules
       or regulations made thereunder, it may pass an order requiring such person to cease
       and desist from committing or causing such violation:
       Provided that the Board shall not pass such order in respect of any listed public
       company or a public company (other than the intermediaries specified under section 12)
       which intends to get its securities listed on any recognised stock exchange unless the
       Board has reasonable grounds to believe that such company has indulged insider
       trading or market manipulation."

                                           "Chapter VA

               PROHIBITION OF MANIPULATIVE AND DECEPTIVE DEVICES,
                 INSIDER TRADING AND SUBSTANTIAL ACQUISITION OF
                             SECURITIES OR CONTROL

12A.   Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading, and substantial
       acquisition of securities or control.--No person shall directly or indirectly--
       (a)     use or employ, in connection with the issue, purchase, or sale of any securities
               listed or proposed to be listed on a recognized stock exchange, any manipulative
               or deceptive device or contrivance in contravention of the provisions of this Act or
               the rules or the regulations made thereunder;
       (b)     employ any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud in connection with issue or
               dealing in securities which are listed or proposed to be listed on a recognized
               stock exchange;
       (c)     engage in any act, practice, course of business which operates or would operate
               as fraud or deceit upon any person, in connection with the issue, dealing in
               securities which are listed or proposed to be listed on a recognized stock
               exchange, in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the
               regulations made thereunder;
       (d)     engage in insider trading;
       (e)     deal in securities while in possession of material or non-public information or
               communicate such material or non-public information to any other person, in a
                                                                                  Appendix 3    47


               manner which is in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the
               regulations made thereunder;
       (f)     acquire control of any company or securities more than the percentage of equity
               share capital of a company whose securities are listed or proposed to be listed
               on a recognized stock exchange in contravention of the regulations made under
               this Act."

C.     Insertion of New Sections 15HA and 15HB

3.     After section 15H of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:--

       "15HA. Penalty for fraudulent and unfair trade practices.--If any person indulges in
              fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to securities, he shall be liable to a
              penalty of twenty-five crore rupees or three times the amount of profits made out
              of such practices, whichever is higher.
       15HB. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided.--
              Whoever fails to comply with any provision of this Act, the rules or the regulations
              made or directions issued by the Board thereunder for which no separate penalty
              has been provided, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore
              rupees."

D.     Substitution of New Sections for Sections 15L and 15M

4.      "15L. Composition of Securities Appellate Tribunal.--A Securities Appellate Tribunal
shall consist of a Presiding Officer and two other members, to be appointed, by notification, by
the Central Government:"

E.     Substitution of New Section for Section 15Z

5.     For section 15Z of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:--

       "15Z.   Appeal to Supreme Court.--Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of
               the Securities Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within
               sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the
               Securities Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of such
               order:"

F.     Insertion of New Sections 24A and 24B

6.     "24B. Power to grant immunity.--
             (1)    The Central Government may, on recommendation by the Board, if the
                    Central Government is satisfied, that any person, who is alleged to have
                    violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations
                    made thereunder, has made a full and true disclosure in respect of the
                    alleged violation, grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it
                    may think fit to impose, immunity from prosecution for any offence under
                    this Act, or the rules or the regulations made thereunder or also from the
                    imposition of any penalty under this Act with respect to the alleged
                    violation:"
48     Appendix 3


G.     Repeal and Saving

7.      (1)    The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002
(Ord. 6 of 2002) is hereby repealed.

(2)     Notwithstanding the repeal of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2002 (Ord. 6 of 2002), anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
principal Act, as amended by this Act.
                                                                                                    Appendix 4      49


                                              UNIT TRUST OF INDIA

1.      The government-run Unit Trust of India (UTI) is the largest mutual fund manager in India.
Established by an act of Parliament, UTI started operations in 1964 with the twin objectives of
(i) mobilizing retail savings, and investing those savings in the capital market; and (ii) enabling
small investors to benefit from the acquisition, holding, management, and disposal of securities.

2.      As a financial intermediary between investors and stock markets, UTI provides a range
of services, including mutual funds. Unit Scheme 1964 (US-64) was the first open-ended mutual
funds scheme in India. It was also the first mutual scheme offering of UTI and its flagship
scheme with more than 20 million investors.1 As of end June 2001, UT I manages funds of more
than Rs58,221 crore with more than 41.8 million investors accounts under 85 schemes.
Reserve Bank of India, Life Insurance Corporation of India, State Bank India, and some foreign
banks contributed the initial capital of Rs5 crore for US-64 scheme. In 2002, UTI had 54 branch
offices, 266 chief representatives, and about 67,000 agents.

3.       UTI initially invested in government paper at fixed returns. It took the opportunity created
by the rise in stock market values at the start of liberalization in 1991 to shift an increasing part
of the portfolio to equities. US-64, a balanced income fund it has run since 1964, invested
heavily in equities in the mid-1990s and paid dividends that were kept artificially high for political
reasons. Similarly, UTI did not alter the structure of its savings instruments, which offered units
at artificially administered prices that did not take into account the changing value of its stocks
with long-term security. In 1998, UTI's principal fund was responsible for the bulk of equity
investments in the market.

4.       UTI deteriorated from a thriving investment establishment and collapsed due to
inefficient management, affecting millions of investors who placed their trust in the government
body. 2 UTI operations reflected a lack of accountability and professionalism, poor expertise, and
fraud. It suffered from a lack of clear investment policies and improper transfers of investments
and money across funds. A major weakness of its premiere US-64 was its lack of transparency.
UTI did not disclose its net asset value (NAV), a figure that should be made publicly available
every working day, even though UTI is reported to have made internal calculations. For years, a
shroud of secrecy created by Parliament protected UTI, which did not have a system for public
scrutiny of the accounts or a periodic declaration of the assets and the portfolios of UTI. Under
the protection afforded by an act of Parliament, UTI was able to do everything from invest in the
stock market in collusion with shady speculators to buy large chunks of real estate--all of which
finally resulted in its failure. In 1998, faced with cash shortages to meet dividend payments that
were artificially high for political reasons, UTI "secretly" sold shares and represented the capital
return as income. When the deal was exposed, the market went into another decline.

5.     A key problem of UTI was the widening gap between its fixed commitments (on
guaranteed income and capital gains schemes) and its real net asset value in the market. UTI
proved a poor judge of the equities it purchased, and was caught in the stock market fall in the

1
    In addition to equity, debt, and balanced schemes, UTI manages schemes aimed at meeting specific needs, such
    as low cost insurance cover, regular income and liquidity needs, and building up funds to meet the cost of higher
    education. It also provides financial services, including underwriting to the corporate sector. UTI set up associate
    companies in the field of banking, securities, trading, investor servicing, investment advice, and training to meet
    investors' varying needs through a diversified financial conglomerate. In 2001, it was the largest single player in
    India's markets with investments totaling Rs600 billion.
2
    UTI is a trust without ownership capital and independent board of trustees. The Government of India appoints the
    chairman of the board of UTI.
50        Appendix 4


late 1990s. As the crisis in the information technology sector and a string of stock market
scandals in February 2001 drove down equity prices, UTI ran into liquidity problems and closed
down. The Government bailed UTI out, but it faced competition from smaller and better-
managed mutual funds that had gained market share. By the end of 2001, UTI's share of assets
of all mutual funds fell from 65% to 50%. Private mutual funds increased their share from 28%
to 42%.

6.       US-64 was considered safe and provided high returns to investors, especially in the first
half of the 1990s. US-64 encountered difficulties in July 1998 with reports that the value of the
scheme had dropped. As a consequence, US-64's reserves showed a negative balance. This
shook investor confidence in the scheme, prompting the government bailout of UTI with a grant
of Rs300 crores. Despite the earlier problems, UTI continued to choose equities poorly, missed
out on the technology boom in the stock markets in 1999­2000, and fell into a deeper hole. In
June 2000, a run on deposits led to the US-64 fund for 6 months. The loss in confidence was
fueled by rumors that the value of its real assets was far below the administered price at which
its units were sold.

7.     The Malegam Committee investigated and found the paper valuation of UTI funds was
nearly 50% higher than its real assets.3 In addition to recommending better management of the
UTI, the Committee proposed a series of reforms with far-reaching implications for the capital
market. It called on the public sector to stay out of the mutual fund business, at least for equity
transactions. UTI also needed to find a strategic partner in the private sector and adopt market-
based management principles. Even if the Government retains partial ownership, UTI must
operate like any other market trader. Large-scale structural changes (including improved
accounting and auditing, more transparency, and a reduction in the risk of non-settlement and a
payment crisis) are needed within the UTI. Because of the magnitude of UTI's activities relative
to the market and private placements it accepts, increased transparency in its activities would
also benefit the capital market.

8.      In October 2002, the Union Cabinet repealed the UTI Act of 1963. As part of the
structural reform process, the assets and liabilities of the UTI were vested into two
entitiesUTI-I and UTI-IIunder the purview of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI). Losses from both were borne by the Government. UTI-I comprised the US-64 scheme,
Assured Return Schemes, SUS 1999, and Development Reserve Fund. A government-
appointed administrator will continue to manage UTI-I until the fund fulfills its commitments to
the investors of US-64 and more than 20 assured-return schemes. The healthy net asset value
(NAV)-based schemes were transferred to UTI-II. Subsequently, it was registered as UTI Asset
Management Company (AMC) Limited, a new asset management company formed by the State
Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda, and Life Insurance Corporation. 4 The UTI
AMC would manage UTI-II and its NAV-based schemes, totaling more than Rs17,000 crore.
UTI-II will be a SEBI-compliant mutual fund with a three-tier structure, comprising the board of
trustees, sponsors, and an asset management company with an initial paid-up capital of Rs10
crore. A chartered accountant would carry out due diligence on UTI-II, allowing a decision to be
need on whether to privatize UTI-II after 3­5 years.




3
    A corporate committee was set up to reposition UTI in an emerging financial sector. Under the chairmanship of Shri
    Y.H. Malegam, the Committee would examine relevant issues and make recommendations.
4
    The State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda, and Life Insurance Corporation each will have a
    25% stake and invested Rs2.5 crore in the UTI AMC.
                                                                                   Appendix 5    51


                            JOINT PARLIMENTARY COMMISSION

1.      The identification of severe market irregularities in 2001 resulted in a Joint Parliamentary
Committee (JPC) investigation in 2002. In its report, the JPC highlighted weaknesses in the
areas of regulation and oversight at the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). These
weaknesses can be attributed in part to SEBI's position on the self-regulatory organization
(SRO) responsibilities. The concept of SROs is an area of regulatory confusion where SEBI and
market participants clearly disagree. Under the SEBI Act, SEBI has the power to license SROs.
However, regulations governing the requirements of an organization to obtain SRO status are
lacking. In the past, SEBI has expressed the desire that all trade organizations become SROs.
Currently, only the National Stock Exchange and Bombay Stock Exchange have been
designated as SROs. SEBI has taken the position that these exchanges are solely responsible
oversight and enforcement, and would like the trade associations assume the same
responsibilities. The exchanges (and others) believe that SEBI should be ultimately responsible
for oversight and enforcement. SEBI has not issued a formal memorandum of agreement,
understanding, or guidelines to clarify the powers and responsibilities of the regulator versus
those of the exchanges.

2.      The exchanges, however, perform routine oversight of their members and take actions
based on membership rules of the exchange. While India appears to have elected to operate its
capital market under the SRO concept, SEBI has not recognized its responsibility as the
principal regulator in the past. That has led to a lack of understanding of a proper SRO
environment with SEBI as the ultimate regulator. The regulator and the exchanges need to sort
out the confusion to avoid further market irregularities falling through the cracks. In addition to
the SRO issue, market participants have expressed dissatisfaction with the amount and quality
of SEBI circulars. (Circulars may be issued to clarify regulations, provide directives, add to
earlier circulars, etc.) Market participants have complained that SEBI issues circulars without
understanding an issue completely or thinking through all the ramifications of its directives.
                          ELEMENTS OF MARKET DESIGN IN INDIAN SECURITIES MARKET, 1993 AND 2004




                                                                                                                                                                   52
Features                                       Corporate Securities                                                   Government Securities
                                   1993                                     2004                                1993                   2004
Regulator            No specific regulator, but           A specialized regulator for securities        RBI participates in Unchanged. SROs emerged.




                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 6
                     central government oversight.        market (SEBI) vested with powers to           and regulates the
                                                          protect investors' interest and to            market.
                                                          develop and regulate securities
                                                          market. SROs strengthened.
Intermediaries       Some of the intermediaries           Specialized intermediaries emerged,           Brokers and/or          Brokers of specified
                     (stock brokers, authorized           which are registered and regulated by         dealers with            exchanges authorized to
                     clerks, and remisiers)               SEBI. The intermediaries as well as           agency problems.        trade. Primary dealers offer
                     regulated by the SROs.               their employees are required to follow                                two-way quotes.
                                                          a code of conduct and are subject to a
                                                          number of compliances.
Access to            Granted by central                   Eligible issuers access the market after      Authorized by           Unchanged. Automatic
Market               government.                          complying with the issue requirements.        Parliament.             monetization discontinued.
                                                                                                        Automatic
                                                                                                        monetization
                                                                                                        prevalent.
Pricing of           Determined by central                Determined by market, either by the           Determined by RBI.      Determined by market
Securities           government.                          issuer through fixed price or by the                                  through a system of auctions
                                                          investors through book building.                                      (uniform/multiple price/yield).
                                                                                                                                Small proportion available at
                                                                                                                                prices determined by RBI.
Integration with     No access.                           Corporates allowed to issue ADRs and          No access except        Unchanged. FIIs permitted to
International                                             GDRs and raise ECBs. ADRs and                 external borrowing      invest in government
Market                                                    GDRs have two-way fungibility. FIIs           by the Government.      securities.
                                                          allowed trade in Indian market. MFs
                                                          also allowed to invest overseas.
Trading              Open outcry. Available at the        Screen-based trading system. Orders           Negotiated deals        Negotiations over telephone
Mechanism            trading rings of the exchanges.      are matched on price-time priority.           over telephone.         and on screen. Also screen-
                     Opaque, auction and                  Transparent trading platform                                          based trading system where
                     negotiated deals.                    accessible from all over the country.                                 orders are matched on price-
                                                                                                                                time priority.
Aggregation          Fragmented market through            Order flow observed. The exchanges            Fragmented market       Unchanged. Limited use of
Order Flow           geographical distance. Order         have open electronic consolidated limit       through                 OECLOB.
                     flow unobserved.                     order book OECLOB.                            geographical
                                                                                                        distance. Order
                                                                                                        flow unobserved.
Anonymity in         Absent.                              Complete.                                     Absent.                 Absent except for OECLOB
Trading                                                                                                                         market.
ADR = American depository receipt, ECB = external commercial borrowing, FII = foreign institutional investor, GDR = global depository receipt, MF = mutual fund,
OECLOB = open electronic consolidated limit order book, RBI = Reserve Bank of India, SEBI = Securities and Exchange Board of India, SRO = self-regulatory
organization.
Features                                       Corporate Securities                                                 Government Securities
                                   1993                                     2004                             1993                    2004

Settlement           Bilateral.                          Clearing house of the exchange or the      Bilateral.             Clearing corporation is
System                                                   Clearing Corporation is the central                               counterparty to most of the
                                                         counterparty.                                                     trades. Bilateral settlement
                                                                                                                           continues.
Settlement Cycle     14-day account period               Rolling settlement on T+2 basis.           Spot.                  Rolling settlement on T+0 to
                     settlement, but not adhered to                                                                        T+2 basis.
                     always.
Counterparty         Present.                            Absent.                                    Present.               Absent for trades settled
Risk                                                                                                                       through clearing corporation
Form of              Physical.                           Mostly electronic.                         Physical.              Mostly electronic through
Settlement                                                                                                                 DvP.
Basis of             Bilateral netting.                  Multilateral netting.                      Gross.                 Unchanged. However, net in
Settlement                                                                                                                 funds for settlement through
                                                                                                                           clearing corporation.
Transfer of          Cumbersome. Transfer by             Securities are freely transferable.        Transfer by            Securities are freely
Securities           endorsement on security and         Transfers are recorded electronically in   endorsement.           transferable. Transfers are
                     registration by issuer.             book ent ry form by depositories.                                 recorded electronically in
                                                                                                                           book entry form in SGL.
Risk                 No focus on risk management.        Comprehensive risk management              No focus on risk       Comprehensive risk
Management                                               system encompassing capital                management.            management mechanism for
                                                         adequacy, limits on exposure, and                                 transactions settled through
                                                         turnover. VaR-based margining, client                             clearing corporation.
                                                         level gross margining, online position
                                                         monitoring, etc.
Derivatives          Absent.                             Exchange-traded futures and options        Absent.                Absent. Repurchase
Trading                                                  available on two indices and select                               agreement transactions
                                                         securities. Exchange-traded interest                              permitted.
                                                         rate derivatives on 91-day notional
                                                         treasury bill and 10-year notional 6%
                                                         coupon bearing bond as well as zero
                                                         coupon bonds.
DvP = delivery versus payment, SGL = subsidiary general ledger, VaR = value at risk.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 6
                                                                                                                                                          53
                                                                                                                                                     54
                                GROWTH AND DISTRIBUTION OF TURNOVER ON STOCK EXCHANGES
                                                        (Rs million)




                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 7
No. Stock Exchange 1994­1995 1995­1996 1996­1997 1997­1998                         1998­1999      1999­2000   2000­2001    2001­2002    2002­2003

1.    NSE               85,090           800,090     3,367,820      4,811,970      5,198,520     11,432,680   17,704,580   15,622,830   21,265,445
2.    Mumbai           677,480           500,640     1,242,840      2,073,830      3,119,990      6,850,282   10,016,190    3,093,156    3,165,516
3.    Kolkata          528,720           621,280     1,056,640      1,787,780      1,717,804      3,571,655    3,550,354      270,747       65,228
4.    Delhi             90,827           100,760       486,310        678,400        517,593        932,889      838,711       58,280          111
5.    Ahmedabad         56,508            87,860       205,330        307,710        297,342        375,656      540,352      148,435      154,586
6.    Uttar Pradesh     78,230            23,730       160,700        153,900        186,267        240,478      247,467      252,373      147,634
7.    Ludhiana          24,880            48,490        52,740         83,150         59,779         77,405       97,322        8,566            0
8.    Pune              36,720            70,710        99,030         86,240         74,528         60,868       61,705       11,710            0
9.    Bangalore          7,120             8,900        43,980         86,360         67,790        111,474       60,328          703            0
10.   Hyderabad         13,752            12,850         4,800         18,600         12,759         12,365        9,778          413           46
11.   ICSE                  --                --            --             --              7          5,452        2,331          554          531
12.   Cochin             5,970            18,030        14,010         17,830          7,730              0        1,866            0            0
13.   OCTEI              3,650             2,180         2,210          1,250          1,422         35,879        1,259           38            1
14.   Chennai           30,327                          23,150         12,280          3,696          2,502        1,092          241          756
15.   Madhya Pradesh     1,182             2,040           120             10              9             97           24          235            0
16.   Magadh             7,968            16,290        27,550          3,230              0             80           16            0            2
17.   Vadodara          16,210            12,590        42,680         45,760         17,491          1,593            9          101           26
18.   Gauhati            2,853             6,190         4,840            200            302              0            0            1            1
19.   Bhubaneshwar       1,434             2,260         2,310          2,020            770            701            0            0            0
20.   Coimbatore        13,095            25,030        23,980         21,360          3,947            388            0          266            0
21.   Jaipur             8,786            10,470        15,190          4,310            648             21            0            0            0
22.   Mangalore            615               390         3,730          3,080            112              1            0            0            0
23.   SKSE               5,447             5,640         3,980            170              0              0            0            0            0
         Total       1,696,864         2,376,420     6,883,940     10,199,440     11,288,506     23,712,466   33,133,385   19,468,650   24,799,883


-- = not available, ICSE = Inter-Connected Stock Exchange, NSE = National Stock Exchange, OCTEI = Over-the-Counter Exchange of India, Rs = rupees,
SKSE = Saurashtra Kutch Stock Exchange.
Note: Turnover means total value of transactions of securities in all market segments of an exchange.
Source: Securities and Exchange Board of India.
                                                   NEW CAPITAL ISSUES BY NONGOVERNMENT PUBLIC LIMITED COMPANIES
                                                                             (Rs crore)

                              1992­1993                  1994­1995                1998­1999             2000­2001          2001­2002        2002­2003          2003­2004
Security and Type of IssueNo. of   Amount            No. of   Amount          No. of   Amount       No. of   Amount    No. of   Amount   No. of  Amount    No. of Amount
                         Issues                      Issues                   Issues                Issues             Issues            Issues            Issues

1. Equity Shares               868      9,952.6       1,548     17,414.4         33      2,562.7     127     2,924.7     16    1,150.7     15    1,022.1    26    1,490.0
   a. Prospectus               484      3,889.7       1,275     13,727.3         15        340.4     108     2,580.6      6      891.4      3      206.7    10      759.6
   b. Rights                   384      6,062.9         273      3,687.1         18      2,222.3      19       344.1     10      259.3     12      815.4    16      730.4

2. Preference Shares             1           0.5          9        131.4          3         59.7       2      142.2       1       46.8     0         0.0     0        0.0
   a. Prospectus                 0           0.0          5         81.4          0          0.0       0        0.0       0        0.0     0         0.0     0        0.0
   b. Rights                     1           0.5          4         50.0          3         59.7       2      142.2       1       46.8     0         0.0     0        0.0

3. Debentures                  171      9,850.3         121      8,870.9         12      2,390.6       9     3,077.4     16    4,544.4     1         0.5     3     800.0
   a. Prospectus                47      3,187.5          48      5,868.1          9      2,261.3       7     2,987.1     10    3,743.5     0         0.0     3     800.0
   b. Rights                   124      6,662.8          73      3,002.8          3        129.3       2        90.3      6      800.9     1         0.5     0       0.0

4. Total (1+2+3)             1,040     19,803.4       1,678     26,416.7         48      5,013.0     138     6,144.3     33    5,741.9     16    1,022.6    29    2,290.0
   a. Prospectus               531      7,077.2       1,328     19,676.8         24      2,601.7     115     5,567.7     16    4,634.9      3      206.7    13    1,559.6
   b. Rights                   509     12,726.2         350      6,739.9         24      2,411.3      23       576.6     17    1,107.0     13      815.9    16      730.4

Rs = rupees.
Notes:
1. Equity shares exclude bonus shares.
2. Figures exclude data on private placement and offer for sale.
3. Preference shares include cumulative convertible preference shares and equi-preference shares.
4. Convertible debentures include partly convertible debentures.
5. Non-convertible debentures include secured premium notes and secured deep discount bonds.
6. Debentures include bonds.
7. Rs1 crore = Rs10 million.
Sources: Reserve Bank of India and Operations Evaluation Mission.




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 8
                                                                                                                                                                            55
56   Appendix 9



                  NUMBER OF LISTED SECURITIES, MARKET CAPITALIZATION,
                            AND TURNOVER AT BSE AND NSE
                                      (Rs billion)

     Item                                       1992­1993       1994­1995        1998­1999       2002­2003

     Number of Companies                             6,925            9,077           9,877            9,413
     Listed in Indian Stock Exchanges

     BSE
     Number of Listed Companies                      2,781            4,413           5,860            5,650
     Market Capitalization of Companies            2,109.5          4,688.4         6,195.3          5,722.0
        Listed in BSE
     Turnover at BSE (per annum)                      457.0           677.5         3,120.0          3,140.7
     Turnover ratio at BSE (per annum)               21.7%           14.5%           50.4%            54.9%

     BSE Sensitive Index
        Average                                    2,896.0          3,975.0         3,295.0          3,206.3
        Year-End                                   2,280.5          3,261.0         3,740.0          3,048.7

     NSE
     Listed Companies
         Number of Listed Companies                      --            135             648              818
         Market Capitalization                           --         3,633.5         4,911.8          5,371.3
     Permitted Equities
         Number of Equities Permitted                    --            543             609                --
         Market Capitalization                           --         2,901.3         1,559.7               --
     Turnover                                            --            18.1         4,144.7          6,179.9

     S&P CNX Nifty Indexa
        Average                                         --          1,203.1           954.4               --
        Year-End                                     660.5            990.2         1,078.1            978.2


     -- = not available, BSE = Bombay Stock Exchange, CNX = Credit Rating Information Services of India
     Limited (CRISIL) NSE index, NSE = National Stock Exchange, Rs = rupees, S&P = Standard and Poor.
     Note: Data of NSE for 1994­1995 is from November 1994 to March 1995.
       a
         S&P CNX Nifty is a well diversified 50 stock index accounting for 24 sectors of the economy. It is
         used for a variety of purposes such as benchmarking fund portfolios, index-based derivatives, and
         index funds.
     Sources: BSE, NSE, and Securities and Exchange Board of India.
                                                                                                    Appendix 10    57


                          YEARLY TRENDS IN FII INVESTMENT IN INDIA

                    Gross           Gross            Net            Cumulative          Net         Cumulative
Year              Purchases         Sales        Investment              Net        Investment          Net
                                                                    Investment                      Investment
                  (Rs million)   (Rs million)        (Rs million)    (Rs million)   ($ million) a    ($ million)


1992­1993              170              40                130             130               4              4
1993­1994           55,920           4,660             51,260          51,390           1,634          1,638
1994­1995           76,311          28,348             47,963          99,353           1,528          3,167
1995­1996           96,935          27,516             69,419         168,772           2,036          5,202
1996­1997          155,539          69,794             85,745         254,517           2,432          7,634
1997­1998          186,947         127,372             59,575         314,092           1,650          9,284
1998­1999          161,150         176,994            (15,844)        298,248            (386)         8,898
1999­2000          568,555         467,335            101,220         399,468           2,339         11,237
2000­2001          740,506         641,164             99,342         498,810           2,159         13,396
2001­2002          499,199         411,650             87,549         586,359           1,846         15,242
2002­2003          470,601         443,710             26,891         613,250             562         15,804

    Total        3,011,833       2,398,583            613,250                         15,804


FII = foreign institutional investor, Rs = rupees.
a
 Based on monthly exchange rate.
Source: Securities and Exchange Board of India.
58     Appendix 11



                           TRANSACTION COSTS IN INDIA'S EQUITY MARKET

                                               India                                              New York Stock
                                               1993                1997              2004           Exchanges
Cost Component                             (Before NSE)           (NSE)             (NSE)             (1997)
                                                 %                  %                 %                 %

Trading                                         3.75               0.65               0.50                1.23
Brokerage                                       3.00               0.50               0.40                1.00
Market Impact Cost                              0.75               0.15               0.10                0.23

Clearing
Counterparty Risk                             Present             In Part             0.00                0.00

Settlement                                      1.25               1.50               0.03                0.05
Back Office                                     0.75               0.75               0.03                0.05
Bad Paper Risk                                  0.50               0.75               0.00                0.00

          Total                                 5.00               2.15               0.53                1.28


NSE = National Stock Exchange.
Sources: Shah, Ajay and Susan Thomas. 1997. Securities Market . India Development Report, edited by K. Parkh,
         and Operations Evaluation Mission.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE ON THE PROGRAM PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT (PPAR)
  ON THE CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM IN INDIA (LOAN 1408-IND)



        On 9 August 2004, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received the
following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


      "Management takes note of the lessons identified in the PPAR and will take them into
account for the design of relevant future ADB projects."
