ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK               PPA: IND 26346




        PROJECT PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT

                      ON THE

     GAS REHABILITATION AND EXPANSION PROJECT
                   (Loan 1285-IND)


                         IN

                       INDIA




                    December 2003
                                 CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                                 Currency Unit ­ Rupees (Rs)

                                At Project           At Project         At Operations
                                Appraisal           Completion           Evaluation
                              (August 1993)       (February 1998)      (October 2003)
          Rs1.00    =            $0.032               $0.025               $0.022
          $1.00     =            Rs31.70              Rs39.35              Rs45.15

For the purpose of cost comparison in this report, local currency costs were converted into US
dollars at average annual exchange rates.

                                      ABBREVIATIONS

         ADB        ­    Asian Development Bank
         APM        ­    Administered Pricing Mechanism
         CNG        ­    compressed natural gas
         DESU       ­    Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking
         EIA        ­    environmental impact assessment
         EIL        ­    Engineers India, Limited
         EMP        ­    environment management plan
         EIRR       ­    economic internal rate of return
         FIRR       ­    financial internal rate of return
         GAIL       ­    Gas Authority of India, Limited
         GDP        ­    gross domestic product
         GFRP       ­    Gas Flaring Reduction Program
         GOI        ­    Government of India
         GREP       ­    Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion Project
         HBJ        ­    Hazira-Bijaipur-Jagdishpur
         IGL        ­    Indraprashtha Gas Limited
         INRM       ­    India Resident Mission
         JEXIM      ­    Export-Import Bank of Japan
         LNG        ­    Liquefied natural gas
         LPG        ­    Liquefied petroleum gas
         MGL        ­    Mahanagar Gas Limited
         MPNG       ­    Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
         NEERI      ­    National Environmental Engineering and Research Institute
         OEM        ­    Operations Evaluation Mission
         OIDB       ­    Oil Industry Development Board
         ONGC       ­    Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
         PCR        ­    project completion report
         PIB        ­    Public Investment Board
         PIO        ­    project implementation office
         PLL        ­    Petronet LNG Limited
         PSE        ­    public sector enterprise
         RRP        ­    report and recommendation of the President
         SCADA      ­    supervisory control and data acquisition
         TA         ­    technical assistance
                                   WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

BCM         (billion cubic meter)                        ­   1,000 MMCM
hp          (horsepower)                                 ­   746 watts
in          (inch)
km          (kilometer)                                  ­   1,000 meters
kcal/m3     (kilocalorie per cubic meter)                ­   unit of calorific value of gas volume
kg/cm2      (kilogram per square centimeter)             ­   unit of gas pressure
kcal/kg     (kilocalorie per kilogram)                   ­   unit of calorific value of gas weight
m           (meter)                                      ­   1 meter
MMBTU       (million British thermal unit)               ­   unit of energy
MMCM        (million cubic meter)                        ­   unit of gas volume
MMSCMD      (million standard cubic meter per day)       ­   unit of gas volume per day

                                                 NOTES

(i)    The fiscal year (FY) of the Government and Gas Authority of India Limited ends on 31
       March. FY before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends. For
       example, FY2001 begins on 1 April 2000 and ends on 31 March 2001.

(ii)   In this report, $ refers to US dollars.




                              Operations Evaluation Department, PE-640
                                       CONTENTS

                                                                 Page

BASIC DATA                                                          iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                  iv
MAP                                                                vii

I.     BACKGROUND                                                   1
       A.   Rationale                                               1
       B.   Formulation                                             1
       C.   Purpose and Outputs                                     2
       D.   Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements             2
       E.   Completion and Self-Evaluation                          3
       F.   Operations Evaluation                                   3

II.    PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE                      4
       A.   Formulation and Design                                  4
       B.   Achievement of Outputs                                  4
       C.   Cost, Financing Plan, and Scheduling                    6
       D.   Consulting Services, Procurement, and Construction      9
       E.   Organization and Management                            10

III.   ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE                              10
       A.   Operational Performance                                10
       B.   Performance of the Operational Entity                  11
       C.   Economic and Financial Reevaluation                    11
       D.   Sustainability                                         12

IV.    ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS                    13
       A.   Socioeconomic/Environmental Impacts                    13
       B.   Impacts on Institutions and Policy                     16

V.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT                                          16
       A.   Relevance                                              16
       B.   Efficacy                                               17
       C.   Efficiency                                             17
       D.   Sustainability                                         17
       E.   Institutional Development and Other Impacts            17
       F.   Overall Assessment                                     18

VI.    ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                      18
       A.   Key Issues                                             18
       B.   Lessons Identified                                     18
       C.   Follow-Up Actions and Recommendations                  20
APPENDIXES
1.   Project Scope                                                            21
2.   Project Cost (Original Versus Actual)                                    22
3.   Project Implementation Schedule Versus Actual                            23
4.   Gas Sales/Percentage Sales                                               25
5.   Gas Authority of India Limited: Organization Chart                       26
6.   Status of Compliance with Major Loan Covenants                           27
7.   Financial Performance of Gas Authority of India Limited                  30
8.   Assumptions for the Financial and Economic Reevaluation of the Project   34
                                                   BASIC DATA

                     Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion Project (Loan 1285-IND)

PROJECT PREPARATION/INSTITUTION BUILDING:
TA                 TA Project Name                                 Type      Person-     Amount1        Approval
No.                                                                          Months        ($)            Date
2008 Regulatory Framework for the Gas Industry                     ADTA        18.0      600,000        7 Dec 1993
1837 Natural Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion                      PPTA        n.a.      100,000       31 Dec 1992

                                                          As per ADB
KEY PROJECT DATA ($ million):                           Loan Documents                           Actual
Total Project Cost                                           1,008.0                              560.44
Foreign Currency Cost                                          646.0                              363.28
Bank Loan Amount/Utilization                                   260.0                              157.47
Bank Loan Amount/Cancellation                                                                     102.53
Amount of Cofinancing                                          417.7                               63.83

KEY DATES:                                                    Expected                                  Actual
Fact-Finding                                                                                       12-23 Apr 1993
Appraisal                                                                                         12­27 Aug 1993
Loan Negotiations                                                                                  8­12 Nov 1993
Board Approval                                                                                         7 Dec 1993
Loan Agreement                                                                                       17 May 1994
Loan Effectiveness                                           15 Aug 1994                             15 Aug 1994
First Disbursement                                                                                     6 Jun 1995
Project Completion                                           31 Aug 1997                               31 Jul 1998
Loan Closing                                                 28 Feb 1998                              22 Jun 1998
Months (effectiveness to completion)                             36.5                                     47.5


KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (%):                               Appraisal              PCR                PPAR
Financial Internal Rate of Return                               15.0                 18.8          19.8 (before tax)
                                                                                                   18.8 (after tax)
Economic Internal Rate of Return                                 26.4                30.5          26.2

BORROWER/EXECUTING AGENCY:                            Gas Authority of India Limited

MISSION DATA:
Type of Mission                                   No. of Missions                           Person-days

Fact-Finding                                             1                                       60
Appraisal                                                1                                       80
Project Administration
- Inception                                              1                                       33
- Review                                                 4                                       46
- Project Completion                                     1                                        9
Operations Evaluation2                                   1                                       57




1
    Represents approved amount of technical assistance.
2
    The Operations Evaluation Mission comprised. Richard Simpson (Principal Evaluation Specialist/Mission Leader),
    Julian Bharier (international gas and energy policy expert), and Gyan Prakash (domestic gas engineer consultant).
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        In December 1993, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved a loan of $260.0
million, to finance the construction of the Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion Project (GREP) in
India. The Borrower and executing agency was the Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) and
the Government of India was the guarantor.

        The main components of the GREP were the construction of a pipeline between Bijaipur
and Dadri to enhance the capacity of the Hazira-Bijaipur-Jagdishpur (HBJ) pipeline, together
with new or upgraded gas terminals and compressor stations as well as installation of cathodic
protection and a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) telecommunications
monitoring system. The main objective of GREP was to raise the capacity of the HBJ pipeline
from 18 MMSCMD of natural gas to 33 MMSCMD. As a result, the project was expected to
annually provide feedstock for 2.45 m tons of fertilizer and meet the fuel requirements for 1,700
MW of additional power generation, as well as to produce 40,000 tons of liquefied petroleum
gas (LPG) and 396,000 tons of ethane/propane. Additionally, it would increase the share of gas
in India's total energy supply, resulting in savings in foreign exchange.

         In addition to an overall evaluation of GREP, the main focus of the Operations
Evaluation Mission (OEM) was to (i) assess in depth why project costs were 44% lower than
estimated at appraisal; (ii) attempt a quantification of the environmental impacts of GREP; and
(iii) evaluate the reforms carried out and proposed in the gas sector in relation to the conditions
attached to the ADB loan.

       The physical project was implemented successfully, with no major technical or
operational difficulties encountered and with minimum delay. All project components are
meeting their design outputs and the overall HBJ pipeline system is working at full capacity.
Changes in the size and route of the GREP pipeline as well as in specifications of the gas
compressors were discussed between ADB and GAIL during project implementation. ADB
eventually approved GAIL's proposals, which proved to be both economic and effective.
However, ADB could not agree to GAIL's procurement procedures for the SCADA system of
continuous pipeline monitoring. This item was taken out of ADB financing and financed six
years later by JEXIM, at a very much lower price than originally estimated. The system is now
working well.

       All project components visited were observed to be operating satisfactorily and all
maintenance and safety procedures comply with international industry standards. In addition,
GAIL has implemented several energy conservation measures. The GREP project has laid the
groundwork for the planned massive expansion of India's gas transmission network, as well as
the enhancement and diversification of GAIL's operations.

       The original intention, that the Project should supply gas to electric power generation
and fertilizer production has proved to be appropriate in the context of India's economic
development goals. Indeed, GREP has exceeded its objectives in these two major industries.
Several new gas-fired units of power plants and several new fertilizer factories are now
operating.

        The final project cost, was 44% lower than estimated at appraisal. The original costing,
particularly in respect of the intangible non-investment items, erred substantially on the high
side. For example, neither physical nor price contingencies were utilized, while interest during
                                                                                               v


construction and taxes and duties were much lower than forecast. This has happened in other
ADB projects in India and is cause for broader concern. Cost savings in non-investment items
represented 78% of overall project cost savings. The OEM was informed that savings in tangible
costs (20­25% of project costs) were known to GAIL at the time GREP was approved by the
Public Investment Board (PIB), which was 18 months later than project appraisal and 15 months
after ADB's approval of the loan.

        At the time of project appraisal, medium-term domestic finance was not available to
GAIL and the company was therefore willing to accept ADB's, foreign currency financing. GAIL's
financial situation improved dramatically after project appraisal and during implementation.
Together with much lower project costs, this enabled GAIL to cancel 39.4% of the original
$260.0 million ADB loan and 62% of the JEXIM loan, while there was no need to draw on
agreed loans from suppliers' credits or the Oil Industry Development Board. Rupee loans for 8-
10 years are now available and, using these and its own resources, GAIL fully repaid, in 2002,
both ADB and JEXIM loans.

        GAIL has emerged as a well-managed, extremely competent, commercially astute and
highly profitable company, proving that public sector enterprises (PSE) do not necessarily have
to be unbundled and privatized to perform well, provided the right incentives are allowed and
markets are opened up to real competition. GAIL has become an integral part of India's natural
gas sector and been given the monopoly for construction of all new pipelines longer than 100
km. GAIL's strategic planning is highly advanced and ambitious. It aims to consolidate existing
businesses, including its three joint ventures, increase its consortium activities in hydrocarbon
exploration and expand its range of gas-based products, particularly CNG and LPG, as well as
pursue contracts with gas-rich nations for imported supplies of gas and LNG.

       Quantification of GREP's environmental benefits has proved to be extremely difficult, not
least because it appears the responsibilities of the various agencies concerned with
environmental issues overlap, there is little coordination between them and there is no
agreement on appropriate measurable indicators, or the means of monitoring them. The OEM
witnessed major environmental improvements as a result of the GREP pipeline. The
introduction of compressed natural gas (CNG), manufactured by GAIL joint ventures in Delhi
and Mumbai, was a major breakthrough in contributing to the Government's policy to reduce
vehicle emissions. It was not foreseen at appraisal but is proving to be economically and
environmentally sound and will be replicated in several other priority cities.

       A massive and visible improvement in the environmental situation around the Mathura
Refinery, and to historical and heritage monuments in the Agra Trapezium area, has been
achieved with the conversion of the refinery's power plant from coal to gas, and there have also
been major reductions in pollution formerly generated by the small-medium glass factories in
Ferozabad and the iron foundries in Agra, all of which converted from coal and are now being
supplied through GAIL's gas distribution networks in these cities.

        GAIL has complied with all ADB's loan covenants, including those related to financial
ratios. However, three loan covenants agreed by the Government have not been fully complied
with, partly because they were poorly formulated and unrealistic.

       The recalculated EIRR is 26.2% and the FIRR is 18.8% compared to 26.4% and 15.0%,
respectively, at the time of appraisal. GAIL's financial position is very strong.
vi


        The overall conclusion of this evaluation is that the GREP was successful in terms of its
relevance, efficacy, effectiveness and sustainability. The performance of the borrower, GAIL,
was highly satisfactory. However, the performance of ADB was less than satisfactory in two
major respects­inaccurate costing of GREP, leading to cancellation of 39.4% of the loan, and
unrealistic formulation and implementation of loan covenants by the Government. Both of these
diminished ADB's value added to GREP.

      There are a number of lessons to be learned from this evaluation, particularly for ADB.
The OEM recommends that:

       (i)     There should be a realistic assessment of financial costs, technical risks, inflation
               and the competitive situation for all tangible investment components of projects.
               In particular, ADB should rely on expert technical advice as the basis for project
               cost estimation and the impact on this cost estimation of any changes in project
               scope or technical specifications.

       (ii)    Intangible non-investment costs, especially physical and price contingencies and
               interest during construction, should be fully quantified on the basis of the specific
               conditions and risks relating to GREP. Contingencies should be fully justified and
               care should be taken to avoid arbitrary percentage mark-ups and double
               counting.

       (iii)   There should have been clear justification of the financial, technical, or
               environmental additionality of ADB's involvement in GREP at the time of
               appraisal. If the loan is approved substantially ahead of PIB approval, justification
               should be reconfirmed at the time of PIB approval. ADB's financing was probably
               not required.

       (iv)    ADB should make realistic efforts, at the time of appraisal, to assess its potential
               leverage through loan covenants, with respect to both the borrower and the
               guarantor, and to ensure that the covenants are adequately formulated.
               Consideration should be given to whether it is appropriate for ADB to impose
               loan covenants relating to sector policy issues in what are essentially investment
               projects, particularly when the borrower (in this case GAIL) has little or no
               influence on sector policy.

       (v)     If GAIL continues to perform as well as it has done in recent years, and if it
               requires long-term finance in dollars or rupees, then ADB should consider to add
               value by financing a share of GAIL's approved investment program.

       There are no specific follow-up actions.
                                          I.      BACKGROUND

A.        Rationale

1.      The 1989 operational strategy of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for India
emphasized promoting industrialization through support of efficient physical, human and
financial resource use. This overall objective was to be achieved through three initiatives: (i)
strengthening the industrial policy environment in order to encourage greater private sector
participation; (ii) supporting the development of physical and financial infrastructure through
public and private sectors; and (iii) identifying private investment as a catalyst in areas where
the policy environment was being improved or where new technology was being introduced.

2.      It was in this context that ADB approved a loan for the Hydrocarbon Sector Reform
Program in late 1991. This aimed to accelerate exploration for, and development of, domestic
hydrocarbon resources and contain oil imports at 45% of total fuel consumption.1 In addition to
requiring major balance of payments support (from major donors) it became essential to reduce
the country's dependence on hydrocarbon imports (over 27% of total imports in 1991-3),
particularly since there was a steadily rising gap between energy demand and supply from
domestic energy sources.

3.      This enabled ADB to widen its operations across all key infrastructure sectors, and
thereby assist the Government of India (GOI) in implementing its economic development
policies. In particular, ADB supported national-level policy reforms in the hydrocarbon sector
and financial and capital markets. At the same time, the Government in the early 1990s, faced a
serious balance of payments crisis.

4.      The Eighth Five-Year Plan (1992-1997) accorded priority to: (i) encouraging high levels
of capacity utilization to raise productivity and cost efficiency; (ii) attracting private initiatives by
reducing the Government's regulatory controls; (iii) reforming the public enterprise sector; (iv)
enhancing competition by allowing a greater inflow of foreign capital and technology; and (v)
reorienting public expenditures for human resource and infrastructure development. In the early
1990s, the Government's strategy for energy development was consistent with its strategy for
overall economic development, which emphasized the application of greater market discipline,
increased participation of the private sector, removal of institutional constraints and maximum
exploitation of indigenous rather than imported resources.

B.        Formulation

5.      In October 1992, GOI and the Gas Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL) requested ADB
assistance to construct infrastructure that would enable flared and associated gas from offshore
fields to be used onshore. ADB responded, through a technical assistance (TA) grant of
$100,000, which was completed in 1993. A further $300 million loan, for a Gas Flaring
Reduction Program (GFRP), aimed at bringing flared gas onshore, was approved in 1993.2

6.     The TA recommended a project to expand the existing network and found it to be
technically and financially viable. Following a fact-finding mission in April 1993, and appraisal in



1
    The evaluation of this loan is available at ADB. 2001. Program Performance Audit Report on the Hydrocarbon
    Sector Program Loan in India. Manila.
2
    Loan 1222-IND: Gas Flaring Reduction Project, for $300 million, approved on 30 March 1993.
2


August 1993, a loan of $260 million was approved in December 1993 for the Gas Rehabilitation
and Expansion Project (GREP).3

7.    The Borrower and Executing Agency would be GAIL and the Guarantor was the
Government of India.

C.        Purpose and Outputs

8.     The main objective of GREP was to enhance the capacity of the pipeline from Hazira, on
the west coast to Bijaipur and Jagdishpur in Central India (HBJ) from 18 million standard cubic
meter per day (MMSCMD) of natural gas to 33 MMSCMD, by laying a 505 kilometer (km) 28"
diameter loop line between Bijaipur and Dadri, with spur lines to Bawana (75 km, 18 inch [in]
diameter) and Faridabad (10 km, 12 in diameter), together with the installation of new and
upgraded compressor stations and associated facilities, institutional strengthening and training.

9.      GREP was expected to increase the share of natural gas in India's total energy supply
from 6 to 13% by 1999/2000, saving on average, $600 m annually in foreign exchange,
providing feedstock for 2.45 m tons per annum of fertilizer, meeting the fuel requirements for
1,700 megawatt (MW) of additional power generation, and producing 40,000 tons of liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) and 396,000 tons of ethane/propane annually.

10.     In addition, ADB loan covenants attached to GREP were directed at further reform in the
natural gas sector. In particular, GOI was required to: (i) allow gas marketing companies to
determine the price of gas, based on market conditions once the Administered Pricing
Mechanism (APM) expired; (ii) reduce its equity ownership in GAIL by not less than 30% by
December 1996, through dilution or divestiture of its shareholding; and (iii) limit its role to
providing broad guidelines on gas use, giving gas companies freedom to determine their own
marketing strategies.

D.        Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

11.      The total project cost was estimated at $1,008 million, of which $646 million was foreign
exchange and $362 million local currency. The base cost (i.e., excluding physical and price
contingencies, each 10% of base cost, and interest during construction, 13% of base cost, was
$753.8 million, comprising $486.2 million foreign exchange cost and $267.6 million local
currency. The main components of the base cost were compressors and terminals (29%),
pipeline and associated materials (26%) and a gas processing plant (14%). ADB's loan of $260
million was to finance the bulk of the foreign exchange cost of compressors, pipeline and
institutional strengthening, representing 40% of total foreign exchange cost and 26% of total
project cost. The project scope, appraisal estimates versus actual costs, and project
implementation schedule are attached as Appendixes 1, 2, and 3.

12.     During project processing, the Export-Import Bank of Japan (JEXIM), indicated it would
also be willing to cofinance GREP. Eventually, JEXIM agreed to finance 17% of total project
cost, with a further 17% expected to be provided by export and suppliers' credit. GAIL would
match ADB's contribution of 26% while the remaining 14% would be provided by the Oil Industry
Development Board (OIDB). GREP was to be implemented by GAIL, which had already
established a Project Implementation Office (PIO).



3
    Loan 1285-IND: Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion Project, for $260 million, approved on 7 December 1993.
                                                                                               3



E.     Completion and Self-Evaluation

13.     ADB's project completion report (PCR) was finalized in December 2001, on the basis of
a review mission in August 2001, although GREP was completed in July 1998 (footnote 3).
GAIL had been requested to provide a draft PCR, but one was not prepared and only basic data
was provided. The major conclusion of the PCR was that the primary objective of GREP (to
upgrade the capacity of the HBJ pipeline to transmit 33 MMSCMD of natural gas) had been
achieved with only four months delay in commissioning, and cost savings of 44%, and, that
GREP was rated as "successful". In addition, GREP had contributed to environmental
improvements by reducing gas flaring, substituting gas for coal in electricity generation and
industrial plants and reducing pollution from a large number of small industries, particularly in
the Agra area. The PCR noted, that, while GAIL had complied with all ADB's loan covenants,
GOI had failed to comply with those relating to reform of the gas sector.

14.     The PCR also criticized ADB's appraisal of GREP. It was noted that in view of the fact
that 44% of the ADB loan was cancelled, "a more realistic assessment of project costs should
be made at appraisal" by ADB and "there is still some scope for reducing the time schedule by
effective appraisal".

15.      With respect to GAIL, the PCR recommended that GAIL should establish a
procurement/monitoring system for cutting down delays in estimating bids; provide adequate
staff training; link up with other companies to bring additional gas into India from abroad; and
have more powers to operate on a commercial basis.

F.     Operations Evaluation

16.     The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) was fielded in October 2003. The main
objectives of the Mission, were to undertake: (i) an in-depth assessment of why project costs
were 44% lower than estimated at appraisal; (ii) an attempt at quantification of the
environmental impacts of GREP, and the impact of gas supply on consumers; and (iii) an
evaluation of the reforms carried out and proposed in the gas sector, as a result of covenants
included in the ADB loan.

17.      The OEM visited senior technical and financial management and staff of GAIL, as well
as GAIL staff at installations along the GREP pipeline. In addition, the OEM consulted with the
Director of Natural Gas at the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MPNG), officials in
various environmental agencies, staff of the World Bank, JEXIM and ADB's India Resident
Mission (INRM), and a sample of existing and former customers of GAIL in the electric power,
fertilizer, refinery and small-scale manufacturing sectors.

18.    Facilities at both ends of GREP were visited, as were compressor stations at Vaghodia
and Jhabua and the city gate station at Ferozabad. Site visits were also made to Delhi Electric
Supply Undertaking (DESU) and Dadri power plants, Mathura Refinery, National Fertilizer
Limited's plant at Bijaipur, iron foundries in Agra and glass factories in Ferozabad.
4


                    II.      PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE

A.        Formulation and Design

19.     The average annual growth of India's gross domestic product (GDP), from 1992, was
6.7%.4 To maintain economic growth while reducing the current account deficit, the Government
focused on reforms to the energy sector to reduce imports of petroleum products and increase
the efficiency of energy use. GREP enhanced the infrastructure necessary to make use of
offshore gas that was being flared thereby making its supply to important large consumers such
as power generation and fertilizer plants possible. This was consistent with ADB's country
operational strategy in India (para. 1). The relevance of GREP was reinforced by sustained high
international oil prices. Without GREP, India's foreign exchange bill to meet energy demand
would have increased even more rapidly than it did.

20.     Project formulation and design was helped considerably by TA 1837-IND, approved in
December 1992, to study the financial restructuring of GAIL and to reconfirm the proposed
rehabilitation and expansion scheme represented the optimum design.

B.        Achievement of Outputs

21.     The prime objective of increasing the throughput of the HBJ pipeline to 33 MMSCMD
was achieved by February 2000, with throughput increasing gradually from 25 MMSCMD at the
time GREP became fully operational in January 1998. Even so, the share of natural gas in total
energy supply is slightly less than the 10% targeted, as energy demand had grown rapidly.5 The
objective of reducing dependence on imported petroleum and products was not achieved. As a
proportion of total imports, petroleum products dropped to 15% in 1998-1999 but during the last
2 years, it had risen again to 29%.6 By 2000, India's energy balance showed that imports
represented 69% of total petroleum consumption compared with 45% a decade earlier.7
Estimated foreign exchange savings due to GREP were about $420 million annually rather than
the $600 million expected.8

22.      The other quantitative targets were met or exceeded. Gas has provided inputs for 4.02
million tons of fertilizer production annually, 1.57 million tons more than envisaged, 2,483 MW of
electricity generation, 783 MW more than forecast, and 1.1 million tons of ethane/propane/LPG,
more than double the expected amount.

23.     The major consumers of the HBJ pipeline are 9 electric power plants, 7 fertilizer
factories, 2 petrochemical plants, 2 compressed natural gas (CNG) plants, 2 LPG plants, and
one industrial complex. Total gas sales to these groups are given in Appendix 4 (Gas
Sales/Percentage Sales), which shows that, in 2002, power generation consumed 44% of total
gas sales, fertilizer factories 43%, petrochemical and CNG plants 3% each, and others 7%. The
GREP pipeline enabled 4 new operations (2 fertilizer plants, 1 power plant, and 1 LPG plant) to
be constructed to use gas and Mathura Refinery's power plant to be converted to gas, while
additional gas could be provided for all other plants along the HBJ pipeline.



4
    The World Bank. 2003. India: Sustaining Reform, Reducing Poverty (a World Bank Development Policy Review, p. 3).
5
    ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program ­ India 2003­2006.
6
    Data from the Central Bank of India Monthly Bulletins.
7
    Data from Country Energy Data Report ­ India, website of U.S. Department of Energy, 13 October, 2003.
8
    Calculated by OEM on the assumption that if the 15 m MMSCMD additional gas provided by GREP had had to be
    imported, the price would have been $2.3 million British thermal unit (MMBTU) (30 SCM = 1 MMBTU).
                                                                                                               5


24.     In addition, and not foreseen at appraisal, by 2002/3 sufficient gas was available to
Indraprashtha Gas Limited (IGL) and Mahanagar Gas Limited (MGL), both joint venture
companies of GAIL, to distribute sufficient supply of CNG to enable major conversion of the
Delhi and Mumbai public transport systems to clean fuel. Over 82,000 vehicles in Delhi,
including all buses, most motor-rickshaws and many taxis now use CNG (as well as gasoline)
and the number of CNG filling stations has risen rapidly from the original nine to 115,9 to meet
growing demand. In Mumbai, 78,000 vehicles have converted to CNG.10

25.     There were some changes made to the scope of GREP, after approval but before
commencement of construction, all of which clearly improved the Project and contributed
substantially to reducing overall cost. The total length of the pipeline was reduced by 7 km to
498 km, due to realignment of the route and the pipe diameter was increased from 28 to 36 in to
allow for future increased gas availability. The 75 km 18 in spur line from Dadri to Bawana was
not laid during project implementation, because the gas-based power plant at Bawana, which
was to be the sole user, had been delayed. Following a Supreme Court directive to reduce
pollution and environmental degradation around the Taj Mahal and other important historical
sites, spur lines were laid to Agra and Ferozabad as well as to Mathura Refinery. These spurs
were not financed, but were approved by ADB.11

26.     There were also changes to the horsepower ratings of the compressors, partly because
of the larger pipeline diameter, but mainly because compressor technology was advancing
rapidly and GAIL was determined to use the most efficient, state-of-the-art equipment and take
full advantage of highly competitive market conditions. ADB agreed to all changes in project
scope, as well as to changes in the type of compressors, but did not reassess the impact on
total project costs and consider any immediate cancellation of savings.

27.     ADB's objective of further encouraging gas sector reforms, through the use of loan
covenants, was not achieved, partly because the covenants were not properly formulated. The
APM, which is used to set the landed cost of gas for the GREP pipeline, is still in operation 10
years after the covenant was agreed, in the absence of any other mechanism for setting the
price of this untradeable product. The real issue for ADB was clearly not the APM itself, but the
level at which the gas price has been set. At present, the price is 75% of the international price
of a basket of internationally traded fuel oils. This, in effect, provides a "subsidy" for the
delivered price of gas, and in particular helps keep prices of electricity and fertilizer lower than
they would otherwise be. The latest Government deadline for abolishing the APM in December
2002, has passed and the Government has still not set a new date. However, when other
market-priced sources of gas becomes available, starting in 2004, the APM will anyway have to
be amended or abandoned, as gas provided by competitors will be at full market price.

28.     The Government has taken measures to divest its shareholding in GAIL by 32.7%, in
accordance with the ADB's covenant. However, 9.6% was to other public sector enterprises
(PSEs), through a share swap, which was not the intent of the covenant. Details of GAIL's
current shareholding is shown in Table 1.



9
   This comprises 78 online/mother stations, 7 daughter stations and 30 daughter booster stations.
10
   Data for Delhi from the IGL website, CNG Consumers, 2 October 2003; data for Mumbai from GAIL (India) Ltd.,
   Gas and Beyond ­ 19th Annual Report 2002-2003, p. 13.
11
   These changes to the project scope were, however, also considered and agreed to in a separate ADB report,
   Technical Assistance to the Republic of India for the Environmental Improvement and Sustainable Development of
   the Agra-Mathura-Ferozabad Trapezium in Uttar Pradesh, December 1995, p. 3. This TA was approved by the
   President on 15 December 1995.
6


                  Table 1: Gas Authority of India Limited Current Shareholding

                  Item                                                                 %

                  GOI                                                                67.35
                  PSEs
                       - ONGC                                                         4.83
                       - IOC                                                          4.83
                  Unit Trust of India                                                 2.03
                  Life Insurance Company of India                                     2.99
                  Global Depository Receipts                                         12.09
                  Other Private Investors                                             5.88

                           Total                                                   100.00

                  GOI = Government of India, IOC = Indian Oil Corporation, ONGC = Oil and
                  Natural Gas Corporation Limited, PSE = public sector enterprise.

29.      Further divestment is desirable but now seems to be less relevant in a new competitive
market. Nevertheless, even though GAIL pays the Government high dividends and taxes, it is
likely the Government will soon divest more of its shares due to the budget deficit and short-
term liquidity reasons, while still keeping a controlling interest in GAIL.

30.      The original loan covenant requiring GAIL to open up its marketing arrangements to
competition has also been overtaken by events. GAIL is actually doing no marketing at present
to any customers, particularly to the small-scale sector, where it does have marketing freedom,
because it has to restrict supply owing to a shortage of gas in the GREP, and an overall
shortage of gas in the country. Moreover, GAIL's major customers are the electricity and
fertilizer industries, which have entered into long-term contracts as directed by the Government.
GAIL has already planned to transfer future marketing activities into a new company to compete
with other major Indian and international companies that are already developing new sources of
gas supply and new markets, a positive situation which did not exist at the time of project
design.

C.       Cost, Financing Plan, and Scheduling

31.      Project cost savings of 44.4% led to only 60.6% of the ADB loan being used. A clear
distinction should be made between tangible investment costs (i.e., for purchase and
installation of project equipment) and physical and price contingencies which were equivalent to
25% of investment costs.12 At the request of ADB, the contingency allowances normally used by
GAIL13 were substantially increased. This happened in several other ADB projects at around the
same time in India, even though it was not consistent with ADB's own guidelines.14 There
was also an element of double counting in physical contingencies, first because the estimate for

12
   These contingencies were certainly not justified in the report and recommendation of the President, which noted (p.
   27) that "it is reasonable to assume that the geological risk is minimal" and "the risks of delays in [project
   implementation are minimal because: (i) the Project is in an advanced stage of preparation, (ii) GAIL has gained
   considerable experience in implementing such projects, and (iii) GAIL is being assisted in project management and
   implementation by reputable consultants".
13
   3­5% physical contingencies for a project which extended and upgraded an existing project and negligible for price
   contingencies because these were essentially incorporated in the costs of delivered equipment.
14
   See Guidelines for the Financial Governance and Management of Investment Projects Financed by ADB. pp. 12­
   17.
                                                                                                        7


`pressure upgrading' covered costs of potential technical changes to components of the pipeline
system that later proved unnecessary; second, because the estimate for `consultancy services'
was for foreign consultancy which was eventually not needed.

32.     Other intangible costs proved to be inflated. For example, the actual interest during
construction was lower due to the lower amount actually disbursed. Moreover, taxes, duties,
insurance and handling were based on a larger foreign exchange component of investment
costs than GAIL anticipated. Of the total difference between estimated and actual project costs
($447.6 million), as much as 78% was accounted for by differences in the costs of intangibles.

33.  The reasons for differences between estimated and actual costs for the investment
components that had significant savings are examined in Table 2.

             Table 2: Comparison of Key Appraisal Estimates with Actual Costs

                   Estimate       Actual
Item              ($ million)   ($ million)                           Reasons

Land                 27.00          2.88      (i) The original estimate included a high compensatory
Acquisition and                                     cost for the pipeline passing through two stretches
Right of Way                                        of forest, 35 km and 45 km respectively, near Guna
                                                    and Muraina. The former ultimately did not require
                                                    any compensation, while the latter required less
                                                    than half the estimated compensation, saving over
                                                    $5 million.
                                              (ii) The land for compressor stations at Bijaipur and
                                                    Dholpur was ultimately not required as these
                                                    stations were dropped because of the increased
                                                    pipeline size. This resulted in a saving of about $16
                                                    million.
                                              (iii) Actual compensation paid out for right of way was
                                                    at a lower rate than estimated.

Cathodic              7.60          1.10      The actual cost figure is understated. It should be
Protection                                    about $2.5 million. The reduction was on account of
                                              selecting a different type of power source.

Compressors         188.10        110.56      Deletion of the Bijaipur and Dholpur compressors,
                                              on account of increased size of the pipeline, in
                                              early 1994 resulted in a saving of $45 million. A
                                              further reduction of $32 million was due to
                                              acceptance of larger compressors than those
                                              envisaged at appraisal. The original estimate had
                                              envisaged 6-9MW units as there were five
                                              competitive manufacturers in this range. However,
                                              at GAIL's insistence, manufacturers of larger
                                              compressors were later allowed to bid.

LPG (Gas            108.20         93.77      The actual cost was lower because of competition
Process) Plant                                among suppliers.
8


                       Estimate        Actual
Item                  ($ million)    ($ million)                            Reasons

Telecom/                 12.20            6.62      A significant saving of $6 million was achieved due to
SCADA                                               intensive competition in the telecommunications
                                                    equipment and SCADA hardware/software market at
                                                    the time of procurement. A drop of almost 50% in the
                                                    prices of these items occurred during this period.

Institutional              2.00           0.63      A Gas Training Institute was set-up by GAIL in
Strengthening                                       collaboration with Dansk Olie og Natur Gas at Noida,
                                                    near Delhi during 1995-1997. This institute extended all
                                                    training facilities required for world class operation and
                                                    maintenance of gas pipeline systems. As a result,
                                                    some of the allocation for training and institutional
                                                    strengthening was not required.

GAIL = Gas Authority of India, Limited, km = kilometer, LPG = liquefied petroleum gas, MW = megawatt, SCADA
= supervisory control and data acquisition.

34.     There are two components where costs were greater than estimated: the line pipes and
pipeline construction. The increase in pipeline diameter from 28 in to 36 in should have led to an
increase of about 42% in the "line pipe and coating" cost. However, due to the depressed world
steel market at the time of procurement, the actual increase was only 12.5%. The increase in
pipeline construction cost was 28.6%, slightly lower than expected (30%) under normal
conditions.

35.     It should be noted that, although ADB approved the loan in late December 1993, the
Public Investment Board (PIB) did not approve GREP until the first quarter of 1995. GAIL could
only begin to implement the Project after that date. In the intervening period, ADB sent two
missions to India, an inception mission in March 1994 and a review mission in November 1994.
Although these missions discussed project implementation issues and changes in project
scope, they did not discuss PIB approval or the potentially large reduction in total project costs.
Indeed, the November mission reported it was likely project costs would increase by $1.5 m.15
This conflicts with information obtained by the OEM which suggests that, by the time of PIB
approval, GAIL's management was confident that project costs (which essentially meant the
tangible investment costs) would be 20-25% lower than originally estimated, partly due to a
downturn in international steel prices, partly because of intensive competition among equipment
and civil works suppliers, partly because of the lower cost of compressors and partly because of
lower land acquisition payments.16 GAIL would have saved commitment charges if part of the
ADB loan had been cancelled at that time.

36.     At the time of appraisal, there were undoubtedly some advantages to GAIL to accept a
larger loan from ADB, the only major multilateral development bank then operating in the
hydrocarbons sector in India. The terms of the ADB loan were much better than market, with an
interest rate of about 6.3%, plus 1.2% for the Government guarantee, and a maturity of 20
years, including a four-year grace period. Rupee loans were either unavailable, or only available
on a short-term basis. Suppliers' credits were priced at around 8%, while funds from the OIDB
would cost 16%. The offsetting factor was ADB's commitment charge of 0.8% on the


15
     Back-to-Office Report of the Review Mission, dated 9 December 1994, p. 4.
16
     This statement is based on OEM's interviews with GAIL management and finance personnel who were involved
     with GREP at the time.
                                                                                                                     9


undisbursed portion on the loan and, particularly, the charge on the unused portion of the
original loan. This commitment charged amounted to approximately $1.8 million.

37.    As a result of savings, no suppliers' credit and the funding from OIDB were not utilized.
Only $63.8 million of the original JEXIM loan of $170 was utilized, the balance was later
disbursed for other purposes. Only $157.5 million, 60.6% of the ADB loan was disbursed.
GAIL's financial situation improved dramatically during project implementation. Added to the
reduction in total project costs, this enabled the company to reassess GREP's sources of
finance, using astute financial management to ensure that it used the cheapest funding first.
With attractively priced Rupee loans now available for 8­10 years, both the ADB and JEXIM
loans have been prepaid in 2002.

38.    In retrospect, the inflated project cost estimates appear to have been implicitly agreed
between the Government, ADB, and GAIL, which needed cheaper and longer-term financing at
a time when its liquidity situation was poor. ADB appears to have rushed the loan to the Board
in December 1993, and, the Ministry of Finance appears to have supported the premature
approval of ADB's loan. It would have been prudent for ADB to wait for PIB approval of GREP,
and then reassess total project costs before approving its loan. Indeed, since the eventual
foreign exchange cost savings in GREP ($283 million) were actually larger than the original
ADB loan, questions can now be asked about the need for ADB's loan in the first place, and,
whether ADB brought any financial additionality or value added to GREP.

39.     The significant savings in ADB's loan was not unique to this project. Similar ADB
projects in India experienced large cost overruns. Of the 66 loans to India approved by ADB to
September 2003, 22 showed a disbursed loan amount at least 20% lower than the approved
loan amount. According to INRM staff, there are several reasons for this, including exchange
rate fluctuations, more competitive procurement, and cancellations by ADB or the borrower over
technical, financial or procurement issues.17

D.         Consulting Services, Procurement, and Construction

40.     As agreed at appraisal, GAIL appointed Engineers India Limited (EIL), an experienced
Indian engineering firm, to: (i) carry out basic design and engineering of all project components,
(EIL was supported by Det Norske Veritas, an international consulting firm); (ii) assist in
procurement of materials and equipment; (iii) provide quality assurance and quality control; (iii)
provide project management services reporting; (iv) assist with commissioning and start up; and
(v) prepare an environmental impact assessment (EIA).

41.    GAIL received considerable guidance from ADB on its procurement guidelines and both
the ADB and JEXIM components of GREP followed these. No issues arose with the
procurement of pipeline and associated equipment, supplied on time by two Indian companies.
In the case of the compressors, ADB finally agreed to GAIL's request, in opposition to both
MPNG and EIL, that bidders should determine the most cost-effective size and design. This had
the impact of reducing the cost of compressors and increasing their efficiency. In the case of
the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system for continuous pipeline
monitoring, GAIL believed that it could procure the equipment at a substantially cheaper price
than that bid by the only technically competent bid received under ADB procurement. GAIL,
therefore, proposed a new tendering process, which ADB could not agree to as, under its


17
     In particular the major depreciation of the rupee from Rp31 to Rp45 reduces the US$ equivalents of project cost in
     local currency.
10


procedures, GAIL should have accepted the original bid. In the event, ADB and GAIL agreed to
remove the SCADA system from ADB financing. It was financed 6 years later by JEXIM, at a
very much lower price than originally estimated or bid.

42.     The consultants and civil and structural contractors satisfactorily completed their work
within the time schedule specified in their contracts.

E.         Organization and Management

43.     Throughout project implementation and operation, GAIL's performance has been highly
satisfactory as the major player in the Indian long-distance gas pipeline sector. It now employs
3,385 staff, of whom 2,257 are technical (2,147 on site and 110 at Headquarters) and 1,128 are
non-technical (886 on site and 242 at Headquarters).18 In 2002, GAIL, was rated second among
global gas utilities by the Global Platts Survey, in terms of return on capital invested and was
one of 20 Indian companies included in the Forbes 2000, where the world's biggest companies
were measured by a composite of sales, profits, assets and market value. GAIL's capabilities to
formulate, design, implement, operate and maintain gas pipeline projects are in line with
international standards. GAIL's organization structure is shown at Appendix 5.

44.      All ADB loan covenants in connection with GAIL's obligations were complied with,
illustrating GAIL's commitment to GREP and the capability of its staff (Appendix 6). These
included the covenant to establish take-or-pay contracts with all major gas consumers.
However, as discussed in paras. 28-31 above, three covenants agreed to by the Government as
guarantor of the loan, were not complied with. These related to gas reform sector issues
regarding gas pricing, divestment of Government shares, and gas marketing arrangements,
none of which were the responsibility of GAIL. OEM considers these covenants were imprecise
and such conditions were not treated with great seriousness or commitment by the Government.
It should be noted however, that, in contrast most of ADB's loan covenants included in the
Hydrocarbon Sector Program Loan were complied with.19

45.    The PCR noted that only 12 of the 15 training courses financed by GREP were
successfully completed. This was partly because GAIL had established its own training institute
and had forged linkages with leading management institutes such as the Indian School of
Business and the Indian Institute of Management. GAIL's original target of training 75% of its
employees has been achieved by 2001, and a new policy of "one training per employee per
year" has since been adopted.

                             III.    ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE

A.         Operational Performance

46.     The prime objective of GREP was met, namely, to enhance the carrying capacity of the
HBJ pipeline from 18 to 33 MMSCMD, utilizing gas which otherwise would have been flared.
The other project-related quantitative targets were also met or exceeded and significant
environmental benefits have been achieved. All project facilities inspected were well maintained
and in excellent condition at the time of OEM's visit. Assuming the constant supply of gas, which
in fact will increase in early 2004 on commissioning of the Petronet LNG terminal, the project is
technically, environmentally, and financially sustainable.


18
     Data from GAIL's Human Resources Department.
19
     ADB. 2001. Program Performance Audit Report on the Hydrocarbon Sector Program Loan in India. Manila.
                                                                                                                11


B.      Performance of the Operational Entity

47.    In 1997, GAIL was conferred "navratna" status by the Government, which allows it
greater financial and managerial autonomy and powers to develop, implement, and operate
commercial projects. It is listed on three Indian stock exchanges and the London Stock
Exchange.

48.    GAIL has continued to become a stronger institution since the GREP project was
commissioned. The company's most recent financial statements are attached as Appendix 7.
Performance was strong, with both turnover and operating margins in 2002-3 recording gains
over the previous year. A total dividend equivalent to 70% of share capital was paid to
shareholders.

49.      GAIL has become a key player in the natural gas sector and has evolved into a major
integrated gas company, spanning the entire upstream and downstream gas chain. Its core
activity remains gas transmission and it has recently been given the monopoly to construct and
operate all transmission pipelines longer than 100 km on a common carrier (open access)
principle, as part of the Government's strategy to create a 7,000 km National Gas Grid over the
next five to 6 years.20 GAIL has entered into upstream activities, aimed at enhancing gas
supplies, through pipeline imports from nearby countries, exploring for new gas reserves­in
consortium with other Indian and foreign companies­importing LNG from Qatar through a long-
term contract of its joint-venture company Petronet LNG Limited and researching the potential
for the development of gas hydrates and coal-bed methane. Downstream, GAIL has two joint
ventures. Mahangar Gas Limited (MGL) in Mumbai and Indraprashtha Gas Limited (IGL) in
Delhi, to supply gas to domestic and commercial consumers and, most importantly, provide
CNG to the transport sector.21

50.     GAIL's institutional skills have been substantially enhanced following GREP. In addition
to GAIL's upstream and downstream activities, the following activities have been commenced or
are planned: (i) two new major pipeline projects, of re-gasified LNG from Petronet LNG's
terminal at Dahej to Bijaipur; and an LPG pipeline from Vizag to Secunderabad; (ii) four smaller
pipeline projects for natural gas, re-gasified LNG and LPG; (iii) the Agra-Ferozabad loopline to
augment existing supplies; (iv) CNG and city gas distribution networks in Lucknow, Kanpur,
Agra, Faridabad and Pune; (v) upgrading of pipeline related telecommunications networks; and
(vi) GAIL is also conducting research and development into methods of converting diesel
generators to natural gas, producing solid fuels from plastic wastes and separating light
paraffins and olefins by adsorption from natural gas.22

C.      Economic and Financial Reevaluation

51.     Appendix 8 contains the recalculated financial internal rate of return (FIRR) and the
economic internal rate of return (EIRR), using updated information to 2002­2003, obtained from
GAIL. The assumptions are the same as used at appraisal, and are discussed in the appendix.
The revised FIRR with APM is only marginally different before tax (19.8% instead of 15.0% at
appraisal) and 18.8% after tax. Both total revenue and incremental operating costs in the final
12 years of operation are expected to be slightly lower (about 5.0%) than expected at the time
of the PCR.


20
   The Statesman. 30 September 2003. Centre to Set Up National Gas Grid.
21
   Further details can be found in GAIL (India) Ltd. Gas and Beyond ­ 19th Annual Report 2002-2003, pp. 9­17.
22
   GAIL (India) Limited, Gas and Beyond ­ 19th Annual Report 2002-2003, pp. 14-17.
12


52.     The EIRR has been recalculated using the same methodology at appraisal and using
revised figures for the international prices of petroleum products. The EIRR is now estimated at
26.2%, compared to 26.4% at the time of appraisal and 30.5% in the PCR. It must be noted that
this highly satisfactory EIRR is, in fact, the lower band, as it excludes the environmental and
operational benefits produced by the use of natural gas rather than coal, fuel oil or naphtha.

53.    OEM questions the original methodology for calculating the FIRR and EIRR. Use of
more realistic assumptions in the calculations, such as a longer economic life of the project and
increasing, rather than straight-line, benefits, and consistency in the use of residual values,
would further increase the already high EIRR and FIRR.

D.      Sustainability

54.      The sustainability of GREP depends on continued demand for, and adequate supply of,
natural gas. Demand is likely to continue to grow at a high rate, even with the substantially
higher delivered prices expected for new sources of imported gas, in the order of $3.5­$4.0 per
million British thermal unit (MMBTU), compared to $2.175 currently, because of rapid expansion
of the economy, expected high international oil prices, the popularity of gas as a fuel,
particularly as the transmission grid expands to cover new areas, and improved enforcement of
tough environmental emission standards. Rising gas demand is also relatively assured subject
to pricing, since 78% of gas is supplied to produce electricity and fertilizer, and 5% is converted
to CNG. All these gas users are currently suffering supply shortages.

55.      Supply depends crucially on new discoveries of indigenous gas and the feasibility of
imports from new sources of supply. India's reserves of recoverable gas are currently estimated
at 692 billion cubic meters (enough for more than 20 years at currently projected demand) and
major exploration is underway. Gas is produced from seven western fields23 and recent large
discoveries in the Bay of Bengal indicate the possibility of finding large reserves on the eastern
coast. At the same time, India is strategically located to import gas from nearby countries in the
Middle East, Central Asia and Bangladesh through pipelines, as well as LNG from the Arabian
Gulf and Southeast Asia. The Government has encouraged gas imports by removing all
restrictions and the private sector is now free to import natural gas, which it is doing.24 LNG
imports by Petronet LNG, to be transported through an expanded, HBJ pipeline, are expected to
start in early 2004.

56.    Project sustainability is further enhanced by the operating, maintenance and safety
procedures of GAIL, which are all in accordance with internationally accepted standards. The
terminal facilities have been well designed to handle additional gas and are being operated and
maintained by competent and trained personnel. The expected design life is about 30 years,
assuming proper corrosion inspection and remediation measures. The cathodic protection
system for GREP is very effective, with only about 10­12% of protective current requirement
compared to design.25 This provides adequate confidence that the system will be able to run




23
   Bombay High, Heera, Neelam, Panna-Mukta, Ratna, South Bassein and Tapti.
24
   ADB. 2002. Country Strategy and Program ­ India 2003-2006. Manila.
25
   The cathodic protection system for GREP has been based on Thermo-Electric Generators (TEGs) as the power
   source. GAIL`s experience with TEGs is satisfactory, though not as good as with Closed Cycle Vapour Turbo-
   Generators (CCVT), which were deployed in HBJ and are operating without any major problem even after 15 years.
   The coating on line pipe as a passive means of corrosion protection in GREP is the same as that in HBJ (3-layer
   PE).
                                                                                                        13


through the design life without any problems. The HBJ pipeline is sustainable, it has been
operating efficiently since 1986 and, with GREP, is setting standards for all future pipeline
design, construction, and operation in India.

57.     The Project is financially sustainable with a recalculated FIRR of 18.8%, after tax (para.
51).

                 IV.     ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

A.      Socioeconomic/Environmental Impacts

58.    As GREP was to upgrade and expand an existing gas pipeline, it was not originally
designed to produce direct socioeconomic benefits. Indirect benefits, in terms of generation of
both skilled and unskilled jobs, have been achieved through the construction and operation of
new gas-fired power plants and fertilizer factories, while the relatively low price of gas has led to
cheaper electricity and fertilizers, benefiting economic development in general and poorer
sections of the community in particular. In addition, the spur line to Agra and Ferozabad,
together with GAIL's associated gas distribution networks in these cities, has substantially
increased employment of both skilled and unskilled workers, particularly in Ferozabad's glass-
making industry.

59.      The environmental impacts of GREP are complex. At the outset, there was concern
about potential adverse environmental impacts of construction of the pipeline. An EIA was
carried out by EIL in association with the Wildlife Institute of India (WII), adopting ADB and the
Government guidelines. The EIA showed that none of the impacts on forests, wild life and
vegetation would be significant provided that appropriate mitigating measures were taken to
protect agricultural and irrigation activities, compensate local inhabitants for inconvenience,
prevent adverse ecological impacts in sensitive areas and implement all approved safety
measures. Its recommendations were relatively minor and concerned small additional measures
to dispose of waste oil, plant more trees around compressor stations, adapt sewage treatment
facilities and implement an Environmental Management Plan (EMP).26 GAIL was required to
provide ADB with annual reports on environmental issues. Instead, however, it chose to
commission the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) to carry out an
evaluation of the EMP. The report concluded that GAIL had "effectively implemented almost all
the EMP measures outlined in the EIA report and also (those) in the WII report specifically
dealing with the ecologically sensitive areas". NEERI was particularly complimentary about the
efforts by GAIL to minimize disruption from disposal systems at the Bijaipur control center.27

60.     Although it is difficult to separate the environmental impact of enhanced gas supply from
that of Government environmental legislation (e.g., minimize pollution and force industrial
relocation), the OEM has seen major environmental improvements as a result of the gas
provided by the GREP pipeline. For example:

        (i)     New gas-fired power stations visited (such as the four units at Dadri totaling 585
                MW) are extremely clean and efficient, with no visible emissions and, together
                with the reduction in emissions from the coal-fired units in the plant have
                dramatically reduced the serious pollution that previously blackened the area.

26
   ADB. 1993. Office of the Secretary. Summary Environmental Impact Assessment (SEIA) for the Proposed Gas
   Rehabilitation and Expansion Project (India). (Restricted). Manila.
27
   National Environmental Engineering Research Institute. 1999. Evaluation of Environmental Management Plan
   Implemented for the Upgradation of HBJ Gas Pipeline.
14


        (ii)    The introduction of CNG for use in buses, taxis, auto-rickshaws, and other
                vehicles in the Delhi area has had a measurable impact on reducing nitrogen
                oxides. This success is being replicated in Mumbai and will be extended to other
                priority cities when gas becomes available.
        (iii)   A massive, and visible, improvement in the environmental situation around the
                Mathura Refinery, and hence to historical and heritage monuments in the area,
                has been achieved with the conversion of the refinery's power plant from coal to
                gas. There are no visible emissions, apart from minor flaring of surplus refinery
                gas, and a five-acre ecological park has been established around ponds of
                treated refinery effluent. This is now the home to up to 90 varieties of indigenous
                and migratory birds.
        (iv)    Major reductions have been achieved in pollution formerly generated by the small
                and medium glass factories in Ferozabad and the iron foundries in Agra, all of
                which converted from coal and are now being supplied through GAIL's gas
                distribution networks in these cities.
        (v)     GAIL has given environmental issues, especially energy conservation, high
                priority in all its operations, through a variety of different measures. GAIL
                estimates the overall savings to its operation costs due to conservation efforts in
                2002-2003 were around $64 million (footnote 22).

61.    Quantification of many of the environmental benefits has been difficult, not least because
responsibilities of various agencies concerned with environmental issues overlap, there is little
coordination between them and there is no agreement on appropriate measurable indicators or
the means of monitoring them. However, some reliable quantitative evidence exists for the Delhi
and Agra Trapezium areas.

62.     A comparison of air quality at the Taj Mahal in 1997 and 2003 is given in Table 3:

        Table 3: Comparison of Air Quality in 1997 and 2003 at the Taj Mahal

Year                       SOx (microgm/m3)            NOx (microgm/m3)           SPM (microgm/m3)

1997                                13.7                        12.0                        380
2003                                 4­5                        6­7                         370

m3 = cubic meter, microgm = microgram, NOx = nitrogen oxide, SOx = sulfur oxide, SPM = suspended particulate
matter.

63.     The introduction of CNG has produced major environmental benefits. A comparison of
air quality in 1998 and 2003 in Delhi is given in Table 4:

                 Table 4: Comparison of Air Quality in 1998 and 2003 in Delhi

Year                       SOx (microgm/m3)            NOx (microgm/m3)           SPM (microgm/m3)

1998                                179                        323                         135
2003                                  7                         19                         273

m3 = cubic meter, microgm = microgram, NOx = nitrogen oxide, SOx = sulfur oxide, SPM = suspended particulate
matter.
                                                                                                                  15


64.     The improvement in air quality is, of course, not only due to CNG introduction in Delhi
but also to stricter enforcement of Government anti-pollution laws in and around Delhi. A
comparison of the transport sector's contribution to pollution in 1998 (which was 11 micrograms
[microgm] of SOx and 157 microgm of NOx) gives a clearer measure of the contribution of CNG
in reducing pollution. Importantly, all additions to power generation capacity in Delhi have been
based only on natural gas and many polluting industries have been moved out of the national
capital region. However, SPM has increased due to higher levels of sand, dust, and traffic
pollution in the atmosphere.

65.     In the Agra Trapezium area, the impact of the spur lines from the GREP pipeline to Agra
and Ferozabad, and GAIL's associated gas distribution networks in those cities, has had a
major impact on the development of small and medium scale industries. This is particularly true
of the glass-making industry of Ferozabad. At present, 134 plants (mostly glass or ceramics),
which formerly used coal as fuel, have entered gas supply contracts. In addition to the
immediate reduction in pollution, the cleanliness and constancy of gas supply has enabled
these plants to increase the quality, quantity and variety of their output. In many cases
production is now mainly for export.28 Moreover, new designs of furnace to replace the existing
pot and tank furnaces have further increased productivity. In 1993, coal-using iron foundries in
Agra were warned that they had to close down and, by 1998, only 89 were left. Of these, 46
restarted operations using gas but have had some initial difficulties in designing appropriate
gas-fired furnaces. At present there are 10 firms using induction furnaces, 30 using rotary
furnaces and six using cupolas. Total gas consumption in Ferozabad is 0.82 MMSCMD and in
Agra 0.08 MMSCMD. The OEM was advised that the businesses which had converted to gas
had increased staff on average between 20­30% and, provided additional gas is made
available in 2004, these businesses can grow a further 30­50%.

66.      The downside to these advancements in Ferozabad and Agra, as witnessed by the OEM
in its site visits to three glass factories and two iron foundries, was that these five companies
were clearly not complying with the Government's regulations on health and safety. Protective
clothing and footwear was not in evidence, despite the proliferation of molten and shattered
glass, molten iron and the intense heat from furnaces. Working conditions were generally
primitive. This is in complete contrast to the major gas customers in the fertilizer and electricity
industries, whose operational health and safety standards are maintained at a very high level.

67.     Environmental benefits in the Agra Trapezium area were also significantly helped by the
spur line to Mathura Refinery, which has replaced coal by gas to fuel its power plant, which also
removes lead and over 96% of sulfur from its products. The refinery, which consumes 0.85
MMSCMD of gas, monitors air quality at three stations­one at the refinery, one at the Taj Mahal
and the third at a point mid-way. The level of SOx is down to 4­5 micrograms at the Taj Mahal,
compared to 21 micrograms measured in 19931994. The refinery's emissions are down to 330­
350 kg/hr from 1,000 kg/hr in 1996-1997.

68.      The SPM still remains high and is not expected to reduce significantly, in the short term,
as it is largely due to dust and traffic. However, GAIL has plans to introduce CNG to Agra. An
outlay of $23 million has been approved for a City Gas Distribution Project, which will include
seven CNG stations, with the first expected to be operational by April 2004.




28
     One plant visited by the OEM is now producing large numbers of high quality vacuum flasks for export, which would
     have been impossible with coal-fired furnaces.
16


69.    Additionally, CNG has no lead or benzene content, does not dilute the crankcase oil and
increases the life of lubricating oils.

B.         Impacts on Institutions and Policy

70.    Before the early 1990s, most of India's gas production was flared, and the HBJ pipeline
took some of this gas. It is only in the last decade, since the GREP project was approved, that
major changes have taken place in institutions and policy in the natural gas sector with respect
to supply, transmission and distribution. In particular, what was previously a state-owned sector,
closed to outsiders, has been dramatically opened up in a concerted attempt by the
Government to enhance gas supplies from indigenous and foreign sources, and, to encourage
greater use of gas as a fuel.

71.     GREP included a TA component, at the Government's request, to propose an
appropriate regulatory framework for the gas industry. This component had the immediate effect
of bringing gas regulation to the fore of sector discussions, and, although it had no immediate
outcome, due to Government inaction, it is expected that, due to rapidly changing market
conditions, the regulatory mechanism will be in place by 2004. Two independent regulators are
expected. An Upstream Regulator to monitor oil and gas exploration and exploitation and a
Downstream Regulator to cover gas processing and transmission, imports and exports, and,
distribution and marketing. The need for the two regulators has become increasingly urgent
because, following significant changes in government policy, all major players in the Indian
hydrocarbon business have plans to enter the natural gas business, while several private Indian
and multinational companies are expanding their activities in the Indian gas market.29

72.    The Government's gas sector policies have so far had no direct influence on GREP's
operational performance, except the Government sets both the base price of gas through the
APM ($1.55 per MMBTU) and the gas transmission tariff ($0.625 per MMBTU), while expected
changes in policy, including establishment of a downstream gas regulator, are not expected to
impinge on project performance. GAIL's fee for gas transmission is approved by the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas, adopting a cost plus methodology. Similarly, noncompliance with
ADB's loan covenants relating to the Government has not affected project performance.

73.     GAIL itself has dramatically changed, becoming an integrated gas company. It complied
with all relevant ADB loan covenants. This in itself indicates its serious intent. At present, it is
preparing to face the opportunities and challenges of further policy changes, including: (i) natural
gas prices to be progressively brought in line with the international price of fuel oil or a basket of
petroleum products;(ii) unbundling of marketing and transmission services; (iii) introduction of a
common carrier (open access) system for gas transmission; and (iv) giving the Downstream
Regulator a role in the setting of gas transmission prices.

                                       V.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT

A.         Relevance

74.    GREP was highly relevant at appraisal as it was a logical extension of ADB's support to
the hydrocarbons sector in the context of its country operational strategy, and an integral part of



29
     ADB. 2002. Country Strategy and Program ­ India 2003-2006. Manila; also press clippings from the Times of India
     and Economic Times.
                                                                                               17


the Government's strategy to substitute indigenous natural gas for imported petroleum products.
Without GREP, India would have had an even higher import bill for petroleum products. GREP
stimulated the rapid development and consolidation of GAIL as a major player in the
hydrocarbons sector and successfully laid the groundwork for countrywide expansion of the
proposed National Gas Grid. Overall, GREP has been highly relevant.

B.     Efficacy

75.     GREP achieved its purpose of increasing the throughput of the HBJ pipeline from 18 to
33 MMSCMD and, by doing so, utilizing gas that would otherwise have been flared. In addition,
it met or exceeded other targets, such as providing inputs to the electric power and fertilizer
industries, and created a whole new environmentally-friendly market in Delhi and Mumbai for
CNG. It also stimulated substitution of coal in the glass-making industries of Ferozabad, the iron
foundries of Agra and Mathura Refinery, all of which contributed substantially to the
Government's policy to reduce pollution in the area of the Taj Mahal and other historic and
heritage monuments. Through GREP and other activities, GAIL adopted modern technologies
and best practices, so that today it can match international standards for the gas industry.
However, the objectives of increasing the share of natural gas with resulting foreign exchange
savings did not materialize as overall growth for energy was faster than forecast at appraisal.
Further, the Government did not comply with the loan covenants to reform the sector as
anticipated. Overall, GREP has been efficacious.

C.     Efficiency

76.     The investment has proved to be highly cost effective, operating at full capacity. The
FIRR has been recalculated on the basis of updated information at 19.8% before tax and 18.8%
after tax, while the EIRR has been recalculated at a highly satisfactory 26.2%. This
demonstrates highly efficient operation. ADB worked closely with JEXIM, and GAIL
implemented GREP successfully with only minor delays in completion, but, the overall project
financing was inefficient as ADB's approved loan was too high and probably not required to
implement the project. Both ADB and JEXIM long-term loans were fully repaid within 4 years of
completion. GREP is rated efficient.

D.     Sustainability

77.     The HBJ pipeline, including the GREP component, is operated and maintained in line
with international standards and is likely to have a life of 30 years. The demand for gas in India
is rapidly increasing because it is the preferred fuel for many purposes, as well as being
cleaner, and a continuous supply of gas from indigenous or imported sources appears to be
assured. The future price competitiveness of gas has not been tested and may be considered to
be an issue, but only because the present supply, which is dwindling rapidly, is currently priced
lower than equivalent petroleum imports as it is mainly used as feedstock for the crucial
electricity and fertilizer industries. GAIL is a financially strong organization. The Project is
considered to be likely sustainable.

E.     Institutional Development and Other Impacts

78.    GREP has brought positive overall impacts on institutional strengthening, environment
and society. It has helped to substantially reduce polluting emissions in the industrial, electric
power and transport sectors. Although GREP did not directly address social and poverty-
oriented goals, it contributed moderately to continuing rapid economic development and the
18


welfare of the poor by helping generate cheaper electricity and produce cheaper urea for
fertilizer in the agricultural sector. The institutional impact of GREP has been substantial
because it provided GAIL with the stimulus to develop into an integrated gas company of
international standing.

F.     Overall Assessment

79.    Based on the above five performance evaluation criteria, GREP is rated as successful.

80.    The outputs of the TA were satisfactory, although the Government has not yet fully
implemented the recommendations but is likely to implement the gas regulatory environment in
2004, when the market further opens up.

81.     The performance of GAIL was highly satisfactory and in some respects the performance
of ADB was satisfactory. Coordination and communication between the two organizations was
mostly good. However, two major aspects of ADB's activities were less than satisfactory; the
estimates of, or acceptance of, total project costs, which turned out to be very much higher than
actual costs, as well as ADB's loan covenants with respect to gas sector reforms, which proved
to be imprecisely formulated and inappropriately attached to what is, essentially, an investment
loan. These two issues raise concerns about the financial and policy additionality of ADB's
contribution to GREP.

                   VI.    ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.     Key Issues

82.     There are issues and questions regarding estimation of project costs and ADB's use of
sector reform covenants. First, ADB approved a project with highly inflated cost estimates and
took no action to cancel a portion of the loan when the Government approved the Project, with
significantly lower costs. As a result, GAIL paid higher than necessary commitment charges to
ADB.

83.     Second, (i) Is it appropriate to attach loan covenants relating to changes in sector policy
to a loan that financed a pipeline project by GAIL, which essentially had no influence on sector
policy? (ii) If such covenants were to be included, should they not have been in the context of
overall energy sector policy rather than piecemeal actions as part of a general view that
unbundling and privatization of PSEs are intrinsically good policies? (iii) Should the loan
covenants have had broader implications and ensured that all final consumers of GREP gas
abided by national health, safety, and environmental regulations (para. 66)? (iv) Should ADB,
during appraisal, have realistically assessed the likelihood of covenants being complied with,
and hence the potential leverage that ADB could achieve in changing sector policy? (v) Even if
complied with, would they have had any major impact on the operations of the Project?

B.     Lessons Identified

84.     Three major lessons learned are relevant for ADB's future operations. First, in relation to
project costing and the development of a financing plan:

       (i)     There should be a realistic assessment of financial costs, technical risks,
               inflation and the competitive situation for the procurement of all project
               investment components. In particular, ADB should rely on technical experts at all
                                                                                                                 19


                    times to examine the basis for project cost estimation and the impact on cost
                    estimates of any changes in project scope or technical specifications.
           (ii)     The inclusion of intangible non-investment costs in the total project cost,
                    especially items such as physical and price contingencies and interest during
                    construction, should be fully justified on the basis of the specific conditions
                    relating to the country and to the project. Care should be taken to avoid arbitrary
                    percentage mark-ups and double-counting (para. 31). If necessary, alternative,
                    more realistic scenarios should be used.
           (iii)    There should be clear justification of the technical, environmental and financial
                    additionality, and ADB's developmental and policy involvement in projects, at the
                    time of appraisal.
           (iv)     If ADB approves a loan substantially in advance of Government approval for
                    projects, a reassessment should be made of total project costs and the size of
                    the ADB loan, once all approvals have been obtained.

85.        Second, in relation to loan covenants:

           (i)      Because of the lack of impact of ADB's loan covenants on the Government's
                    policies, consideration should be given as to whether it is appropriate for ADB to
                    impose loan covenants relating to reforms in sector policy on investment
                    projects.
           (ii)     At the same time, ADB should be prepared, in line with its country strategy, to
                    independently assist the Government in developing and updating India's sector
                    strategies and policies. India presently has no clearly defined overall energy
                    policy and ADB could help to develop such a policy, including assessment of the
                    role of GAIL and other PSEs in the sector, incentives to open up the sector to
                    greater investment and competition, and, the appropriate functions of regulatory
                    mechanisms.
           (iii)    In general, ADB should make realistic efforts at the time of project appraisal to
                    assess its potential leverage through loan covenants, with respect to both the
                    borrower and improvements and reforms to the sector overall.
           (iv)     In projects that lead to expanded industrial and manufacturing activities, ADB
                    should be assured that all relevant environment, health and safety regulations of
                    the respective governments will be complied with.30




30
     In the case of GREP this would certainly have been acceptable to the Government, partly because major gas
     customers in the fertilizer and electricity industries were already operating with the highest health and safety
     standards and partly because it would have given the Government support in ensuring that its regulations were
     complied with in small-medium industries.
20


C.         Follow-Up Actions and Recommendations

           1.      For GAIL

86.    GAIL's performance was highly satisfactory. GAIL may wish to consider ADB's
involvement and participation if the company needs innovative, long-term finance, in either
foreign or local currency, to help fund its very large and ambitious, long-term investment
program, particularly where there are sector policy issues, or, financing constraints from local
lenders.

           2.      For ADB

87.     ADB's current operational strategy for India is to support the gas sector, to reduce
pollution and generate other socio-economic benefits. This includes:

           (i)     Supporting cross-country pipelines because, by and large they "pass through
                   rural areas and can be so developed as to provide natural gas to small-scale
                   industries and household consumers in such areas";
           (ii)    Supporting "clean fuel" projects, which have an impact on environmental, health
                   and gender issues; and
           (iii)   Expediting the establishment of a regulatory framework for the sector,
                   encouraging private sector participation and introducing international technical
                   and management practices.31

88.    The OEM recommends that ADB, as the only major multilateral finance organization
operating in the energy sector in India, should consider a TA grant to finance the preparation of
a comprehensive national energy plan. This plan would identify the major supply and demand
issues facing the sector in the coming decade, develop appropriate strategies and policies for
dealing with them and specify priority investments for finance by Indian and/or foreign private
and public sources.

89.   There are no specific outstanding issues concerning the implementation and operation
of GREP and therefore no follow-up actions are recommended.




31
     ADB. 2002. Country Strategy and Program ­ India 2003-2006. Manila.
                                                                                  Appendix 1     21


                                         PROJECT SCOPE

The project scope comprised the following:

(i)      construction of a 505-kilometer long, 28-inch diameter pipeline between Bijaipur, and
         Dadri and spur lines to Bawana (75 kilometers long, 18 inches in diameter),and
         Faridabad (10 kilometers long, 12 inches in diameter);
(ii)     installation of new compressor stations at Vaghodia and Khera comprising a total of
         about 132,000 horsepower (hp);
(iii)    capacity enhancement and upgrading of the existing compressor stations comprising a
         total of about 77,400 hp at Hazira, Jhabua, and Bijaipur;
(iv)     installation of cathodic protection, telecommunications, and supervisory control and data
         acquisition (SCADA) facilities;
(v)      installation of new gas terminals at Faridabad, Bawana, and Jagdishpur, and upgrading
         of existing gas terminals at Hazira, Bijaipur, and Aonla;
(vi)     installation of a new gas processing plant of 12.7 million cubic meters per day capacity at
         Auraiya;
(vii)    consulting services for engineering, project implementation, and construction supervision;
         and
(viii)   human resources development.

Note: The portion financed by the Asian Development Bank comprises numbers (i), (ii), (iii), and
(viii).
22     Appendix 2




                               PROJECT COST (ORIGINAL VERSUS ACTUAL)

                                                Appraisal Estimate                Actual
     Item                                    Foreign Local      Total   Foreign    Local   Total

     A. Base Cost
        Land acquisition and civil works        0.00  27.00     27.00      0.00     2.88     2.88
        Line pipe and coating                 129.00   0.00    129.00    129.47    15.93   145.40
        Line materials                          5.90   0.40      6.30      0.00     6.43     6.43
        Cathodic protection                     7.60   0.00      7.60      0.95     0.15     1.10
        Compressors                           181.50   6.60    188.10    110.56     0.00   110.56
        Terminals                               4.60   1.40      6.00      0.00     2.80     2.80
        Telecoms and SCADA                     12.20   0.00     12.20      5.52     1.10     6.62
        Pressure upgradation                   11.00   2.80     13.80      0.00     0.26     0.26
        Gas processing plant                   86.30  21.90    108.20     50.68    43.09    93.77
        Pipeline construction                  42.00   7.40     49.40     46.27    17.49    63.76
        Compressor and terminals erection       0.00   9.10      9.10      0.00    10.73    10.73
        Institutional strengthening             1.70   0.30      2.00      0.63     0.00     0.63
        Consultancy services                    2.90  26.30     29.20      0.00    13.71    13.71
        Taxes and duties                        0.00 118.80    118.80      0.00    53.69    53.69
        Project management                      1.50  13.10     14.60      0.00     9.50     9.50
        Port inland handling and insurance      0.00  32.50     32.50      0.00     0.69     0.69

        Total Base Cost                       486.20 267.60    753.80    344.08   178.45   522.53

     B. Contingencies
        Physical contingency                   48.60   26.80    75.40      0.00     0.00     0.00
        Price contingency                      40.90   36.90    77.80      0.00     0.00     0.00

        Total Contingencies                    89.50   63.70   153.20      0.00     0.00     0.00

     C. Interest During Construction           70.30   30.70   101.00     19.20    18.71    37.91

        Total                                 646.00 362.00 1,008.00     363.28   197.16   560.44
                                              PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE VERSUS ACTUAL

S.                                                1993               1994                   1995                   1996                   1997                   1998
No.                     Activity              3          4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4

 1 Survey/ROW Land Acquisition


 2 Civil Works

 3 Process Packages


 4 Detailed Engineering


 5 Procurement

      - Pipeline Ordering


      - Pipeline Manufacturing and Delivery


      - Terminal Ordering


      - Terminal Manufacturing and Delivery


      - Compressor Station Ordering


      - Compressor Station Manufacturing
        and Delivery

 6 Construction

      - Pipeline Tendering


      - Pipeline Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                Appendix 3
      - Terminal Tendering


      - Terminal Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                23
S.                                                     1993               1994                   1995                   1996                   1997                   1998




                                                                                                                                                                                     24
No.                    Activity                    3          4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4   1   2          3   4

      - Compressor Stations




                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 3
       - Hazira, Bijaipur, & Jhabua Tendering


       - Hazira, Bijaipur, & Jhabua Construction


       - Vaghodia & Khera Tendering


       - Vaghodia & Khera Construction


 7 Cathodic Protection

      - Tendering


      - Engineering and Procurement


      - Construction


 8 Telecommunications/SCADA

      - Tendering


      - Manufacture and Delivery


 9 Gas Processing Plant

      - Tendering and Construction


10 System Commissioning


ROW = right of way, SCADA = supervisor contol an data acquisition, S. No. = serial number.
   Appraisal Estimate
   Actual
                                                         GAS SALES/PERCENTAGE SALES

A. Gas Sales

                            Fertilizer    Power    Petrochemical    Others       CNG                         GAIL IC
                                          NTPC                   IOCL Baroda
                                         KAWAS,                  and Mathura,
                                        Jhannore,                  Samcor,
                           GSFC, NFL, ANTA, AUR,                    Agra,                                    GTC IC,
                           CFCL, IGFC,   DADFRI,                  Ferozabad,                                 GTG IC,
                             OCFL,     FBAD, DESU,                  Maruti,                                 HEATER ,                            Total IC
               Total Gas   IFFCO, and Pragati, and               Noida, Small IGL Delhi +         LPG VIJ + CCVT, and                           for the
Year             Sale         TFCL        GIPCL         IPCL      Industries CNG BARODA UPPC PATA LPGVAGH     TEG                                Year
1998-1999       8,987.70      4,740.01       3,327.72              309.06      609.12               1.78     219.42       384.42      257.24      861.07
1999-2000       9,907.35      4,923.66       3,937.43              300.07      739.25               6.93     652.69       401.78      334.20    1,388.67
2000-2001      10,403.99      4,817.86       4,289.75              304.75      960.23              31.40     768.36       380.60      373.36    1,522.32
2001-2002      10,416.28      4,507.34       4,477.52              291.02     1,002.21          138.20       880.05       385.54      378.24    1,643.83
2002-2003      10,272.31      4,401.68       4,532.83              280.43      758.15           299.21      1,032.99      403.47      379.17    1,815.63
2003-2004       4,388.78      1,812.33       2,001.76              103.58      306.58           164.53       337.33       176.26      158.48      672.06

ANT = Anta; AUR = Auraiya; CCVT = Closed Cycle Vapour Turbo-Generator; CNG = compressed natural gas; DADRI = NTPC, Dadri; DESU = Delhi Electric
Supply Undertaking; FBAD = Faridabad; GIPCL = Gujarat Industrial Power Corporation Limited; GSFC = Gujarat State Fertilizer Corporation; GTC IC = gas
turbine compressor internal consumption; GTG IC = Gas Turbine Generator Intl. Consumption; IFFCO = Indian Farmers Fertilizer Corporation Limited; IGFC =
Indo-Gulf Fertilizer Corporation; IGL = Indraprashtha Gas Limited; IOCL = Indian Oil Corporation Limited; IPCL = Indian Petrochemical Corporation Limited;
LPG = liquefied petroleum gas; LPG VAGH = LPG Vaghodia; NFL = National Fertilizer Limited, NTPC; KAWAS = National Thermal Power Corporation, Kawas;
OCFL = Oswal Chemical and Fertilizer Limited, Shahjehanpur; PATA = GAIL's Petrochemical Plant at Pata; SAMCOR = Industrial Consumer at Kota in
Rajasthan; TEG = Thermo-Chemical and Fertilizer Limited; Shahjehanpur; TFCL = Tata Fertilizer and Chemicals Limited; UPPC = GAIL's Uttar Pradesh Petro-
chemical Plant at PATA; VIJ = Vijaypur/Bijaypur.

B. Percentage Sales

Year            Total       Fertilizer      Power       Petrochemical        Other           CNG




                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 4
1998-1999        100            53            37               3               7               0
1999-2000        100            50            40               3               7               0
2000-2001        100            46            41               3               7               0
2001-2002        100            43            43               3               7               1
2002-2003        100            43            44               3               7               3




                                                                                                                                                             25
CNG = compressed natural gas.
   26      Appendix 5


                                   GAS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED:
                                        ORGANIZATION CHART




                                                    Board of
                                                    Directors




                                                 Chairman and
                                                  Managing
                                                   Director




          Finance                      Project                      Planning                   Personnel




 General Manager                Executive Director              Executive Director             General Manager
    (Projects)                     (Projects)                     (Contract and                     (PD)
                                                                  Procurement




Deputy              Deputy                Deputy                General                                    Deputy
General             General               General               Manager                  General           General
Manager             Manager               Manager                (O&M)                   Manager           Manager




  O&M = operation and maintenance, OIC = Officer-in-Charge, PD = Pipeline Development.
  Source: Gas Authority of India Limited.
                                                                                             Appendix 6   27

                      STATUS OF COMPLIANCE WITH MAJOR LOAN COVENANTS

                                                               Reference in Loan
     Covenant                                                     Documents        Status of Compliance

1.   Prior to the implementation of the overseas             Loan Agreement        Complied with.
     training, the Borrower shall submit to the Asian        (LA), Sch. 5,
     Development Bank (ADB) a detailed training              para. 3
     program for its personnel to be trained. The
     Borrower shall make suitable arrangements for
     all staff sent abroad for training to return and
     work for the Borrower for an appropriate period
     after their training is completed.

2.   Except as ADB shall otherwise agree, the                LA, Sch. 5,           Complied with.
     Borrower shall, in order to ensure its sound            para. 4
     financial operations: (i) do everything on its part
     and within its power to achieve financial results
     from its operations which are consistent with
     sound business and financial standards; (ii)
     provide ADB with its annual investment plan and
     its proposed mode of financing starting from
     FY1992/93 for the next five years; (iii) maintain at
     all times a debt service ratio of not less than
     1.5:1; (iv) maintain at all times a debt-equity ratio
     of not more than 70:30; (v) produce for each of
     its fiscal year funds generated from internal
     sources (less the amount for debt service
     requirements and change in working capital) as
     follows: equivalent to not less than 20% for each
     fiscal year in the period from FY1994/95 to
     FY1996/97, and each fiscal year thereafter less
     than 30%, of the aggregate of the Borrower's
     capital expenditures incurred or expected to be
     incurred for the concerned fiscal year.

3.   Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the                  LA, Sch. 5,           Complied with.
     Borrower shall, prior to the public issuing or          para. 5
     offering of its shares under the provisions of
     Section 2.07 of the Guarantee Agreement, (i)
     make necessary amendments to its
     Memorandum of As sociation to enable the
     Guarantor to divest a portion of its shares as
     required under Section 2.07 of the Guarantee
     Agreement; (ii) set up a shares department for
     the purpose of conducting transactions for the
     above-mentioned transfer of shares; (iii)
     undertake evaluation of its shares; (iv) complete
     the formalities for the abovementioned share
     issue or transfer; (v) obtain approval of the
     Securities and Exchanges Board of India for the
     prospects of the issue or offer of the shares of
     the Borrower owned by the Guarantor; and (vi)
     obtain a credit rating for its debt instruments and
     equity shares.
28      Appendix 6


                                                              Reference in Loan
     Covenant                                                    Documents        Status of Compliance

4.   The Borrower shall establish joint ventures for        LA, Sch. 5,           Complied with.
     the purpose of carrying out the new projects in        para. 6
     allied downstream fields not directly in relation to
     its gas processing and transmission business
     (downstream projects) and make capital
     investments for the downstream projects with
     funds raised from the capital markets. For this
     purpose, the Borrower shall amend its
     Memorandum of Association and Articles of
     Association to enable it to make decisions in
     investing in joint ventures and to set up an
     appropriate organizational structure of planning
     and execution of these downstream projects. The
     Borrower shall consult with ADB on all further
     downstream projects to be carried out by the
     Borrower.

5.   The Borrower shall (i) strengthen its                  LA, Sch. 5,           Complied with.
     management and increase the number of                  para. 9
     directors on its Board of Directors by inducting
     specialists from the fields related to the gas
     industry to face future challenges; and (ii)
     increase the representation of the
     nongovernment directors on the Board of
     Directors of the Borrower by FY1995/96.

6.   The Borrower shall in future enter into                LA, Sch. 5,           Complied with.
     agreements with both its suppliers of gas and its      para. 10
     downstream consumers, which may satisfactorily
     reflect contractual responsibilities relating to
     supply of gas, and take and pay obligations.
     Such agreements shall cover all aspects
     including among others, price, gas quality, terms
     and conditions of payment, validity period,
     penalties for defaults, and procedures for settling
     disputes. The Borrower shall provide ADB with
     samples of the abovementioned agreements and
     take into account ADB's comments thereon.

7.   The Borrower shall establish, six months prior to      LA, Sch. 5,           In place of citizens'
     the commencement of the construction work              para. 11(c).          committees, NEERI,
     under the Project, a committee composed of                                   Nagpur, India,
     prominent citizens (citizens' committees) to                                 conducted the review.
     provide a third party monitoring program and
     provide funds for the operation. The Borrower
     shall annually provide ADB with a copy of the
     report of the concerned agencies and the
     citizens' committee on project performance
     related to the mitigating measures outlined in the
     environment impact assessment.

8.   The Borrower shall furnish to ADB quarterly            LA, Sec.              Complied with.
     reports on the execution of the project and on the     4.06(b)
     operation and management of the project
     facilities.
                                                                                              Appendix 6       29

                                                               Reference in Loan
      Covenant                                                    Documents        Status of Compliance

9.    The Borrower shall have its accounts and               LA, Sec. 4.07         Complied with.
      financial statements submitted to ADB in
      accordance with the agreed time schedule.

10.   On the expiry of the current pricing policy, the       GA, Sec. 2.06         Not complied with.
      Guarantor shall allow the gas marketing
      companies to determine the price of natural gas
      based on market conditions.

11.   Reduce its equity ownership in the Borrower by         GA, Sec. 2.07         Partially complied with,
      not less than 30% through dilution or divestiture                            through transfer of
      of its shareholding in the Borrower and complete                             32.65% to other PSEs,
      such dilution or divestiture by the end of                                   other government
      December 1996.                                                               institutions, and a small
                                                                                   proportion to private
                                                                                   shareholders.

12.   The Guarantor shall ensure that, based on its          GA, Sec. 2.10         Not complied with.
      gas utilization policy, its role shall be limited to                         However, current
      providing broad guidelines on gas use, and that                              government policy
      the gas companies shall have the freedom to                                  allows gas companies
      determine their marketing strategies.                                        freedom to explore,
                                                                                   develop, and market gas
                                                                                   free from government
                                                                                   controls. The
                                                                                   government proposes, in
                                                                                   2004, to disband the
                                                                                   APM and to establish
                                                                                   both in Upstream and
                                                                                   Downstream Regulator.
                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                             FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF GAS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED

                                                                       A. Income Statements
                                                                             (Rs milion)




                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 7
Item                                  31-Mar-94   31-Mar-95   31-Mar-96   31-Mar-97    31-Mar-98    31-Mar-99    31-Mar-00   31-Mar-01    31-Mar-02 31-Mar-03


Sales Volume
Natural Gas (MMCM)                       13,079      13,680      16,495      16,798      19,512        20,129       20,521       20,946      20,676      21,129
LPG (tonne)                             407,373     390,457     550,185     595,075     594,782       674,426      753,811      785,513     995,959   1,113,429
Petrochemicals (tonne)                      -           -           -           -         1,760         1,483      110,169      183,311     250,951     289,375
LPG Transmission (tonne)                    -           -           -           -           -             -            -        100,000   1,311,856   1,525,159
Internal Consumption (MMSCM)                315         318         522         570         538           906        1,421        1,592       1,809       2,011

Sales Price (Rs)
Natural Gas (per MMCM)                    2,219       2,300       2,342        2,360        2,597        2,746       3,129        3,396      3,418       3,399
LPG (per tonne)                           5,340       5,549       5,955        6,022        6,364        9,776      10,638       15,391     11,131      14,163
Petrochemicals (per tonne)                                                                 42,163       41,727      44,252       47,025     52,480      57,261
LPG Transmission (per tonne)                                                                                                      1,246      1,349       1,410
Internal Consumption (per MMSCM)          3,605       3,830       4,157        3,825        5,165        4,973       4,962        5,411

Net Revenues                             33,388      36,360      46,036      49,922        63,937       68,929      85,629      101,911    107,625     120,940
Natural Gas                              29,029      31,461      38,633      39,645        50,674       55,279      64,211       71,140     70,663      71,810
LPG                                       2,175       2,167       3,276       3,584         3,785        6,593       8,019       12,090     11,086      15,770
Petrochemicals                              -           -           -           -              74           62       4,875        8,620     13,170      16,570
LPG Transmission                                                                                                                    125      1,770       2,150
Internal Consumption                      1,136       1,217       2,170        2,180        2,780        4,503       7,051        8,613     10,054      11,260
Others                                    1,048       1,515       1,957        4,513        6,624        2,492       1,473        1,323        882       3,380

Operating Expenses                       29,254      31,898      39,946      40,890        49,391       55,660      73,657       84,417     87,338      93,900
Operation and Administration             26,963      29,585      37,864      38,546        46,906       52,265      68,766       78,411     81,604      87,480
Depreciation                              2,292       2,313       2,082       2,344         2,486        3,395       4,891        6,006      5,932       6,420
Amortization

Operating Income                          4,134       4,461       6,090        9,031       14,546       13,269      11,972       17,493     20,287      27,040

Interest Expenses                           928         785         691         744          646          915        1,660        1,971      2,268       1,860

Net Income Before Tax                     3,206       3,677       5,400        8,288       13,900       12,354      10,313       15,522     18,019      25,180
Income Tax                                    1           1         244        2,092        3,697        1,755       1,700        4,260      6,161       8,790
Net Income After Tax                      3,205       3,676       5,155        6,195       10,203       10,599       8,613       11,262     11,858      16,390

Dividends                                   300         507         719        1,268        1,860        3,285       2,816        3,728      3,805       5,920

LPG = liquefied petroleum gas, MMCM = million cubic meter, MMSCM = million standard cubic meter.
Source: Gas Authority of India Limited.
                                                                                                                              Appendix 7      31




                                                                  B. Ratio Analysis
                                                                     (in percentage)



Item                        31-Mar-94     31-Mar-95   31-Mar-96   31-Mar-97    31-Mar-98 31-Mar-99   31-Mar-00    31-Mar-01    31-Mar-02    31-Mar-03


Operating Margin Ratio           12.38        12.27       13.23        18.09       22.75     19.25        13.98       17.17         18.85       22.36
Profit Margin Ratio              12.38        12.27       12.70        13.90       16.97     16.70        12.00       12.98         13.13       15.09
Return on Net Fixed
Assets                           29.30        34.00       48.40        43.40       47.10     25.10        21.60       27.00         31.00        43.2
Return on Equity                 23.90        22.20       24.70        24.00       29.90     25.60        18.20       20.60         22.20        25.9

Interest Coverage (Times)         4.46         5.69        8.82        12.15       22.53     14.50         7.21        8.87          8.94       14.54
Current Ratio (Times)             1.36         1.30        0.76         0.53        0.75      1.06         1.24        1.44          1.21
Debt/Equity Ratio                39.20        32.70       27.70        24.40       30.20     32.30        33.40       33.10         31.20
Debt-Services Ratio
(Times)                           3.00         3.20        3.60         4.20        4.20      3.70         3.50        3.50          3.90
Self-Financing Ratio             42.00        69.00      179.00       162.00       80.00     56.00        58.00       68.00         23.00

Operating Cash/Current
Liabilities                      67.00        56.00       43.00        36.00       58.00     60.00        50.00       80.00         52.00

Source: Gas Authority of India Limited.
32        Appendix 7




                                                          C. Balance Sheets
                                                              (Rs million)


 Item                       31-Mar-94      31-Mar-95   31-Mar-96 31-Mar-97 31-Mar-98 31-Mar-99 31-Mar-00 31-Mar-01 31-Mar-02



 Current Assets                 13,385        16,036     14,237    13,964    17,450    27,423     38,036    35,562    46,305
 Cash and Bank Balances          9,938        12,510      8,507     5,952     3,345     8,517     14,341    16,548    24,506
 Account Receivables             2,283         2,001      3,223     3,105     3,558     3,371      5,449     6,646     7,642
 Inventories                       706           967      1,121     1,249     1,853     2,234      3,526     3,266     3,824
 Other Current Assets              458           557      1,387     3,658     8,694    13,301     14,720     9,102    10,333

 Fixed Assets                   18,449        20,942     33,442    46,376    54,848    59,736     63,702    71,013    69,605
 Property, Pipeline and         25,828        27,173     28,713    39,273    51,827    77,688     85,224   100,379   107,019
  Equipment
 (Accumulated                   11,736        14,039     16,123    18,439    20,950    24,765     29,676    35,689    41,671
  Depreciation)
 Net Fixed Assets               14,092        13,134     12,590    20,833    30,876    52,923     55,547    64,690    65,348
 Capital Work in Progress        4,357         7,808     20,851    25,542    23,971     6,813      8,155     6,322     4,257

 Unamortised Capital                78            37         25        12         9         0         4         3         2
  Expenditure

 Total Assets                   31,912        37,015     47,704    60,352    72,306    87,159    101,743   106,578   115,912

 Current Liabilities             9,834        12,370     18,779    26,215    23,389    25,930     30,765    24,669    38,311
 Account Payables                4,270         4,300      6,605     8,512     7,866     7,149     10,250    11,531    10,959
 Pool Account                    3,286         5,857      9,597    11,264     3,338     4,598      5,479     3,896     5,983
 Others                          2,278         2,212      2,577     6,439    12,185    14,182     15,036     9,241    21,369

 Long-term Debt                  8,661         8,059      8,021     8,345    14,779    19,775     23,725    27,109    24,248

 Equity                         13,417        16,586     20,904    25,792    34,138    41,454     47,252    54,800    53,355
 Paid-In Capital                 8,453         8,453      8,453     8,457     8,457     8,457      8,457     8,457     8,457
 Retained Earnings               4,964         8,133     12,451    17,336    25,681    32,997     38,796    46,344    44,898

 Total Liabilities              31,912        37,015     47,704    60,352    72,306    87,159    101,743   106,578   115,914
  and Equity

 Source: Gas Authority of India Limited.
                                                                                                                             Appendix 7           33


                                                          D. Cash Flow Statements
                                                                 (Rs million)


Item                            31-Mar-94 31-Mar-95       31-Mar-96    31-Mar-97    31-Mar-98    31-Mar-99    31-Mar-00    31-Mar-01    31-Mar-02


Sources

Internal Cash Generations           6,585        6,952        8,160        9,408      13,677       15,553        15,420      19,679        20,058
Net Income After Taxes              3,205        3,676        5,155        6,195      10,203       10,599         8,613      11,262        11,858
Depreciation and Amortization       2,292        2,313        2,082        2,344       2,486        3,395         4,891       6,006         5,932
Interest Expenses                   1,088          963          924          868         988        1,559         1,917       2,411         2,268

Share Capital                                      -            -              3          -            -            -            -            -

Borrowings                                        269         1,289        1,659        8,732       7,646         6,404         837        20,058
Foreign Currency Loans                -                       1,128        1,308        3,102       2,961         2,357         156       (20,058)
Domestic Borrowings                   -                                                 3,900       2,500         3,010         475           -
Suppliers'/Buyers' Credit             -           269           375          558          975         832           -           -             -
Year-end Evaluations                                           (214)        (207)         756       1,353         1,037         207           -

Total Sources                       6,585        7,221        9,449       11,070      22,409       23,199        21,824      20,517        20,058

Applications

Capital Expenditures:               2,739        4,796       14,584       15,250      10,983         8,702        8,878      13,323         4,575
Acquisition of Capital Assets       1,092        1,344        1,540       10,560      12,554        25,861        7,536      15,156         6,640
Capital Work-in-Progress            1,647        3,451       13,043        4,691      (1,571)      (17,159)       1,342      (1,833)       (2,065)

Debt Services                       2,205        2,180        2,289        2,216        3,287       4,209         4,378        5,549        5,129
Principal Repayment                 1,117        1,217        1,366        1,347        2,299       2,650         2,461        3,137        2,861
Interest Expenses                   1,088          963          924          868          988       1,559         1,917        2,411        2,268

Dividends                             200         300          507          719         1,268       1,860         3,285        2,816        3,805

Increase/Decrease in
Working Capital                    (2,350)      (2,458)      (4,204)      (5,153)       8,917       2,261           (47)       1,416      (10,857)
Increase/Decrease in Other
Assets                                    (5)     (169)        277          593          561          995          (494)      (4,794)       3,081

Total Applications                  2,789        4,649       13,453       13,624      25,016       18,028        16,000      18,309         5,733

Net Cash Flow                       3,796        2,573       (4,004)      (2,554)      (2,607)      5,171         5,824        2,207       14,325

Cash Balance
- At the Beginning                  6,142        9,938       12,510        8,507        5,952       3,345         8,517      14,341        16,548
- At the End                        9,938       12,510        8,507        5,952        3,345       8,517        14,341      16,548        24,506

Source: Gas Authority of India Limited.
34     Appendix 8


         ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC REEVALUATION
                              OF THE PROJECT

A.     Financial Reevaluation

1.     The financial reevaluation of the Project is carried out on an incremental basis.

2.     The Project's economic life is assumed to be 16 years, with no salvage value. However,
the actual life of the Project is around 30 years. The recalculated EIRR, with a 30-year life,
shows a higher EIRR of 26.62%.

3.     All prices and costs are expressed in constant 2001 values.

4.      The capital cost includes the costs for construction of the pipeline, and modification of
existing compressor stations (Bijaipur, Hazira, and Jhabua) as well as the addition of new
compressor stations at Khera and Vaghodia, and installation of gas processing facilities at Pata.

5.       Incremental Gas. The incremental gas supply amounted to 8.75 million standard cubic
meter per day (MMSCMD) in FY1999, increasing to 12.67 MMSCMD in FY2000 and further to
14.49 MMSCMD in FY2001. The full design capacity of the expanded pipeline amounting to
15.2 MMSCMD was realized only from FY2002. Out of the incremental gas, ethane/propane
production is estimated at 0.24 million tons in FY2000, 0.3 million tons in FY2001, and 0.41
million tons thereafter.

6.      Sale Prices. At present, gas sale prices in India are based on a formula linking the
consumer price to 75% of the international price of a basket of fuel oils. The Government had
intended to dismantle the Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM) in place for gas from April
2002, but has not set a new date for this. The present reevaluation has been carried out
assuming the APM remains in place. As ethane/propane is not a traded commodity in India, a
price of Rs8,517 per ton has been assumed. This product is consumed by Gas Authority of
India Limited (GAIL) internally for production of other petrochemicals.

7.     Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR). Considering the current APM prices, the
posttax FIRR works out to 18.8%. The effective corporate tax rate for GAIL has been
assumed to be 30%. The posttax weighted average cost of capital for GAIL is estimated at
12.9%, based on a debt-equity ratio of 33%.

B.     Economic Reevaluation

8.     The economic reevaluation of the Project is on an incremental basis, considering actual
revenue details till FY2002 and projected sales thereafter, based on an economic life of 16
years and a salvage value of 5%.

9.      The economic capital cost of the Project is based on the financial capital costs and
excludes duties, taxes, and other financial charges. The local currency costs are adjusted by
using a standard conversion factor of 0.8. The capital costs are in 2001 constant prices. The
capital cost includes, in addition to the costs for expansion of the pipeline, the cost of the
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) extraction facility set up at Pata.

10.   Gas Valuation. The natural gas inputs used by GREP cannot be traded or used
elsewhere, so an economic reference price is difficult to establish. For the present reevaluation,
                                                                                 Appendix 8     35


it has been assumed that these gas inputs displace fuel oil, to the extent of 30%. The cost,
insurance, and freight (SIF) prices at the point of sale are taken as $169.5 per ton for fuel oil
and $268 per ton for naphtha. However, the actual economic value of GREP's gas output is
much higher because, as preferred feedstock for the fertilizer industry, its use leads to
significantly lower capital and operating costs and, as a fuel source for electric power generation
and other industries, it has major environmental benefits in terms of reduced pollution and
effluents.
                                                                                                                                               36
                                                  FINANCIAL INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN
                                                 WITH ADMINISTERED PRICING MECHANISM
                                                               (Rs million)




                                                                                                                                               Appendix 8
                               Sales Revenue                               Incremental Operating Cost
       Incremental     Sales Price                                                                Change in
Fiscal    Sales          of Gas       Revenue from Gas   Total      Variable Capital Incremental   Working     Capital    Net Cash Flow
Year      MMCM         (Rs/MMCM)      Sales  Processing Revenue      Cost     Cost       Tax       Capital  Investment Before Tax After Tax

1994            -                -         -         -        -         -       -          -           -          (127)      (127)     (127)
1995            -                -         -         -        -         -       -          -           -          (363)      (363)     (363)
1996            -                -         -         -        -         -       -          -           -        (6,945)    (6,945)   (6,945)
1997            -                -         -         -        -         -       -          -           -        (6,519)    (6,519)   (6,519)
1998            -                -         -         -        -         -       -          -           -        (7,049)    (7,049)   (7,049)
1999          3,194            3,627    13,099       -     13,099     8,409     317        -           490      (1,201)     3,662     3,662
2000          4,260            4,045    18,868     2,057   20,925    14,329     837         66       1,930         (74)     7,615     7,549
2001          4,564            4,266    19,472     2,519   21,991    16,286     936         70         250        (196)     4,824     4,754
2002          4,785            4,312    20,634     3,532   24,166    17,393     817        494         670         -        6,626     6,132
2003          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        406         -           -        5,208     4,802
2004          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2005          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2006          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2007          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2008          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2009          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2010          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2011          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2012          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2013          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759
2014          4,496            4,312    19,388     3,532   22,920    16,874     838        449         -           -        5,208     4,759

                                                                              FIRR      18.80%   After Tax

                                                                              FIRR      19.79% Before Tax

MMCM = million cubic meter.
Note: Values are in constant 2001 prices.
Source: Gas Authority of India Limited.
                                                                           Appendix 8   37




                     ECONOMIC INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN
                               (million Rupees)



Fiscal       Capital Operating Cost of            Total                 Net Cash
Year          Cost     Cost     Gas               Cost      Revenue       Flow

1994           106.7                                106.7         -       (106.7)
1995           350.9                                350.9         -       (350.9)
1996         6,650.2                              6,650.2         -     (6,650.2)
1997         5,927.0                              5,927.0         -     (5,927.0)
1998         6,605.8                              6,605.8         -     (6,605.8)
1999         2,118.6        472.5     14,890.0   17,481.1    23,823.3    6,342.2
2000         1,685.6      1,676.8     21,562.0   24,924.4    33,367.4    8,443.0
2001           416.0      2,622.3     24,657.0   27,695.3    36,153.1    8,457.8
2002            58.9      3,242.8     25,865.0   29,166.7    38,917.5    9,185.1
2003                      3,266.8     39,856.0   43,122.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2004                      3,311.8     39,856.0   43,167.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2005                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2006                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2007                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2008                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2009                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2010                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2011                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2012                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2013                      3,371.8     39,856.0   43,227.8    49,107.0    5,313.0
2014        (1,196.0)     3,371.8     39,856.0   42,031.8    49,107.0    6,509.0

                                                 EIRR                     26.23%

Note: Values are in constant 2001 prices.
