           ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
         Operations Evaluation Department




       PROJECT PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT


                                  FOR


                                 INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by the Management response.
Project Performance Audit Report




PPA: IND 26470
(Final)




Industrial Energy Efficiency
Project in India




February 2005




Operations Evaluation Department
ecial Evaluation Study
                                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                              Currency Unit ­ Indian Rupee/s (Re/Rs)
                              At Appraisal        At Completion At Operations Evaluation
                              July 1994           June 2000        October 2004
        Re1.00          =     $0.0318             $0.0217          $0.0218
        $1.00           =     Rs31.37             Rs46.07          Rs45.90

                                          ABBREVIATIONS

                     ADB              ­      Asian Development Bank
                     CFD              ­      Corporate Finance Department
                     CO2              ­      carbon dioxide
                     DID              ­      Department of Industrial Development
                     DIPP             ­      Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
                     EIRR             ­      economic internal rate of return
                     FIRR             ­      financial internal rate of return
                     FSD              ­      Foreign Exchange Service Department
                     IDBI             ­      Industrial Development Bank of India
                     INRM             ­      India Resident Mission
                     LA               ­      Loan Agreement
                     NPK              ­      nitrogen/phosphorus/potassium
                     OEM              ­      Operations Evaluation Mission
                     PCR              ­      project completion report
                     PPAR             ­      project performance audit report
                     PSE              ­      public sector enterprise
                     RRP              ­      report and recommendation of the President
                     SOE              ­      statement of expenditure
                     TA               ­      technical assistance
                     TOR              ­      terms of reference

                                   WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

                     GWh              ­      gigawatt-hour (1 million kWh)
                     g                ­      gram
                     kg               ­      kilogram (1 thousand grams)
                     MW               ­      megawatt (1 million watts)
                     kWh              ­      kilowatt-hour
                     toe              ­      ton of oil equivalent

                                             NOTES

       (i)    The fiscal year (FY) of Industrial Development Bank of India ends on March 31.
       (ii)   In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

Director General, Operations Evaluation Department         :       Bruce Murray
Director, Operations Evaluation Division 2                 :       David Edwards
Evaluation Team Leader                                     :       Hong Wang

                            Operations Evaluation Department, PE-660
                                           CONTENTS

                                                                                           Page

BASIC DATA                                                                                    v

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                            vi

I.     BACKGROUND                                                                             1

       A.      Rationale                                                                      1
       B.      Formulation                                                                    1
       C.      Purpose and Outputs                                                            2
       D.      Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements                                    3
       E.      Completion and Self-Evaluation                                                 4
       F.      Operations Evaluation                                                          4

II.    PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE                                                5

       A.      Formulation and Design                                                         5
       B.      Achievement of Outputs                                                         7
       C.      Cost and Scheduling                                                            8
       D.      Procurement and Construction                                                  10
       E.      Organization and Management                                                   11

III.   ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE                                                        13

       A.      Operational Performance                                                       13
       B.      Performance of the Operating Entity                                           16
       C.      Financial and Economic Reevaluation                                           19
       D.      Sustainability                                                                19
       E.      Related Technical Assistance                                                  19

IV.    ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS                                              20

       A.      Socioeconomic Impact                                                          20
       B.      Environmental Impact                                                          20
       C.      Impact on Institutions and Policy                                             21



Hong Wang, evaluation specialist (team leader), was responsible for the preparation of this
report, and reviewed documents, interviewed key informants, and guided the fieldwork
undertaken by V. Buhat-Ramos, evaluation officer, and the consultants. A. Silverio, operations
evaluation assistant, provided secretarial assistance from Manila.
The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of the management of OED, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
V.    OVERALL ASSESSMENT                                                           22

      A.      Relevance                                                            22
      B.      Efficacy                                                             22
      C.      Efficiency                                                           22
      D.      Sustainability                                                       23
      E.      Institutional Development and Other Impacts                          23
      F.      Overall Project Rating                                               23
      G.      Assessment of Asian Development Bank and Borrower Performance        23


VI.   ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS                                       23

      A.      Key Issues for the Future                                            23
      B.      Lessons Identified                                                   24
      C.      Follow-Up Actions                                                    26

APPENDIXES

1.    Overview of Subprojects                                                      27
2.    Reports on Plant Visits                                                      29
3.    Financial Highlight of Selected Subproject Entities                          35




Attachment:   Management Response on the Program Performance Audit Report on the
              Industrial Energy Efficiency Project in India.
                                                BASIC DATA

                       Industrial Energy Efficiency Project (Loan 1343-IND)

Project Preparation and Institution Building
TA                     TA Project Name                       Type       Person-     Amounta        Approval
No.                                                                     Months        ($)           Date
1890     Industrial Energy Conservation and                 PPTA          20.0      275,000      19 May 1993
         Environment Improvement
2403     Energy and Environmental Management of             ADTA          41.6      585,000      26 Sep 1995
         the Industrial Development Bank of India

                                                       As per ADB
Key Project Data ($ million)                         Loan Documents                           Actual
Total Project Cost                                          150.0                             150.0
Foreign Currency Cost                                       150.0                             150.0
Bank Loan Amount and/or Utilization                         150.0                             150.0

Key Dates                                                 Expected                            Actual
Fact-finding                                                                              26 Jan­11 Feb 1994
Appraisal                                                                                  26 Jun­11 Jul 1994
Loan Negotiations                                                                          5 Oct­15 Nov 1994
Board Approval                                                                                   13 Dec 1994
Loan Agreement                                                                                    30 Mar 1995
Loan Effectiveness                                        28 Jun 1995                              28 Jul 1995
First Disbursement                                                                                29 Mar 1996
Project Completion                                        30 Jun 1999                             30 Jun 2000
Loan Closing                                              28 Jul 2000                            27 Sep 2000
Months (effectiveness to completion)                           48                               59

Economic and Financial Internal Rates                      Appraisal               PCR                PPAR
of Return (%)
Financial Internal Rate of Return                           >WACC                   --                 --
Economic Internal Rate of Return                             12.0                   --                 --

Borrower                          Industrial Development Bank of India

Executing Agency                  Industrial Development Bank of India

Mission Data
Type of Mission                             Number of Missions                    Number of Person-Days
Fact-Finding                                       1                                       68
Appraisal                                          1                                      102
Consultation                                       3                                       38
Project Administration
- Inception                                           1                                     24
- Review                                              8                                    102
- Project Completion                                  1                                      2
Operations Evaluation                                 1                                     86


-- = not calculated, ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PCR = project
completion report, PPAR = project performance audit report, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, TA =
technical assistance, WACC = weighted average cost of capital.
a
  Represents approved amount of technical assistance.
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        The Industrial Energy Efficiency Project (the Project) was consistent with efforts by the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) to promote efficient and environmentally sustainable
industrialization in India. The Project was to support specific Government initiatives in (i) turning
energy sector reforms into demand-side management of energy-intensive industries, (ii)
reducing energy shortages by increasing energy efficiency, (iii) improving the overall efficiency
and international competitiveness of the industries, and (iv) integrating environmental
considerations into project design and implementation.

        The main objective of the Project was to promote energy efficiency in the energy-
intensive industries in India. Since the industry did not invest as much as expected in energy
efficiency, the Project sought to address this market failure through the Industrial Development
Bank of India (IDBI), the apex project financing institution in India. The loan proceeds were to
finance priority projects of public and private sector enterprises for energy efficiency and
environmental improvement for 1995­1997 in the iron and steel, cement, chemical, fertilizer,
pulp and paper, sugar, and textile sectors.

         As defined at appraisal, the scope of the subprojects under the Project involved (i)
modifying production processes through the installation of equipment required for energy
efficiency and optimization of plant operations, (ii) technological restructuring of production
facilities, and (iii) licensing or acquiring energy efficiency-related or other technologies. The
project scope, as implemented, varied considerably from what was envisaged at appraisal. For
example, 43% of the ADB loan was used for financing 10 captive power plants, including three
that were power and heat cogeneration. Most of these captive power plants operate at relatively
low plant load factors, meaning their macro-energy economics are not optimal. Small captive
power plants that use fossil fuel also can pollute the environment badly. No subproject involved
licensing or acquiring energy efficiency-related or other technologies as envisaged. Second-
hand equipment made in the 1970s was imported for one captive power subproject, introducing
outdated technology to the Project.

        A number of design weaknesses in project formulation were identified. Formulated
originally as an energy efficiency sector loan, the Project was reclassified as a financial
intermediation loan for the purpose of administration system registration. Some of the important
policy and institutional issues the project preparatory technical assistance (TA) identified were
not incorporated fully in the final design of the Project. In the absence of policy and institutional
changes, the Project effectively became an ordinary line of credit to IDBI. The energy efficiency
programs to be introduced in each subproject were to reduce energy consumption by at least
18% after implementation. However, this performance indicator had certain weaknesses. First, it
was difficult to quantify. Second, the quantum gains in energy efficiency achieved, as defined,
did not incorporate the quantum of investment or associated change in operating and
maintenance costs.

       The $150 million loan was disbursed fully to finance 26 subprojects spread across 9
states and 7 industrial sectors. IDBI confirmed that 24 of the subprojects were implemented
successfully. The other two subprojects were suspended due to financial difficulties of the
subborrowers after the ADB-financed equipment arrived at the site.

       During the first 18 months of project implementation, subproject approvals and loan
disbursements were much slower than planned. In response, IDBI took steps to market the loan
and relax some selection criteria, while ADB simplified disbursement procedures. Although
disbursement accelerated, the quality of project selection and monitoring were undermined
                                                                                              vii

somewhat. Various subprojects financed under the loan were part of ongoing expansion and/or
modification schemes. In cases where IDBI already had financing agreements with the
enterprises concerned, subloan agreements between IDBI and the respective subborrowers for
the ADB funds were lacking. As a result, the subborrowers were unaware of any of their
obligations to ADB. ADB loans were used to reimburse expenditures incurred before ADB
approved the subproject. Furthermore, IDBI did not comply fully with the covenants in the Loan
Agreement (LA), such as (i) the prohibition against selecting greenfield subprojects, (ii) the
submission of benefit monitoring and evaluation reports for each subproject, and (iii) the
establishment of a revolving fund to provide additional financing for energy efficiency projects.

        Based on plant visits and interviews with representatives of subborrowers, the
Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) concluded that, to a large extent, subprojects financed
under the loan had performed well in terms of operation and servicing of the subloans. Since
IDBI did not set up a benefit monitoring and evaluation system for the Project, the OEM could
not assess the energy efficiency achievements for all the subprojects. Based on the available
information, analyses showed that only four of 11 achieved the energy efficiency improvement
target of 18% for the respective plant. This relatively low improvement in energy efficiency
reflected the fact that most ADB-financed subprojects were a small part of a much larger
investment in the production process. The results also highlighted the inappropriateness of the
performance indicator. In industrial enterprises in India, energy efficiency is rarely a separate
focal area of business. Investment in stand-alone energy efficiency projects carries little
incentive unless the quantum gains in energy efficiency in monetary terms exceed the quantum
of investment or associated change in operating and maintenance costs. As a result,
information on energy efficiency improvements for subprojects was not readily available. Most
subprojects might have achieved the subborrowers' objectives of expanding capacity and
improving quality. However, they were less successful in achieving the primary project objective
of promoting energy efficiency in the industrial sector.

        The sustainability of the successfully implemented subprojects depends on the proper
maintenance of the facilities installed, and the sound financial performance of the subproject
entities. Most project facilities that the OEM visited were maintained well. The weak financial
health of subproject entities is the main concern for long-term sustainability. Of the nine
subproject entities analyzed based on available information, eight encountered financial
problems and experienced losses from time to time over the past 6 years. IDBI reported that
repayments of four subloans were rescheduled due to financial difficulties of the subborrowers.

        Environmental improvement was not the primary objective of any of the subprojects
under the loan. However, improvement in energy efficiency undoubtedly leads to reductions in
the emission of green house gases. This is also true for some of the captive power subprojects
using industrial waste rather than fossil fuels.

         Although an appropriate policy and institutional framework was considered important for
achieving the project objectives, the Project did not include a policy or an institutional
component. Hence, the direct policy impact of the Project was minimal. With regard to
institutional impacts, the Project did not appear to offer any specialized energy efficiency
services that were not available through IDBI's normal term lending instruments.

        The performance of ADB and IDBI in project formulation, appraisal, and implementation
was assessed as less than satisfactory. For ADB, this assessment reflected (i) design
weaknesses at project formulation, particularly in excluding policy and institutional components;
(ii) inadequate project supervision during implementation, as shown by the minimal
documentation of subproject implementation; and (iii) inadequate provision for project
viii

monitoring and evaluation after the completion of all subprojects. For IDBI, this assessment
reflected the frequent change of project implementation responsibility within IDBI, and
noncompliance with major loan covenants. Overall, the Project was rated partly successful.

        The Project yielded five main lessons. First, the statement of the project objective in the
report and recommendation of the President (RRP) did not specify how the objective was to be
achieved. The RRP, LA, and minutes of loan negotiations on project scope and definitions of
eligible subprojects lacked clarity and consistency. While greenfield investments should not be
considered in energy efficiency projects, capacity expansion within some upper limits should be
allowed. The yardsticks for measuring the energy efficiency achievements seemed arbitrary,
and not relevant to cogeneration schemes. These issues should be resolved at the design stage
by applying rigorously the project logical framework processes.

       Second, the attainment of project objectives and goals were undermined to some extent
by the relaxation of subproject selection criteria and simplification of disbursement procedures.
These measures might have been appropriate from IDBI's point of view to accelerate loan
disbursements. However, they gave insufficient consideration to their impacts on project
outcomes and the achievement of project objectives. As a consequence, project selection and
assessment became a repackaging exercise; and the project scope, as implemented, deviated
considerably from what was envisaged at appraisal. The catalytic role of ADB financing in
promoting energy efficiency at the subproject level was reduced significantly. This unsatisfactory
outcome highlights the need for more thorough and rigorous demand analysis during project
preparation.

         Third, the simplification of disbursement procedures also made verification of project
costs and expenditures difficult afterwards. While ADB should work to simplify disbursement
procedures and reduce related transaction costs, measures must be in place to ensure that
ADB funds are used for the intended purposes. The executing agencies of financial
intermediation loans should be required to provide ADB with the subloan agreement before the
first disbursement for the respective subproject. As with project loans, the executing agencies
should be required to maintain original receipts for all expenses financed under the ADB loan for
at least 5 years after loan closing. Such measures are needed to ensure the presence of a
strong trail for auditing.

        Fourth, ADB's project monitoring and supervision were inadequate. Delegation of loan
administration responsibilities to the India Resident Mission (INRM) did not improve ADB's
project supervision noticeably. The OEM could confirm that ADB staff visited only eight of the 26
subprojects. More effective arrangements for project monitoring and supervision should be put
in place before project implementation. Since the subprojects are scattered in nine states across
the country, domestic consultants could have been engaged to visit each subproject at least
once during implementation if INRM did not have the staff to do so. The OEM believes that
visiting all subproject sites during project implementation is an essential part of project
administration.

        Fifth, given the nature of energy efficiency activities and the considerable engineering
industry capability in India, the capital cost of most investments would have a limited direct or
indirect foreign exchange component. If domestic currency lending were available for
commercially oriented public sector entities, the demand for ADB funds might have increased.
Although project formulation had some weaknesses, the difficulty in disbursing the loan is a
strong indicator that the loan proceeds were not competitive in the Indian financial sector.
Compared to commercial banks, ADB has not been innovative enough to develop a broader
range of financial instruments to meet the needs of clients such as IDBI better.
                                                                                                     ix


       A number of issues for improving energy efficiency in India were identified:

       (i)     India is not making full use of market-based pricing signals to encourage
               industries to make the type of investments that are necessary to conserve energy
               and improve the energy efficiency of the economy. Pricing policies have a direct
               bearing on the viability of energy efficiency investments for the enterprises.
               Subsidized energy prices result in inadequate investment in energy efficiency.
       (ii)    Top management teams of most enterprises focus on product outputs,
               commercial competitiveness, quality, and profitability. They rarely focus on
               energy efficiency. Responsibility for energy efficiency often is given to the
               maintenance and/or electrical managers. As a result, most companies give
               investments in energy efficiency, and the adoption of new energy-efficient
               technologies, a secondary priority.
       (iii)   For many industries, second-hand plant and/or equipment have been imported.
               While this might be a rational way to lower the capital cost of the investment, the
               unintended result is the use of outdated technologies in terms of energy
               efficiency. Energy inefficiencies often are transferred from one plant to another
               as inefficient equipment is removed from one factory and usually resold for
               installation in another. Energy conservation norms for the industries need to be
               developed that make commercial sense.

        By and large, ADB did not promote energy efficiency through this Project. Unless
specific measures have been put in place to address the issues above, ADB financing for a
similar project in the future is not justified.

       After the OEM, INRM discussed with IDBI the establishment of a revolving fund. IDBI
agreed to try to track the information required for the creation of the revolving fund. If it is unable
to do so by the end of 2005, IDBI might consider prepayment of the loan to ADB.



                                                               Bruce Murray
                                                               Director General
                                                               Operations Evaluation Department
                                           I.       BACKGROUND

A.        Rationale

1.       In the early 1990s, the development strategy of the Government of India accorded a high
priority to energy efficiency and related environmental improvements. The energy sector was
considered critical to economic growth since it accounted for more than 30% of public
investments, utilized 25% of export earnings for energy imports, and generated about 15% of
Government revenues. In 1992, the Government launched the National Energy Efficiency
Program, emphasizing the promotion of indigenous capabilities for design and manufacture of
energy-efficient equipment. At the time, the operational strategy of the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) for India supported economic growth with a focus on efficient industrialization of the
economy. ADB's strategy recognized the dual needs to improve the efficiency of India's energy-
intensive industries, and to strike a balance between industrial development and the
environment. In this context, ADB supported projects aimed at energy efficiency and
environmental improvements.

2.       With its emphasis on improvements in energy efficiency, the Industrial Energy Efficiency
Project1 (the Project) was consistent with ADB's efforts to promote efficient and environmentally
sustainable industrialization. The Project was to support the Government's specific initiatives in
(i) turning energy sector reforms into demand-side management of energy-intensive industries,
(ii) reducing energy shortages by increasing energy efficiency, (iii) improving the overall
efficiency and international competitiveness of the industries, and (iv) integrating environmental
considerations in project design and implementation.

B.        Formulation

3.      In response to a request from the Government, ADB approved a project preparatory
technical assistance (TA)2 in May 1993 to study energy efficiency investments in the industrial
sector. The project preparatory TA, which was completed in May 1994, also was to prepare a
project suitable for ADB financing. ADB fielded a loan fact-finding mission in February 1994,
followed by an appraisal mission, and two consultation missions between June and September
1994.

4.      The project preparatory TA proposed to ADB a sector loan project consisting of an
investment component, an institutional strengthening component, and a set of recommended
policy changes. The study yielded a list of 73 subproject candidates3 in aluminum, cement,
copper, fertilizer, pulp and paper, and steel. These subprojects potentially could represent a
time slice of an industrial sector investment program, focusing on energy conservation and
environmental improvement. While the primary project objective was fostering investments in
industrial energy efficiency and environmental improvement, the study recommended
complementary support to facilitate the participation and assistance of other financial institutions
for integrated and comprehensive plant-specific technical studies. The project preparatory TA


1
    ADB. 1994. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
    for the Industrial Energy Efficiency Project. Manila (Loan 1343-IND, for $150 million, approved on 13 December
    1994).
2
    ADB. 1993. Technical Assistance to India for the Industrial Energy Efficiency Conservation and Environment
    Improvement. Manila (TA 1890-IND, for $275,000, approved on 19 May 1993).
3
    Pre-investment works for 25 of the 73 candidate subprojects were deemed to have been completed at the time of
    the TA.
2


also recommended the consideration of policy adjustments,4 such as (i) changing and extending
the depreciation provisions, (ii) allowing the transfer of depreciation to energy or environmental
service companies, and (iii) improving industrial solid waste and hazardous waste management.

5.       The main conclusions of the appraisal mission included: (i) more than adequate demand
existed for the loan at the market-based terms; (ii) the Industrial Development Bank of India
(IDBI) had a developed energy appraisal capacity, and was a sound financial institution; and (iii)
the policy framework was appropriate at the time. The mission did not highlight the need for
institutional strengthening and policy changes. However, during the appraisal, IDBI requested a
TA from ADB to strengthen its management and institutional capabilities. The TA would focus
on improving IDBI's capabilities in energy and environmental technical assessment, and
economic and financial evaluation, in energy efficiency and environmental pollution control
projects. The appraisal mission informed IDBI that the request would be examined in due
course, taking into account similar assistance that ADB provided earlier. ADB approved an
advisory TA5 in September 1995, 9 months after loan approval.

6.      In accordance with ADB management's instructions, the consultation missions'
discussions with the Government focused on an action plan to strengthen the supportive policy
reforms in energy efficiency during project implementation. However, the Government resisted
including this action plan as part of the loan covenants under the Project. The consultation
missions related that ADB management believed the inclusion of the action plan would facilitate
greatly the favorable consideration of the Project by the Board. With this understanding, the
Government agreed to include the action plan in the appropriate sections of the report and
recommendation of the President (RRP), indicating the objectives and directions of policy
reforms.6

C.        Purpose and Outputs

7.      The objective of the Project was to promote energy efficiency in the energy-intensive
industries in India, where market-oriented reforms had been--or soon would be--implemented.
The project objective was to be realized through support for industrial investments that focused
on energy efficiency and environmental improvements, and also showed satisfactory financial
and economic rates of return. When the Project was formulated, however, industry had not
invested as much as expected in energy efficiency improvements. The Project sought to
address some of the sources of this market failure7 by providing energy efficiency financing
through a financial intermediary that had developed capabilities to undertake such activities.

8.     Proceeds from the project loan were to finance priority projects of public sector
enterprises8 (PSEs) for energy efficiency and environmental improvements in the aluminum,
cement, chemical, copper, pulp and paper, sugar, and textile subsectors in 1995­1997. Other
energy-intensive subsectors, including fertilizer and iron and steel, also might be considered if
4
    The project preparatory TA report noted that other policy changes might be recommended by a more thorough and
    extensive examination of the issues than was possible within the constraints of its study.
5
    ADB. 1995. Technical Assistance to India for the Strengthening the Capacity of IDBI in Energy and Environmental
    Project Management. Manila (TA 2403-IND. for $585,000, approved on 26 September 1995).
6
    This arrangement was reported to management in the back-to-office report of the mission dated 14 September
    1994. Management did not comment on this remark, but the sector loan modality was no longer applied to the
    Project.
7
    The sources of the market failure were the lack of (i) capital, especially for smaller enterprises; (ii) adequate
    information on appropriate equipment and technology; and (iii) emphasis on energy efficiency investment financing
    by domestic financial institutions.
8
    Private sector entities also would be considered in the subsectors where market reforms were well advanced.
                                                                                                                        3


market-based reforms were implemented. The scope of the subprojects, as defined at appraisal,
involved (i) modification of production processes through the installation of equipment required
for energy efficiency and optimization of overall plant operations, (ii) technological restructuring
of production facilities, and (iii) licensing or acquisition of energy efficiency-related or other
technologies. The energy efficiency programs to be introduced in each of the subprojects were
expected to reduce energy consumption by at least 18% after implementation.

9.       The main criteria for selecting subprojects for ADB financing included:

         (i)      Energy efficiency should increase by at least 18%, as measured by the before-
                  project and after-project energy consumption across the specific equipment or
                  manufacturing process to be replaced or modified;
         (ii)     IDBI should not select and appraise any greenfield investment, or any expansion
                  project;9
         (iii)    The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) should be at least 12% in real terms,
                  while the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) should exceed the respective
                  weighted average cost of capital after tax in real terms;
         (iv)     Subborrowers should contribute, out of their own resources, at least 25% of the
                  cost of the subproject;
         (v)      Subborrowers should maintain a debt service ratio of at least 1.5 and debt-equity
                  ratio not higher than 60:40; and
         (vi)     Subprojects should be designed to ensure that the modified plant would meet all
                  local and national environmental standards, as well as internationally accepted
                  safety standards.

D.       Cost, Financing, and Executing Arrangements

10.      ADB provided a loan of $150 million from its ordinary capital resources to finance 100%
of direct and 50% of indirect foreign exchange costs of the qualified subprojects. The
subborrowers were to arrange all local currency financing from their own resources, domestic
borrowing, and other sources. IDBI was the Borrower and Executing Agency for the Project. A
leading financial institution in India for term lending to the industrial sector, IDBI has
considerable experience administering lines of credit funded by the World Bank and ADB. IDBI
was to relend the loan proceeds to subborrowers in accordance with market-related lending
policies. The subloans, provided in dollars or local currency, were to carry relending rates not
lower than the prevailing minimum domestic lending rates. For dollar subloans, an interest rate
of about 8.9%, including IDBI's spread of about 2%, was considered competitive. For subloans
in local currency, the prevailing market rate of about 16% at appraisal was applicable.

11.    IDBI was responsible for the selection, appraisal, and administration of all subprojects to
be financed by the ADB loan in accordance with the selection criteria. IDBI was required to
forward to ADB evaluation summaries of the subprojects for review.10 To monitor the
improvements in energy efficiency under ADB-financed subprojects, IDBI was to (i) require the


9
   The definition of an expansion project was not given in the RRP or the Loan Agreement. The definition probably
   was kept vague to allow flexibility in future interpretations. For this project performance audit report, an investment
   scheme is considered an expansion subproject if its objective, as stated in the subproject proposal, was for
   expansion of an existing production facility.
10
   According to the RRP, detailed appraisal reports for subprojects involving ADB financing of more than $5 million
   were to be submitted for ADB approval. However, this requirement was not stipulated in the Loan Agreement or the
   minutes of the loan negotiations.
4


subproject entities to undertake energy audits upon completion of the subprojects, and (ii)
submit quarterly reports to ADB on energy savings for the completed subprojects.

12.    The Department of Industrial Development (DID), which later was replaced by the
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), was responsible for implementing the
policy measures required for expeditious utilization of the loan. DID also was to coordinate
supportive policy reforms by the Government involving the industrial, energy, and environment
sectors. In coordination with IDBI, DID was to provide ADB with reports on project benefit
monitoring and evaluation during the first 5 years of full operation of each subproject. Further,
DID was to submit reports to ADB on progress regarding price liberalization policies for energy
inputs and industrial products, enterprise reforms in the public sector, and other measures
introduced to encourage energy efficiency. An interministerial steering committee, headed by
the DID secretary and comprising representatives from IDBI as well as the ministries involved in
energy-intensive industries, was to be constituted. The committee was to review the policy
framework periodically, and make appropriate recommendations for necessary adjustments.

E.       Completion and Self-Evaluation

13.      ADB's India Resident Mission (INRM) prepared the project completion report (PCR),11
which was circulated in April 2002. INRM did not visit any of the subprojects during PCR
preparation. The PCR concluded that the Project was substantially successful in achievement of
its objectives. However, the PCR did not provide sufficient credible evidence that the project
objectives had been achieved. The accounts of the design, scope, implementation, and
performance of the subprojects were limited. The PCR provided little information on the financial
and operational performance of the subproject entities. Due to the lack of benefit monitoring and
evaluation data, the PCR did not calculate the EIRR and FIRR for any of the subprojects.
Further, the PCR did not provide detailed information on policy developments regarding price
liberalization of energy inputs and products of industrial enterprises, or on measures introduced
to encourage energy efficiency. The PCR also failed to identify any substantive lessons learned.
Nevertheless, the PCR recommended that ADB consider a follow-up loan.

F.       Operations Evaluation

14.    This project performance audit report (PPAR) reviewed the findings of the PCR, and
assessed the Project in terms of relevance, efficacy, efficiency, sustainability, and institutional
and other developmental impacts. The assessment was based on a review of ADB documents,
discussions with ADB staff, and findings of the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM). A
questionnaire seeking required information was sent to IDBI before the OEM. The OEM visited
India 30 August­23 September 2004, and held discussions with representatives from the
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, IDBI, and 15 subproject entities.12 The OEM also visited 7 of the
26 subprojects financed under the loan.13 The files available at INRM and IDBI contained
information only on subproject approval and disbursements. No documentation could be found

11
   Administration of project implementation was transferred to INRM on 1 June 1998. By then, ADB had committed
   subloans amounting to $90 million for 14 subprojects.
12
   During the OEM, INRM's repeated requests for a meeting with DIPP were declined.
13
   Considering sector coverage and logistical constraints, the subprojects that the OEM selected for plant visits were
   Star Paper Mills Ltd., Sintex Industries Ltd., Indorama Cement Ltd., Sunflag Iron & Steel Co. Ltd., Sree
   Rayalaseema Alkalies and Allied Chemicals Ltd., Madras Fertilizers Ltd., and EID Parry (India) Ltd. IDBI staff
   accompanied the OEM on most of the plant visits. The Mission also met representatives of the following subproject
   entities: Upper Ganges Sugar and Industries Ltd., Oudh Sugar Mills Ltd, Arunoday Mills Ltd., Gujarat Alkalies and
   Chemicals Ltd., Associated Cement Companies Ltd.; DCW Ltd., Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd., and Sun Paper Mill Ltd.
                                                                                                                     5


on the implementation and completion of individual subprojects,14 creating difficulties in
understanding fully the problems that arose during the Project and evaluating the achievement
of project objectives. Nonetheless, information collected during the OEM was considered
sufficient to provide an overall picture of project performance and impacts. The views of relevant
ADB departments and offices, as well as those of the Government and IDBI, were considered
when finalizing the PPAR.


                   II.       PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE

A.       Formulation and Design

15.      At appraisal, one of the main justifications for the Project was the lack of adequate
capital for energy efficiency investments in the targeted subsectors. However, the project
preparatory TA study lacked a detailed analysis to explain why enterprises did not undertake
profitable energy efficiency activities. On the other hand, ADB was concerned that a substantial
portion of previous ADB loans for energy conservation and environment improvement projects
had been canceled.15 In response to the concern raised at the staff review committee meeting
on 2 September 1994, the project team said that IDBI had pending requests for a large number
of energy efficiency projects requiring financing for $350 million, and there was, therefore, more
than adequate demand for the loan. However, the demand for ADB funds was not strong from
industry in general and PSEs in particular, which became clear soon after the loan became
effective. This was partly due to (i) the deterioration of the exchange rate, (ii) weak demand for
industrial products at the time, (iii) limited need for foreign exchange in most of the energy
efficiency investments, and (iv) ADB's elaborate documentation requirements. More importantly,
energy efficiency is rarely a separate focal area of business in industrial enterprises in India.
The objective of any investment scheme is usually the overall improvement of competitiveness
and profitability. Investments in stand-alone energy efficiency projects carry little incentive,
unless they contribute substantially to the bottom line. The OEM was told that IDBI had to
market the loan through awareness seminars among IDBI staff, distribution of brochures to
concerned industries, and relaxation of some selection criteria to include ongoing expansion
schemes. The legitimate concern that demand for such an energy efficiency loan would be
insufficient appears to have been overlooked during project formulation.

16.      The Project, which was formulated originally as an energy efficiency sector loan, was
reclassified later as a financial intermediation loan for the purpose of administration system
registration. While a sector loan can accommodate financing multiple subprojects, and provides
needed procurement flexibility, it is expected to improve sector policies--energy efficiency in
this case--and strengthen institutional capacity. The energy efficiency action plan agreed during
appraisal was included in the RRP, though it was not covered by the covenants in the Loan
Agreement (LA). Despite IDBI's request for a TA during project design, the final project scope
did not include an institutional strengthening component. In the absence of required policy and
institutional changes, the Project was formulated largely as a special line of credit to IDBI.



14
   Based on the back-to-office reports of loan review missions, ADB staff visited 8 of 26 subprojects during the review
   missions. The issues discussed focused mainly on the selection of new subprojects for approval.
15
    ADB. 1992. Report and Recommendation of the President on a Proposed Loan to India for the Energy
   Conservation and Environment Improvement Project. Manila (Loan 1212-IND, for $147 million, approved on 17
   December 1992). On 10 February 1994, ADB received a request from the Government, before loan effectiveness,
   for cancellation of $107.7 million, which was approved on 28 September 1994.
6


17.    The Project, as implemented, deviated considerably from what was designed and
envisaged at project preparation. Some of these variations were:

         (i)      The project preparatory TA identified 25 subproject candidates, with pre-
                  investment work completed in the aluminum, cement, copper, fertilizer, steel, and
                  pulp and paper subsectors--all of which were from PSEs. A de facto preference
                  was given to PSEs, which had been the primary focus of the project preparatory
                  TA study. However, when subprojects were approved for financing under the
                  loan, 25 of the 26 selected were from private enterprises--and none, except
                  Madras Fertilizers Ltd., was identified as a candidate during the project
                  preparatory TA. IDBI offered two main reasons for the changes. First, many
                  PSEs did not have the full authority to raise funds without Government approval.
                  Second, many PSEs could still receive financial support or development funds
                  from the Government. The project preparatory TA and ADB missions should
                  have considered these factors during project design, so the Project could have
                  been formulated better to meet the needs of private enterprises.
         (ii)     The scope of the Project, according to the RRP, included (a) modifying
                  production processes through the installation of equipment required for energy
                  efficiency and optimization of overall plant operations; (b) technological
                  restructuring of production facilities; and (c) licensing or acquiring energy
                  efficiency-related or other technologies. Captive (in-house) power plants, or
                  power and heat cogeneration facilities, were not considered in the original project
                  design.16 During implementation, 43% of the ADB loan was used for financing 10
                  captive power plants, including three cogeneration facilities. Captive power plants
                  were not considered at appraisal, because most operate at relatively low plant
                  load factors and lack optimal macro-energy economics.17 No subproject involved
                  licensing or acquiring energy efficiency-related or other technologies as
                  envisaged. In one captive power subproject,18 second-hand equipment made in
                  the 1970s was imported and installed, allowing outdated technology to be
                  introduced. These changes in project activities suggest design weaknesses in
                  project formulation.
         (iii)    By definition, any greenfield investments or expansion projects, other than for
                  balanced use of conserved energy arising from technology restructuring, were
                  not eligible for financing under the Project.19 However, seven expansion
                  subprojects20 and at least one greenfield21 subproject were financed under the
                  loan. Due to the lack of clarity in definitions, determining if these expansion
                  subprojects were within the project scope was difficult.
16
    According to the minutes of loan negotiations, the ADB team clarified that cogeneration subprojects involving
   conservation of energy would also be covered under the Project. Cogeneration is usually defined as generation of
   both electricity and steam.
17
   Between 1992 and 2002, the installed capacity of captive power generation in India increased from about 9,300
   megawatts (MW) to 19,000 MW. By 2002, captive power plants accounted for approximately 20% of the installed
   generating capacity. This phenomenon of industrial users abandoning the unreliable and costly grid power is
   damaging to the power utilities and independent power producers, as industrial users represent a major segment of
   consumption, as well as reliable payers of higher tariffs.
18
   This was the subproject of Svadeshi Mills Co. Ltd.
19
   According to the minutes of loan negotiations, the ADB team clarified that expansion subprojects connected with
   the balanced use of conserved energy arising from technological restructuring would be eligible for financing under
   the Project. The expression "balanced use of conserved energy" was not clearly defined, however.
20
    These were the subprojects under Oudh Sugar Mills Ltd., Upper Ganges Sugar and Industries Ltd., Associated
   Cement Company Ltd. (Sindri), Associated Cement Company Ltd. (Lakheri), Associated Cement Companies Ltd.
   (Kymore), Tulsipur Sugar Company Ltd., and Balrampur Chini Mills Ltd.
21
   This was the subproject of Indo Rama Cement Ltd.
                                                                                                                      7



18.     Under one of the most important subproject selection criteria, energy efficiency should
have improved by at least 18% in all subprojects, as measured by the before-project and after-
project energy consumption across the specific equipment or manufacturing process that was
replaced or modified. However, the basis for the adoption of this important yardstick was not
clear. The project preparatory TA quoted an excerpt from the Government's Eighth Five-Year
Plan, which predicated an energy conservation potential of 25­30% for the industrial sector as a
whole. However, it did not propose any specific indicator for measuring the energy efficiency
gains under the subprojects. This seemingly arbitrary indicator was, in fact, difficult to quantify
during subproject selection and monitor after implementation. With this indicator, the quantum
gains in energy efficiency do not incorporate the quantum of investment or associated change in
operating and maintenance cost.22 For captive power generation schemes, the yardstick of
energy efficiency achievement at 18% is not appropriately defined.

B.         Achievement of Outputs

19.       Under the Project, 26 subprojects requiring a combined investment of Rs36.07 billion
were approved and financed. An overview of the subprojects is in Appendix 1. Of the 26
subprojects, 8 were for modification of production processes, 7 for capacity expansion of
production facilities, 10 for power generation plants, and 1 for a greenfield cement production
facility. The subprojects were spread across nine states and seven industrial subsectors (Table
1).

                               Table 1: Distribution of Subprojects by Sector
          Subsector        Number of Subprojects                Amount of Subloans                  % to Total
                                                                    ($ million)
         Cement                    4                                   38.12                             26
         Chemicals                 3                                   26.26                             18
         Fertilizers               2                                   30.49                             20
         Paper                     3                                    6.31                             4
         Steel                     2                                   10.49                             7
         Sugar                     9                                   30.23                             20
         Textiles                  3                                    8.08                             5
           Total                  26                                 149.98                             100
         Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

20.      The PCR reported that 24 of the 26 subprojects were implemented successfully, which
IDBI confirmed. The other two subprojects, Swadeshi Mills Ltd. and Bellary Steels & Alloys Ltd.,
were suspended due to financial difficulties of the subborrowers after the ADB-financed
equipment arrived at the site. Both companies have been registered for bankruptcy under the
Board for Industrial & Financial Reconstruction, a statutory body dealing with financially weak
companies in India. IDBI also is searching actively for investors to refinance and/or acquire
these two subborrowers. Due to a lack of information on project implementation and completion
at INRM and IDBI, the OEM was unable to evaluate independently the achievements of outputs
for all subprojects.



22
     A more widely accepted indicator is the cost of conserved energy. It is calculated by annualizing the incremental
     investment in energy efficiency over its lifetime, adding to (or subtracting from) it the value of any increase (or
     decrease) in annual operations and maintenance costs, and dividing the result by the expected annual savings in
     energy.
8


21.      Based on plant visits and interactions with representatives of the subprojects, the OEM
concluded that most subprojects had been implemented as approved. Table 2 presents the
physical outputs envisaged at approval and achieved for the seven subprojects that the OEM
visited.

       Table 2: Outputs of Subprojects Visited by the Operations Evaluation Mission
         Subprojects                     Output Envisaged                     Output Achieved
      Star Paper Mills Ltd.   · Set up three paper machines               Replaced by conveyor belt
                              · Install a chemical recovery boiler        Implemented
                              · Install an electrostatic precipitator     Implemented

        Sintex Industries     · Modernize the production facility         Implemented
              Ltd.              from batch process to continuous
                                process to improve the quality of
                                finished fabrics
                              · Replace six old narrow-width (150         Implemented
                                cm) looms with wider-width (190
                                cm) new rapier looms
       Indo Rama Cement       · Set up a slag-cement production           Implemented
              Ltd.              factory with a capacity of 1 million
                                tons per year by using blast furnace
                                slag from a nearby iron and steel
                                plant
        Sunflag Iron and      · Install a waste heat recovery boiler      Implemented
         Steel Co. Ltd.         and fluidized bed boiler to utilize
                                waste heat and coal fines
       Sree Rayalaseema       · Modernize the caustic soda plant          Implemented
       Alkalies and Allied    · Installing a salt unloading system        Implemented
         Chemicals Ltd.       · Set up a caustic flakes fusion plant      Implemented
       Madras Fertilizers     · Implement an integrated scheme for        Implemented
               Ltd.             modernization of NPK, urea, and
                                ammonia production
      EID Parry (India) Ltd   · Install a bagasse-based power and         Implemented
                                heat cogeneration plant of 24.5 MW
      cm = centimeter, MW = megawatt, NPK = nitrogen/phosphorus/potassium (short name for a compound
      fertilizer).
      Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

C.      Cost and Scheduling

22.     The OEM was unable to confirm the costs for each subproject due to the difficulty in
obtaining survey data from the subborrowers.23 The PCR reported that the total cost of the
Project was Rs36.07 billion. ADB loan disbursements of $149.98 million24 accounted for 14.1%
of the project cost, while the subborrowers contributed 34.4% in the form of equity investment or
internal accruals. The percentage of ADB financing suggests that the subprojects had low
foreign exchange requirements. Loans from domestic banks financed the remaining 51.5% of
the project cost. Table 3 provides a summary of subproject financing.



23
   Only eight of 26 subborrowers responded to the questionnaire, which omitted much key information regarding
   project costs and benefits.
24
   This excludes $20,000 charged against the loan for the recovery of a portion of the project preparatory TA.
                                                                                                                                          9


                                    Table 3: Summary of Subproject Financing

S. Subloan               Subloan                Equity/Internal Accruals          ADB's contribution            Other Loans       Total
NO
     No.                Borrowers               /Promoters Contribution    Committed Disbursed Contribution
.
                                                  (Rs mn)        (%)            (Rs mn)              (%)      (Rs mn)     (%)      (Rs mn)
              Associated Cement Company -
 1      014   Sindri                                180.00        50.30        81.25     81.25       22.70       96.75    27.00       358.00
              Associated Cement Companies
 2      017   Ltd.                                  850.00        41.00       937.00    937.00       46.00      263.00    13.00     2,050.00
              Associated Cement Company -
 3      015   Lakheri                               180.00        44.40       143.40    143.40       35.40       81.60    20.20       405.00
 4      030   Aunoday Mills Ltd.                    100.00        30.30        61.00     61.00       18.48      169.00    51.21       330.00
 5      016   Bajaj Hindustan Ltd.                   92.50        50.00        92.50     92.50       50.00         -        -         185.00
 6      008   Balrampur Chini Mills Ltd.            150.00        34.40       217.60    217.60       50.00       67.70    15.60       435.30
 7      003   Bellary Steel and Alloys Ltd.         110.00        26.83       203.95    203.95       49.74       96.05    23.43       410.00
 8      013   DCW Ltd.                              115.00        25.00       197.15    197.15       43.00      147.85    32.00       460.00
 9      002   EID Parry (India) Ltd.                232.00        31.00       371.65    371.65       49.50      146.35    19.50       750.00
10      031   Godavari Sugar Mills Ltd.             291.00        26.94        57.00     57.00        5.28      732.00    67.78     1,080.00
              Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals
11      019   Ltd.                                1,750.00        55.00       641.30    641.30       20.00      788.70    25.00     3,180.00
12      027   Indo Rama Cement Ltd.                 500.00        33.33       250.00    250.00       16.67      750.00    50.00     1,500.00
              Kanoria Sugar and General
13      006   Manufacturing                          22.00        12.90        85.00     85.00       50.00       63.00    37.10       170.00
              Kothari Sugars and Chemicals
14      005   Ltd.                                   90.00        25.50        63.00     63.00       17.80       200.00   56.70       353.00
15      004   Madras Fertilizers Ltd.             1,210.00        26.00       250.00    250.00        6.00     3,040.00   68.00     4,500.00
              Oswal Chemicals and Fertilizers
16      021   Ltd.                                5,260.00        33.00       250.00    250.00        2.00    10,290.00   65.00    15,800.00
17      026   Oudh Sugar Mills Ltd.                  55.00        11.46        63.03     63.03       13.13       361.97   75.41       480.00
18      029   Sintex Industries Ltd.                116.50        25.00       249.70    249.70       53.50       100.30   21.50       466.50
              Sree Rayalaseema Alkalies &
19      009   Allied Chemicals                       99.25        25.40       216.75    216.75       55.60       74.00    19.00       390.00
20      024   Star Paper Mills Ltd.                 315.00        35.60       129.80    129.80       14.70      440.20    49.70       885.00
21      023   Sun Paper Mills Ltd.                   95.00        40.00       106.65    106.65       45.40       33.35    14.60       235.00
              Sunflag Iron and Steel Company
22      022   Ltd.                                  111.15        24.00       188.85    188.85       41.00      161.30    35.00       461.30
23      001   Swadeshi Mills Co. Ltd.                12.50        25.00        36.50     36.50       73.00        1.00     2.00        50.00
24      025   Tulsipur Sugar Company Ltd.           315.00        52.10       134.20    134.20       22.20      155.80    25.70       605.00
              Upper Ganges Sugar and
25      010   Industries Ltd.                       160.50        31.40        47.20      47.20       9.20       302.80   59.30       510.50
26      011   Yash Papers Ltd.                        4.80        26.20         9.15       9.15      50.00         4.35   23.80        18.30
              Total                              12,417.20        34.43     5,083.63   5,083.63       14.09   18,567.07   51.48    36,067.90
td. = Limited, mn = million, No. = number, and Rs = Indian Rupees.
Source: Asian Development Bank's Project Completion Report.

23.     During interactions with the representative from Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd., the
OEM found that ADB's records showed a disbursed loan amount of Rs641.3 million (or $17.09
million) for the subproject with a total project cost of Rs3,180 million. However, the
subborrower's record showed a loan of only $2.5 million from ADB.25 After checking its records,
IDBI confirmed that $17.09 million was disbursed under the ADB loan against this subproject.
Since IDBI already had financing agreements with Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd. for the
subproject before applying for loan proceeds under the Project, a separate subloan agreement
between IDBI and Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd for ADB funds did not exist. ADB funds
were used to reimburse expenditures incurred before ADB's approval. The $2.5 million loan
shown in the subborrower's record represented a portion of the entire loan from IDBI, for which
IDBI gave a 0.5% reduction in the interest rate. As far as the subborrower was concerned, ADB
provided local currency financing of $2.5 million equivalent for the subproject to replace part of


25
     To this effect, the subborrower provided the OEM a copy of an IDBI letter dated 26 June 2000.
10


the IDBI loan with the benefit of a 0.5% concession on the original interest rate charged by IDBI.
Similar cases might be found in other subprojects.26

24.     ADB approved the loan on 13 December 1994. It became effective on 28 July 1995, a
month later than the proposed date of loan effectiveness. The termination date for ADB
commitments of loan proceeds was extended three times from 28 July 1997 to 31 December
1999. The loan was closed on 27 September 2000, 2 months later than the original closing date.
During the initial 18 months of project implementation, subproject approvals and loan
disbursements were much slower than envisaged. By the end of 1996, only nine subprojects
were approved for ADB financing totaling $38.6 million, and only $19.42 million was disbursed.
The main reasons for the slow pace of commitment and disbursement included (i) lower-than-
expected demand for ADB funds, (ii) frequent changes of the project management team at IDBI,
and (iii) IDBI's difficulties in following ADB disbursement procedures. In response to these
issues, IDBI took steps to market the loan and relax some selection criteria (para. 15). ADB,
meanwhile, simplified disbursement procedures so that (i) the statement of expenditure (SOE)
limit was increased from $500,000 (per the subloan agreement) to $5 million; (ii) copies of the
contract, invoice, and receipt were not required to be attached when preparing a withdrawal
application for replenishment of the imprest fund, reimbursements for contract, or payment
below the limit; (iii) retroactive financing would be allowed for IDBI's disbursement within 90
days of the submission of the subloan application to ADB; and (iv) IDBI had to ensure that
subborrowers maintained records of all expenses financed under the Project for at least one
year after loan closing. Although these measures resolved the implementation delays, the
quality of subproject selection and ADB supervision were undermined somewhat (para. 28).

D.         Procurement and Construction

25.     Under the LA, procurement of ADB-financed equipment for the Project would be done in
accordance with the ADB's Guidelines for Procurement applicable to credit lines to development
finance institutions. Each subborrower would be responsible for its own procurement. IDBI
would ensure that the procurement procedures adopted by the subborrowers were appropriate
in the respective circumstances, and that the goods and services to be financed by subloans
were produced by and procured in ADB member countries. The PCR did not report any issues
regarding procurement and construction. Further, representatives of IDBI and the subborrowers
who met with the OEM did not highlight any procurement- or construction-related problems.

26.    During the plant visit to EID Parry (India) Ltd., the OEM found that a steam turbine
generator was imported from what was then Czechoslovakia, while all other equipment was
manufactured locally. Since equipment from nonmember countries of ADB is not eligible for
ADB financing, the OEM was told that the generator was financed by alternative sources.
However, the OEM was not able to obtain from the subborrower a cost breakdown of all
equipment imported and locally procured under the subproject. A similar case was found during
the plant visit to Sunflag Iron and Steel Company Ltd.




26
     During the plant visit to Sintex Industries Ltd., the OEM was informed that a reduction of 0.5% in the interest rate
     was applied to the first disbursement made under the original IDBI loan. For the subborrower, only this portion of
     the IDBI financing was converted to the ADB loan to avail of the reduced interest rate.
                                                                                                               11


E.      Organization and Management

27.     IDBI was established in July 1964 as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Reserve Bank of
India. Over the past 40 years, IDBI has been constantly reforming--from a development
financial institution to, most recently, a commercial bank. A board of directors manages IDBI in
accordance with the provisions of the IDBI Act of 1964. The current board comprises 10
directors, of whom nine are independent nonexecutive directors. In addition to appointing the
chairman and managing director, the Government nominates as IDBI directors two officials and
three persons with special knowledge and professional experience. The other four directors are
elected by the shareholders, excluding the Government. The chairman and managing director
are responsible for the day-to-day management of operations. A top management team,
comprising executive directors and a legal adviser, provides support and expertise. With its
head office in Mumbai, IDBI operates through a network of zonal offices (in Chennai, Guwahati,
Kolkata, Mumbai, and New Delhi) and branch offices spread across the country.

28.       IDBI's Technology Department initially handled project implementation management
until those responsibilities were transferred to the new Venture Capital Department in 1996. A
year later, IDBI handed project management over to the Foreign Exchange Service Department
(FSD). However, FSD was not positioned well within IDBI to appraise projects, constraining its
ability to select suitable candidates for the Project. FSD acted as the overall coordinator of the
Project, providing a contact point between IDBI and ADB. Subprojects were processed and
administered separately by the corporate financing departments (CFDs) in the relevant sectors.
Since this additional task was outside the main priorities of the CFDs, this arrangement likely
hindered the realization of the Project's full potential.27 For example, many of the subprojects
financed under the loan were part of ongoing expansion and/or modification schemes
undertaken by the subproject entities. In cases where IDBI already had financing agreements
with the enterprises concerned,28 subloan agreements between IDBI and the respective
subborrowers for ADB funds were lacking. As a result, the subborrowers were unaware of their
obligations to ADB. ADB funds were used to reimburse expenditures incurred before ADB
reviewed the subproject. Although this resulted in relatively faster disbursement of ADB funds,
project selection and assessment became a repackaging exercise, and project monitoring
became superficial.29 In an extreme case, the subproject for Upper Ganges Sugar and
Industries Ltd. was submitted for ADB review about 2 years after completion.

29.     The steering committee that had been envisaged for the Project at appraisal was not
formed, and DIPP was not actively involved in project implementation, according to IDBI.30
However, ADB review missions fielded in November 1996 and December 1997 reported that an
interministerial steering committee was established in June 1995. The available project files do
not show any evidence of DIPP involvement in the Project, or the existence of the steering
committee. In coordination with IDBI, DIPP was to provide ADB with reports on project benefit
monitoring and evaluation during the first 5 years of full operation of each subproject. The
project file does not contain any record that DIPP submitted those reports as required (para.12).

27
   Under TA 2403-IND (footnote 5), the consultant report noted that the officers in CFDs were more comfortable
   dealing with normal finance schemes. Generally, they resisted taking up new schemes for which the primary
   responsibility lies with other departments. Moreover, if the loan amount is small compared to the normal project
   finance schemes, implementation of such a scheme carries another disincentive.
28
    INRM informed the OEM that IDBI should amend the loan agreements to include specific clauses with ADB
   requirements. However, IDBI and/or the subborrowers did not mention such amendments to the OEM, and they
   were not documented in project files.
29
   All subprojects visited by the OEM were approved by ADB after the start of implementation.
30
   The PCR noted that DIPP convened few meetings. During the OEM, DIPP declined INRM's request for a meeting.
12



30.    IDBI did not comply fully with the covenants in the LA. Status of compliance with major
loan covenants is provided in Appendix 12 of the PCR. The OEM found a few cases of
noncompliance that were not reported in the PCR or are worth highlighting:

         (i)      Paragraph 3, Schedule 4 of LA: "IDBI shall not select and appraise any
                  greenfield investment or any expansion project, but shall use the proceeds of the
                  Loan [sic] for promoting energy efficiency in ongoing industrial enterprises."
                  However, the OEM found that at least one greenfield subproject was financed
                  under the loan (para. 17).31
         (ii)     Paragraph 8, Schedule 4 of LA: "In respect of each qualified project, IDBI shall
                  summit to ADB for review on an ex post facto basis a short report, checklist,
                  initial environmental examination, environmental impact assessment, or their
                  summaries." Such information was not found in project files for any of the
                  subprojects.32
         (iii)    Paragraph 11, Schedule 4 of LA: "IDBI will provide to the Department of
                  Industrial Development (DID), benefit monitoring and evaluation reports relating
                  to each qualified project during the first five [sic] years of its full operation, to
                  enable an evaluation to be made of the benefits of each qualified project,
                  including an assessment of the energy efficiency achieved and compliance with
                  applicable environmental standards." IDBI representatives informed the OEM
                  that IDBI had few communications with DID/DIPP during project implementation.
         (iv)     Paragraph 12, Schedule 4 of LA: "To monitor the actual realization of the
                  targeted energy efficiency for each qualified project, each year, IDBI should
                  submit information on actual energy savings for completed qualified projects in
                  the quarterly reports to be submitted to ADB under Section 5.05 of the LA." While
                  no such information was found in ADB project files, IDBI provided the OEM with
                  energy efficiency auditing reports for four subprojects.
         (v)      Paragraph 17, Schedule 4 of LA: "IDBI will, pending repayment to ADB, cause all
                  funds received from the repayment of principal of the subloans, to be used as a
                  revolving fund to provide further financing for energy-efficient projects to qualified
                  enterprises." This requirement was not met as of September 2004, although most
                  subborrowers had repaid the subloans in accordance with the repayment
                  schedules. Some even prepaid the full amount to take advantage of the lower
                  domestic lending rates in the past few years.33

31.     In light of these compliance issues, the implementation arrangements for the Project and
the covenants stipulated in the LA were considered ineffective in delivering the intended project
results. This resulted partly from (i) inadequate analysis at the project design stage of the issues
to be addressed, and the readiness of candidate subprojects, (ii) lack of clarity and consistency
in the RRP and LA on project scope; (iii) inappropriate assessments of institutional constraints
in the Government and IDBI; and (iv) limitations of ADB lending products in accommodating this
type of investment project (para. 15).



31
   Determining whether the seven expansion subprojects financed under the loan met the criteria, as referred to in the
   minutes of loan negotiation, is made difficult by the lack of clarity in definitions.
32
   INRM informed the OEM that, as part of project monitoring and progress reporting exercise, IDBI should prepare
   and submit to ADB summary statements on the subprojects' compliance with environmental safeguard
   requirements. Such information was not found in project files for any of the subprojects.
33
   The average long-term prime rate that IDBI charged its borrowers dropped from 16.8% in 1996 to 9.9% in 2003.
                                                                                               13


                       III.   ACHIEVEMENT OF PROJECT PURPOSE

A.     Operational Performance

32.    Based on plant visits and interviews with representatives of subborrowers, the OEM
concluded that subprojects financed under the loan, to a large extent, were performing well
operationally at the time of the Mission. Only 2 of the 26 subprojects implemented had been
suspended (para. 20). The operational performance of the subprojects visited by OEM--in
terms of outputs, energy efficiency improvement, and environmental benefits--are presented in
Appendix 2. The results are summarized in paras. 33­48.

       1.      EID Parry (India) Ltd.

33.     The subproject was to replace the inefficient boilers and turbines of the captive power
plant using bagasse as fuel. The power generation was expected to rise from 8.5 megawatts
(MW) to 24.5 MW after implementation of the subproject. In addition to meeting the power
requirement for its own sugar production, the plant would sell any excess power generated to
the grid. The subproject was implemented successfully. The power plant has operated
satisfactorily since its commencement in May 1997.

34.     The OEM was informed that energy efficiency of the power plant, as measured by the
increase in power generation for the same levels of bagasse input, had improved. By adding
electrostatic precipitators in the boilers, the particulate emissions were reduced. However, data
on the energy efficiency achievement and environmental improvement was not available.

       2.      Madras Fertilizers Ltd.

35.    The subproject was a minor part of an integrated expansion and modernization scheme
to enhance the production capacity of ammonia, urea, and nitrogen/phosphorus/potassium
(NPK) fertilizers. Energy efficiency was not the main objective. During the site visit, the plant
had been shut down for annual maintenance. Plant officials had trouble demarcating specific
items covered by ADB funding. The whole scheme, which was implemented over 6 years,
became fully operational only in 2002 due to technical problems.

36.    The annual reports of Madras Fertilizers Ltd. stated that energy intensity for ammonia
production, in terms of tons of oil equivalent (toe) per ton of ammonia output, was reduced by
19.4% from 1997 to 2002. During the same period, however, energy intensities for urea and
NPK production increased by 4.4% and 71.7%, respectively. Due to its poor financial
performance, the subborrower has been unable to make any loan repayments to IDBI.
Currently, the subborrower is negotiating a debt restructuring with IDBI and other lenders.

       3.      Indo Rama Cement Ltd.

37.     The subproject was to set up a new slag-cement factory with a capacity of 1 million tons
per year by utilizing blast furnace slag produced from a nearby iron and steel plant.
Implementation of the subproject started in 1997, 2 years before ADB's approval. The
subproject was completed, as envisaged, in June 1999. However, the plant did not start
commercial operation until July 2000, when the slag became available from the iron and steel
plant. Since then, the plant has been operating satisfactorily at full capacity. The OEM found the
production facilities well maintained.
14


38.    The main feature of the subproject was the utilization of waste slag, instead of clinker, as
raw material for cement production. For every ton of cement produced, 0.5 ton of clinker would
be saved. This would reduce electricity consumption in cement production from 90 kilowatt-
hours (kWh) per ton to 35 kWh/ton. With annual cement production of 1 million tons, the
subproject would have consumed 55 gigawatt-hours (GWh) more electricity per year if clinker
were used as raw material.

39.    The environmental benefits of the subproject were derived mainly from (i) the productive
use of 500,000 tons of waste slag per year, which otherwise would require a large land area for
disposal and would cause serious environmental pollution; and (ii) a 15% reduction of carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions from cement production in India compared to the national average.
Indo Rama Cement Ltd. is exploring certified emission reduction trading with Norway.

           4.       Sree Rayalseema Alkalies and Allied Chemicals Limited

40.     The subproject had two main purposes. First, it was to modernize a caustic soda plant
by replacing 14 electrolyzers, which would arrest the loss of production of 3,300 tons of soda
per year and result in power savings of 19%. Second, the subproject was to set up a caustic
flakes fusion plant, which would reduce the transportation cost of caustic lye by 50%. The
subproject was implemented successfully, and completed in December 1996. The equipment
and auxiliaries installed are well maintained.

41.    The OEM was informed that lower energy intensity for manufacturing caustic soda would
reduce pollution. The conversion of caustic soda into flakes would lower fuel usage for
transportation per unit of output, which also would have a positive impact on the environment.
However, no data was readily available on the energy savings and environmental benefits
achieved.

           5.       Sintex Industries Ltd.

42.     The subproject was to modernize the textile production facilities from batch process to
continuous process, and to replace narrow-width looms with wider rapier looms. The subproject
was implemented as planned, and successfully completed in June 2000. The equipment
installed is in good operating condition.

43.    Sintex's Energy Audit Report of March 2001 stated that the subproject saved 34% in
power and 33.5% in water, and reduced effluent generation by 32.8%. The subborrower prepaid
the loan amount in full.

           6.       Star Paper Mills Ltd.

44.    The subproject, as envisaged, was to modernize and expand the paper production
capacity from 46,200 to 59,000 tons per year by rebuilding paper machines, installing a
chemical recovery boiler for enhancing recovery of chemicals, and implementing additional
steam generation and pollution-abatement measures. At the OEM, the subborrower informed
the Mission that three schemes had been implemented under the Project: (i) the replacement of
pneumatic chips blowing system with belt conveying system, (ii) the rehabilitation of the
evaporator, and (iii) installation of a new recovery boiler.34 The implementation of the subproject
was started in 1995, 3 years before ADB approval, and was completed in September 1997.

34
     These schemes were not indicated in the original proposal for ADB approval.
                                                                                                                  15



45.     The subborrower's main project objective was the modernization and expansion of
production capacity. Baseline data on energy efficiency was unavailable for the three schemes
before installation of equipment. However, the subborrower informed the OEM that all the ADB-
funded schemes achieved considerable energy savings after implementation.

         7.       Sunflag Iron and Steel Company Ltd.

46.     The subproject was to set up a 15 MW power plant by installing a waste heat recovery
boiler and fluidized bed boiler, using sensible heat of flue gases, coal fines, and electrostatic
precipitation dust from its production of sponge-iron. The implementation of the subproject
started in 1995 and reached full operation by July 1998, 4 months before ADB approval of the
subproject. The power plant and auxiliaries are maintained well and have been working
satisfactorily.

47.     The subproject's progress report submitted to IDBI in March 2001 stated that the power
consumption per ton of steel produced increased from 1,000 kWh in 1998 to 1,100 kWh in
2000. However, the power purchased from the grid was reduced by 49.25%, which meant
significant financial savings for the company from the cost difference between purchased and
captive power, plus the sale of surplus power to the grid. Furthermore, about 128,000 cubic
meters per hour of flue gases, which had been wasted, have been put to effective use. The
waste products from the power plant are collected for the manufacture of bricks for the
construction of buildings and roads.

         8.       Overall

48.     Because IDBI did not set up a benefit monitoring and evaluation system for the Project
(item (iii) in para. 30), the PPAR could not assess the energy efficiency achievements for the
individual subprojects.35 From the responses to the questionnaire and the annual reports, the
OEM collected some relevant information for assessing energy efficiency improvements of
subproject entities as a whole. Since most subprojects' proposals envisaged energy efficiency
improvement of 18% or more for the whole plant, the use of findings for the whole plant as an
indicator of subproject achievement in promoting energy efficiency was justified. Analyses of 11
such subproject entities, before and after the subproject, showed that reductions in energy
consumption per unit of outputs varied between ­18.4%36 and 46.72% (Table 4). Four of the 11
subprojects analyzed achieved the energy efficiency improvement target of 18% or more. This
relatively low improvement in energy efficiency reflected the fact that most ADB-financed
subprojects were only a small part of much larger investments in the production process. The
results also reflected the mismatch of primary project objectives among the subborrowers, IBDI,
and ADB. While most subprojects might have achieved the subborrowers' objectives of capacity
expansion and quality improvement, they were less successful regarding the primary project
objective of promoting energy efficiency in the industrial sector.




35
   The PCR reported that 15 of the 17 schemes for which energy audit reports were available achieved the required
   energy efficiency improvements. The OEM was unable to find these energy audit reports in the project files at ADB,
   and obtained energy audit reports for only four subprojects from IDBI.
36
   In the case of Madras Fertilizers Ltd., the main reason for the deterioration in energy efficiency was the abnormal
   operational conditions resulting from technical problems, frequent interruptions of power supply, and severe
   drought in the region in the past 3 years.
16


                          Table 4: Energy Efficiency Improvements
         Subborrowers                                       Energy Efficiency Achieved
                                                                        (%)
         Madras Fertilizers Ltd.                                       (18.40)
         Upper Ganges Sugar and Industries Ltd.                           0.64
         Sree Rayalaseema Alkakies and Allied Chemical Ltd.               2.06
         EDI Parry (India) Ltd.                                           6.97
         Associated Cement Companies Ltd.                                 9.32
         Yash Papers Ltd.                                               11.40
         Sintex Industries Ltd.                                         13.62
         Oudh Sugar Mills Ltd.                                          18.99
         Indo Rama Cement Ltd.                                          22.98
         Sunflag Iron and Steel Co. Ltd.                                26.21
         Star Paper Mills Ltd.                                          46.72

       Source: Annual reports and/or energy audit reports of the subborrowers.


B.     Performance of the Operating Entity

49.     The financial performances of nine subproject entities for which annual reports were
available for the period under review were analyzed. Financial highlights of the nine subproject
entities are presented in Appendix 3. Some key financial indicators for these entities are given in
Table 5.

               Table 5: Financial Performance of Selected Subproject Entities
Item                       1997/98    1998/99     1999/00    2000/01     2001/02    2002/03
Associated Cement
Companies Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)          1.35        7.44      (5.19)       7.68      16.32      11.22
Debt Service Ratio            0.03       0.17       (0.10)       0.16       0.32       0.19
Debt-Equity Ratio             1.46        1.37        1.27       1.44       1.48       1.30
Gujarat Alkalies and
Chemicals Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)          0.29      (3.79)     (17.49)      (9.0)    (12.45)        8.8
Debt Service Ratio            0.01      (0.10)      (0.42)     (0.29)     (0.37)       0.39
Debt-Equity Ratio             2.13        2.43        2.31       2.70       3.14       2.78
Kothari Sugars and
Chemicals Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)            --     (99.16)     (77.84)    (45.30)    (44.89)          --
Debt Service Ratio              --      (2.61)      (1.24)     (0.60)     (0.61)          --
Debt-Equity Ratio               --        3.69        4.19        4.4       4.79          --
Madras Fertilizers Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)        (31.43)     (4.04)       3.62     (16.95)    (37.38)       4.36
Debt Service Ratio           (0.15)     (0.02)       0.01      (0.06)     (0.43)       0.03
Debt-Equity Ratio              4.08        4.6        4.6        4.78       4.13       4.06
Sun Paper Mills Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)          9.62        6.35     (20.11)       6.52    (18.47)      14.48
Debt Service Ratio              --        0.21      (0.47)       0.13       0.32       0.36
Debt-Equity Ratio             1.21        1.21        1.52       1.47       1.59       1.23
                                                                          Continued on next page
                                                                                                       17


Continued

Item                           1997/98     1998/99      1999/00     2000/01     2001/02     2002/03
Star Paper Mills Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)               1.35       (9.65)      (2.89)        9.31        2.49        4.17
Debt Service Ratio                 0.08       (0.47)      (0.16)        0.54        0.25        0.37
Debt-Equity Ratio                  0.38         0.65        0.88        0.75        0.63        0.59
Sunflag Iron and Steel
Co. Ltd
Return on Equity (%)                 --     (24.19)        4.83         5.78        4.72        3.44
Debt Service Ratio                   --        0.77        1.24         1.15        0.77        0.68
Debt-Equity Ratio                    --        1.67        1.45         1.20        0.99        0.87
Upper Ganges Sugar and
Industries Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)             11.43        13.17        3.91         3.14      (8.04)     (13.03)
Debt Service Ratio                0.29         0.25        0.20         0.11      (0.15)      (0.20)
Debt-Equity Ratio                 1.82         1.58        1.64         2.28        3.69        3.38
Yash Papers Ltd.
Return on Equity (%)               0.84        2.54        6.49         9.12       10.62       21.92
Debt Service Ratio                 0.07        0.18        0.49         0.64        1.14        1.12
Debt-Equity Ratio                  0.76        0.69        0.70         0.72        0.48        0.50

-- = not available, 1997/98 = fiscal year of IDBI starting from 1 April 1997 and ending on 31 March 1998.
Source: Annual reports of the subborrowers concerned.

50.     The results show that only Yash Papers Ltd. performed well financially over the period
under review. Its return on equity increased steadily from 0.84% in 1997/98 to 21.92% in
2002/03. However, Yash Papers was unable to maintain a debt service ratio of at least 1.5, as
required in the LA covenants. The other subproject entities encountered financial problems, and
showed losses from time to time. Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd., Kothari Sugars and
Chemicals Ltd., and Madras Fertilizers Ltd. ran at a loss for most years between 1997/98 and
2002/03. The covenanted debt service and debt-equity ratios were not complied with in most of
these cases. The reasons given in the annual reports for the poor financial performances of
these entities included the sluggish market, lower-than-expected selling prices of products,
higher-than-expected costs of raw materials, and severe drought in major sugarcane producing
areas.

51.    IDBI's financial position has been weakening over the past 5 years. Its profit before tax
decreased from Rs13 billion in 1998/99 to Rs4.6 billion in 2002/03. The ratio of after-tax profit to
average net worth dropped from 15.1% to 5.9% in the same period, while the debt-equity ratio
increased from 6.5 to 7.9 (Figure 1).
18



             Figure1: Key Financial Indicators of Industrial Development Bank of India


                                        90.0
                                               Reserves
                                        80.0


                                        70.0


                                        60.0
               Rs billion




                                        50.0


                                        40.0


                                        30.0


                                        20.0
                                                                 Profit before tax
                                        10.0
                                               Dividend on equity capital
                                         0.0
                                               1998-99         1999-00           2000-01            2001-02            2002-03




                                        20.0
                                                                                           Capital adequacy ratio
                                        18.0

                                        16.0

                                        14.0
                 Financial ratios (%)




                                        12.0                           Profit after tax to average net

                                        10.0                                                              Debt-equity ratio

                                         8.0

                                         6.0

                                         4.0
                                                   Profit after tax to average assets
                                         2.0

                                         0.0
                                               1998-99          1999-00            2000-01               2001-02              2002-03




Source: Annual reports of Industrial Development Bank of India.
                                                                                                                  19



C.         Financial and Economic Reevaluation

52.     Since most of the ADB-financed subprojects were only small parts of much bigger
investment schemes, the benefits attributable to ADB financing are difficult to define and
measure. During the plant visits, the OEM unsuccessfully tried to verify the actual costs of the
subprojects. In many cases, the subproject entities could not identify which equipment, or which
part of the scheme, was financed with ADB funds. Without reliable data on costs and benefits,
financial and economic reevaluation of the subprojects, and the Project, were neither feasible
nor meaningful.

D.         Sustainability

53.     The sustainability of the 24 successfully implemented subprojects depends largely on
proper maintenance of the facilities installed, and the sound financial performance of the
subproject entities. Most subproject facilities visited by the OEM were maintained well. The main
concern for long-term sustainability comes from the relatively weak financial health of subproject
entities, as shown in Table 5. IDBI reported that (i) 4 subborrowers (Madras Fertilizer Ltd.,
Kothari Sugars and Chemcials Ltd., Bellary Steels and Alloys Ltd., and Swadeshi Mills Co. Ltd.)
rescheduled their loan repayments; (ii) 5 subborrowers (Associated Cement Companies Ltd.,
DCW Ltd., EID Parry [India] Ltd., Sintex Industries Ltd., and Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals
Ltd.) repaid their subloans in full; and (iii) the 17 other subborrowers were on schedule with their
loan repayments. Despite the generally satisfactory repayment status, the poor financial
performance of subproject entities (para. 50) put the sustainability of the related subprojects at
risk. However, the failure of a few subprojects and the weak financial performances of some
subproject entities do not endanger the sustainability of the Project as a whole necessarily.

E.         Related Technical Assistance

54.     At the request of the Government during appraisal and loan negotiation, ADB approved
TA2403-IND (footnote 5) in September 1995 to improve IDBI's capabilities in identifying,
appraising, and implementing energy efficiency and environment projects. TA implementation
did not start until January 1997, about 18 months after loan approval.37 Due to the late start, the
TA did not develop and implement an appropriate energy efficiency and environmental impact
analysis for subproject selection and appraisal under the Project, as envisaged in the TA scope.
The TA produced a report on the IDBI institutional structure and lending processes, plus 10
sector reports on the technological status of the industry, energy use and conservation potential,
costs and benefits of energy efficiency, and environmental concerns. IDBI considered the
procedures recommended by the TA for identifying and assessing energy efficiency projects
unpractical. As such, they have not been incorporated into IDBI's business processes. The
impact of the TA would have been more pronounced had the TA started before project
implementation. Overall, the TA was assessed as unsuccessful.




37
     The reason for ADB's late approval of the TA, and the delayed TA implementation, was not documented in the
     available files.
20




                                   IV.      ACHIEVEMENT OF OTHER DEVELOPMENT IMPACTS

A.              Socioeconomic Impact

55.      Since a majority of the subprojects were implemented within the premises of existing
facilities, and involved mainly upgrading technology and equipment, the socioeconomic impact
of the Project per se was limited. A review of energy intensities for India and several other
countries in the region, in terms of toe/$1,000 of gross domestic product, showed that energy
intensities in India and the People's Republic of China dropped by 15.4% and 35.3%,
respectively, between 1994 and 2001. For Pakistan and the Philippines, energy intensities
remained almost unchanged at around 0.27 toe/$1000 and 0.15 toe/$1000, respectively, during
the same period. For Thailand, energy intensity increased from 0.17 toe/$1000 in 1994 to 0.21
toe/$1000 in 2001 (Figure 2). However, the link between the Project and the energy efficiency
improvements in the country is unclear.



                                     Figure 2: Energy Intensities in Selected Asian Countries

                             0.4
                                                PRC
                            0.35

                             0.3
                                                                                                     Pakistan
      toe/000$ 1995 price




                            0.25                                              India

                             0.2                 Thailand

                            0.15
                                                                                       Philippines
                             0.1

                            0.05

                              0
                                         1994          1996   1998     1999           2000           2001


                PRC = People's Republic of China, and toe = ton of oil equivalent.
                Source: World Development Indicators 2002, World Bank.

B.              Environmental Impact

56.    Environmental improvement was not the primary objective of any subproject under the
loan. However, improvement in energy efficiency undoubtedly leads to reductions in the
emission of greenhouse gases. This is also true for some of the captive power subprojects
financed under the loan. An INRM memo, dated 30 July 1999, reported that most of these
                                                                                                                 21


power subprojects had installed a combination of abatement equipment, such as bag filters, fly
ash catchers, and electrostatic precipitators.

57.     Ten of the 26 approved subprojects were intended for power generation. Six of them
reported using surplus heat or bagasse as fuels, 3 used fossil energy for steam and power
cogeneration, and 1 was a pure captive power plant using fossil fuel. The six subprojects using
bagasse and surplus heat as fuels have a combined installed capacity of about 200 MW
(Appendix 1), according to information collected during the OEM. Assuming a plant factor of
50%, and the use of no fossil fuels for these generation capacities, these 6 power plants will
generate about 1,000 GWh of electricity per year. That will save about 450,000 tons of coal
equivalent energy for the country.38 An analysis by Ohio Supercomputer Center in 200339
concluded that a coal-fired power plant in India would emit on average about 0.8 kilogram (kg)
per kWh of CO2, 7.4 grams (g)/kWh of SO2, and 6.2 g/kWh of NOx. Thus, 1,000 GWh of
electricity generated from bagasse and surplus heat would translate into emission mitigation of
800,000 tons of CO2, 7,400 tons of SO2, and 6,200 tons of NOx.

58.     In the case of Indo Rama Cement Ltd., the subproject was to build a new cement plant
using slag from an adjacent iron and steel plant. If the cement plant were not developed, the
slag--a by-product from the iron and steel plant--would pile up at a rate of 500,000 tons per
year, causing considerable damage to the environment. In addition, Indo Rama Cement Ltd.
reported that its cement production using slag is more energy efficient than the average cement
production in India. As a result, CO2 emissions per ton of cement output are about 15% less
than the national average. The subproject entity is entitled to apply for CO2 emission reduction
credit under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Indo Rama Cement
Ltd. is considering trading the CO2 emission reduction credits with Norway. However, a
greenfield project of this kind, by design, was not eligible for ADB financing under the Project.

C.      Impact on Institutions and Policy

59.      Although an appropriate policy and institutional framework was considered important at
appraisal for achieving the project objectives, the original project scope did not include a policy
or institutional component. Under the LA, the Government only was required to inform ADB
about progress on price liberalization policies for energy inputs and products of industrial
enterprises, enterprise reforms in the public sector, and other measures introduced to
encourage energy efficiency and improve energy management. Therefore, the Project's direct
impact on policy was minimal. With regard to institutional impacts, the Project did not appear to
offer any specialized energy efficiency services that were not available through IDBI's normal
term lending instruments. The advisory TA (para. 54) also did not achieve its objective of
improving IDBI's capabilities in identifying, appraising, and implementing energy efficiency and
environment projects. However, in the past 10 years, several policy changes have been
implemented independent of the Project (paras. 60­61).

60.     Before 1995, significant policy measures concerning energy efficiency pertained to the
disclosure of energy consumption and efficiency activity by every manufacturing company in the
Company Directors' Annual Report, and the accelerated depreciation allowance for certain
specified energy efficiency and pollution control equipment. These policies continue to be in

38
   It is reasonable to assume that primary energy consumption in a thermal power plant in India is about 450 grams of
   coal equivalent per kWh.
39
    Ohio Supercomputer Center. 2003. Anthropogenic Emissions from Energy Activities in India: Generation and
   Source Characterization.
22


effect. After the start of the Project in 1995, the enactment of the Energy Conservation Act (the
Act), coupled with the establishment of the Bureau of Energy Efficiency in 2001, were major
policy developments. Since then, a number of regulations to advance the objectives of the Act
were put in place, including (i) the establishment of energy conservation norms, (ii) mandatory
energy audits by accredited energy auditors by 2007, (iii) product standard and labeling with
respect to energy efficiency, (iv) mandatory appointment of energy managers in industrial
entities, and (v) penalty for noncompliance with the Act.

61.     Linking domestic diesel prices to international prices and reducing the subsidy in 2003
was an important achievement in energy pricing reform. The Government continues to regulate
and subsidize the prices for liquefied petroleum gas and kerosene. The price of natural gas was
deregulated in September 1997. The prices of coking coal and high-grade non-coking coal were
deregulated since 1996. However, the Government still controls the prices of lower-grade coal
used almost exclusively for power generation. Among the industrial subsectors covered by the
Project, prices of fertilizer and sugar are still regulated by the Government.


                               V.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT

A.     Relevance

62.     At approval, the Project's goals and purposes were consistent with the high priority
accorded to industrial energy efficiency in the Government's development strategy. The Project
also was consistent with ADB's operational strategy for India at the time. The Project's
objectives have remained highly relevant to the Government's development strategy, though
they are less relevant to ADB's current operational strategy in India and its overarching strategic
objective of poverty reduction. The design weaknesses identified in the report (paras. 15­18)
suggest that the project design was not very relevant to the achievement of project outputs and
objectives. Overall, the Project was assessed as partly relevant.

B.     Efficacy

63.     Most physical outputs of the Project were substantially achieved (paras. 19­21).
However, project outcomes in terms of energy efficiency improvements (para. 48), and policy
changes and institutional development, were not achieved fully. Despite the positive
environmental benefits resulting from some of the subprojects, the Project failed to address
sources of the market failure identified at appraisal. The subborrowers demand for the ADB loan
was not as high as expected, and the revolving fund to provide additional financing for energy
efficiency projects was not established. Overall, the Project was assessed as less efficacious.

C.     Efficiency

64.     Many of the subloans involved refinancing IDBI loans. ADB financing was only
marginally incremental for most subprojects, and was not instrumental towards the achievement
of project objectives. Overall, the Project was assessed as less efficient.
                                                                                                             23


D.      Sustainability

65.      The operation and maintenance of most project facilities generally was satisfactory. The
failure of a few subprojects, and the weak financial performances of some of the subproject
entities studied (paras. 49­50), do not endanger the sustainability of the Project as a whole
necessarily. Thus, the sustainability of the Project was considered likely.

E.      Institutional Development and Other Impacts

66.     The Project made little impact on the institutional development of IDBI and the
subproject entities (para. 59). While the energy intensity of the country decreased between 1994
and 2000 (para. 55), the link between the project impacts and the reduction in energy intensity
of the country was unclear. The institutional development and other impacts of the Project were
assessed as negligible.

F.      Overall Project Rating

67.     On the basis of its relevance, efficacy, efficiency, sustainability, and institutional and
other impacts, the Project was rated partly successful.

G.      Assessment of Asian Development Bank and Borrower Performance

68.      The performance of ADB and IDBI in project formulation, appraisal, and implementation
was assessed as less than satisfactory. For ADB, this assessment reflected (i) design
weaknesses at project formulation, particularly in excluding policy and institutional components;
(ii) inadequate project supervision during implementation; and (iii) lack of benefit monitoring and
evaluation after completion. Based on the back-to-office reports of review missions, ADB staff
visited only eight of 26 subprojects during the review missions,40 and the issues discussed
focused mainly on the selection of new subprojects for approval. Available ADB files contain
information only up to subproject approval. No documentation could be found on the
implementation and completion of individual subprojects. For IDBI, this assessment reflected
the frequent change of project implementation responsibility within IDBI (para. 28), FSD's
difficulty in selecting and appraising suitable candidates for the Project, and noncompliance with
major loan covenants (para. 30).


                     VI.      ISSUES, LESSONS, AND FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS

A.      Key Issues for the Future

69.     India has made significant progress in reducing energy intensity. However, many more
barriers and hurdles must be surmounted to progress further in energy efficiency. During the
1990s, energy costs as a percentage of production costs increased from 29% to 45% in the
cement subsector; from 7% to 13% in the textile subsector; and from 14% to 25% in the pulp
and paper subsector.41 The potential energy savings in the Indian industrial sector are valued at


40
   The subprojects visited by the review missions were Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd., Swadeshi Mills Ltd.,
   Madras Fertilizers Ltd., EID Parry (India) Ltd., Shree Rayalaseema Alkalis and Allied Chemicals Ltd., Oswal
   Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd., Bellary Steels and Alloys Ltd., and Indo Rama Cement Ltd.
41
   U. V. Krishna Mohan Rao. 2001. Energy Audit and Management for Indian Industry. New Delhi: The Institute of
   Chartered Accountants of India.
24


more than $200 million per year. Some key issues that need to be addressed to realize the
gains associated with capturing this huge energy saving potential include the following:

       (i)     The Government still directly or indirectly subsidizes many energy inputs (para.
               61). Energy prices do not reflect the full cost of energy supply. India is not
               making full use of market-based pricing signals to encourage industries to make
               the type of investments that are necessary to conserve energy and improve the
               energy efficiency of the economy. Pricing policies have a direct bearing on the
               viability of energy efficiency investments for the enterprises. Subsidized energy
               prices lead to inadequate investments in energy efficiency.
       (ii)    Top management teams of most enterprises focus on product outputs,
               commercial competitiveness, quality, and profitability. They rarely focus on
               energy efficiency. Responsibility for energy efficiency often is given to the
               maintenance and/or electrical managers. As a result, energy efficiency
               investments, and the adoption of new energy-efficient technologies, are given
               secondary priority in most companies. A clear analysis of the positive impact of
               energy efficiency investments on company profitability is required to change this
               priority.
       (iii)   For many industries, second-hand plant and/or equipment have been imported.
               While this may be a rational way to lower the capital cost of the investment, the
               unintended result is the use of outdated technologies in terms of energy
               efficiency. Energy inefficiencies often are transferred from one plant to another
               as inefficient equipment is removed from one factory and usually resold for
               installation in another. Energy conservation norms for the industries need to be
               developed that make commercial sense.

70.      In light of the importance the Government attaches to further improvements in energy
efficiency, the PCR and the Country Assistance Plan for India (2001­2003) proposed a follow-
up industrial energy efficiency project. However, the OEM does not believe that ADB should
continue to be involved in this area due to (i) the less-than-satisfactory performance of the
Project, (ii) the fact that the loan proceeds did not have a major impact on energy conservation,
(iii) the initial difficulties disbursing the loan, and (iv) IDBI's lack of commitment to the
establishment of the energy efficiency revolving fund. ADB did not play a catalytic role or have
measurable development impact through this Project. Unless specific measures have been put
in place to address the issues highlighted in this PPAR, ADB financing for a similar project in the
future is not justified.

B.     Lessons Identified

71.      The statement of the project objective in the RRP did not specify how the objective was
to be achieved. The RRP and LA lacked clarity and consistency on project scope and definitions
of eligible subprojects. The RRP, LA, and minutes of the loan negotiations should be clear and
consistent. For example, while greenfield investments should not be considered, capacity
expansion within some upper limits should be allowed in energy efficiency projects. In the case
of cogeneration schemes, the yardsticks for measuring the energy efficiency achievements
seemed arbitrary and irrelevant. The logical framework under the project performance
management system can be a useful tool in sorting out some of the weaknesses and
inconsistencies in project formulation. It also provides the basis for the Government and ADB to
monitor and evaluate the Project.
                                                                                                   25


72.     The relaxation of subproject selection criteria and simplification of disbursement
procedures (para. 24) undermined the attainment of project objectives and goals to some
extent. These measures might have been appropriate from IDBI's point of view to accelerate
loan disbursements. However, they gave insufficient consideration to their impacts on project
outcomes and the achievement of project objectives. As a consequence, project selection and
assessment became a repackaging exercise; and the project scope, as implemented, deviated
considerably from that envisaged at appraisal (para. 17). During the plant visits, most
subborrowers told the OEM that the only benefit to them of switching to ADB funds was to avail
of a 0.5% reduction in interest rate on loans that IDBI provided previously. The catalytic role of
ADB financing in promoting energy efficiency at subproject level was reduced significantly. This
unsatisfactory outcome highlights the need for more thorough and rigorous analysis of the
demand for ADB financing during project preparation.

73.     The simplification of disbursement procedures made the verification of project costs and
expenditures difficult afterwards. Under the simplified procedures, copies of the contract,
invoice, and receipt were not required to be attached to the withdrawal application for
replenishment of the imprest fund, or for reimbursements for contracts, or payments below the
$5 million limit. Subborrowers were required to maintain records of all expenses financed under
the Project for only 1 year after the loan closing date. In the case of Gujarat Alkalies and
Chemicals Ltd. (para. 23), the OEM was unable to check the itemized record of expenses
financed under the Project to reconcile the disbursement gap between the records of ADB and
IDBI and the subborrower. While ADB should simplify disbursement procedures and reduce
related transaction costs, measures must be in place to ensure that ADB funds are used for the
intended purposes. The executing agencies of financial intermediation loans should be required
to provide ADB with the subloan agreement before the first disbursement for the respective
subproject. As with project loans, the executing agencies should be required to maintain original
receipts for all expenses financed under the ADB loan for at least 5 years after loan closing.
Such measures are needed to ensure the presence of a strong trail for auditing, and that the
funds are used for the purpose intended.

74.     ADB's project monitoring and supervision were inadequate. The need for TA2403­IND
later on suggests that IDBI lacked the full capabilities to undertake energy efficiency activities. In
some cases, project supervision and monitoring became superficial (para. 28). The delegation
of loan administration responsibilities to INRM did not improve ADB's project supervision
noticeably. More effective arrangements for project monitoring and supervision should be in
place before project implementation. Since the subprojects are scattered in nine states across
the country, domestic consultants could have been engaged to visit each subproject at least
once during implementation if INRM did not have the staff to do so. The OEM believes that
visiting all subproject sites during project implementation is an essential part of the project
administration.

75.     Given the nature of energy efficiency activities and the considerable engineering industry
capability in India, the capital cost of most investments would have a limited direct or indirect
foreign exchange component. This explains, to some extent, why the ADB loan accounted for
only about 14.1% of the project cost (para. 22). If domestic currency lending were available for
commercially oriented public sector entities, the demand for ADB funds might have increased
significantly. Although the project formulation had some weaknesses, the difficulty in disbursing
the loan is a strong indicator that the loan proceeds were not competitive in the Indian financial
sector. The transaction costs and financial terms were not attractive to subborrowers. Domestic
currency lending was introduced for private sector projects in India after ADB's Indian rupee
bond issue in February 2004. However, it is still not available to commercially oriented public
26


sector entities. Compared to commercial banks, ADB has not been innovative enough to
develop a broader range of financial instruments to meet the needs of clients such as IDBI
better.

C.     Follow-Up Actions

76.    After the OEM, INRM discussed with IDBI the establishment of a revolving fund. IDBI
agreed to try to track the information required for the creation of the revolving fund. If it is unable
to do so by the end of 2005, IDBI might consider prepayment of the loan to ADB.
                                                                                        Appendix 1       27


                                    OVERVIEW OF SUBPROJECTS

                                 ADB Loan                            Scope of Subprojects
   Subproject        Type of      Amount
      Entities      Industry      ($ '000)    Modernization            Captive Power        Capacity Expansion
1 Swadeshi           Textile       535.1                          Cogeneration using fossil
  Mills Ltd.                                                      fuel (2.6 MW and steam)
2 EID Parry         Sugar &       7,681.2                         Bagasse-based power
  (India) Ltd.     Fertilizers                                    generation (24.5 MW)
3 Bellary Steel      Steel        5,122.5                         Power generation using
  and Alloys Ltd.                                                 waste gases (12 MW)
4 Madras           Fertilizers    8,100.5    Modernization
  Fertilizers Ltd.                           (NKP, urea &
                                             ammonia plants)
5 Kothari Sugars     Sugar        1,415.0                         Bagasse-based power
  and Chemicals                                                   generation (12 MW)
  Ltd.
6 Kanoria Sugar      Sugar        1,098.0    Modernization
  and General                                and effluent
  Manufacturing                              treatment plant
  Co. Ltd.
7 Balrampur          Sugar        6,112.9                                                  Modernization cum
  Chini Mills                                                                              expansion
8 Sree             Chemicals      6,283.0    Modernization of
   Rayalaseema                               caustic soda plant
   Alkalies and
   Allied
   Chemicals Ltd.
9 Upper Ganges Sugar              3,599.1                                                  Modernization &
   Sugar and                                                                               expansion
   Industries Ltd.
10 Yash Papers      Paper          270.0     Modernization
   Ltd.                                      and upgrading of
                                             boiler
11 DCW Ltd.        Chemicals      2,884.5    Modernization
12 Associated     Cement          2,722.8                                                  Modernization cum
   Cement                                                                                  expansion (convert
   Companies                                                                               wet process plant to
   Ltd. (Sindri)                                                                           dry process)
13 Associated     Cement          4,409.3                                                  Modernization cum
   Cement                                                                                  expansion (convert
   Companies                                                                               wet process plant to
   Ltd. (Lakheri)                                                                          dry process)
14 Bajaj           Sugar          1,647.1    Installation of
   Hindustan Ltd.                            high-pressure
                                             boilers
15 Associated       Cement       26,005.3                                                  Modernization cum
   Cement                                                                                  expansion (convert
   Companies                                                                               wet process plant to
   Ltd. (Kymore)                                                                           dry process)

                                                                                     Continued on next page
 28      Appendix 1



 Continued

                                    ADB Loan                           Scope of Subprojects
       Subproject Type of            Amount
         Entities      Industry      ($ '000)    Modernization           Captive Power       Capacity Expansion
16   Gujarat          Chemicals      17,089.4                       Cogeneration with fossil
     Alkalies and                                                   fuel (95 MW and 60 tons
     Chemicals Ltd.                                                 per hour of steam)
17   Oswal            Chemicals     22,386.0                        Power generation using
     Chemicals &            &                                       waste heat (110 MW)
     Fertilizers Ltd. Fertilizers
18   Sunflag Iron        Iron &      5,371.0                        Power generation using
     and Steel Co.        Steel                                     waste heat (15MW)
     Ltd.
19   Sun Paper           Paper       2,534.3                        Cogeneration with fossil
     Mills Ltd.                                                     fuel (5.8 MW of power
                                                                    and 15.6 tons per hour of
                                                                    steam)
20 Star Paper Mill      Paper        3,502.2    Installation of
   Ltd.                                         chemical
                                                recovery boiler,
                                                and renovation of
                                                evaporator plant
21 Tulsipur Sugar Sugar              3,433.8                                                    Expansion of sugar
   Company Ltd.                                                                                 production
22 Oudh Sugar      Sugar             3,946.9                                                    Modernization cum
   Mills Ltd.                                                                                   expansion
23 Indo Rama      Cement             4,986.0                                                    New cement
   Cement Ltd.                                                                                  production facility of 1
                                                                                                million ton per year
24 Sintex          Textiles &        6,160.5    Modernization
   Industries Ltd. Plastics                     from batch to
                                                continuous
                                                processes
25 Arunoday Mills Textiles           1,385.6                        Installation of a captive
   Ltd.                                                             power plant (3.8 MW)
26 Godavari        Sugar             1,296.8                        Bagasse-based power
   Sugar Mills                                                      generation (24 MW)
   Ltd.
     Subtotal                       149,978.9           8                       10                         8

Ltd. = Limited, and MW = megawatt.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission
                                                                                Appendix 2      29


                                 REPORTS ON PLANT VISITS

A.     Indo Rama Cement Ltd.

       1.      Project Scope

1.     The subproject was to set up a new slag-cement factory with a capacity of 1 million tons
per year by utilizing blast furnace slag produced from a nearby iron and steel plant. The project
cost was estimated at Rs1.5 billion ($33.3 million). Before the Asian Development Bank's (ADB)
approval of $4.99 million for the subproject in March 1999, financing for the proposed subproject
was secured by a loan from the Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI).

       2.      Project Implementation

2.      Implementation of the subproject started in 1997, 2 years before ADB's approval.
Completed in June 1999, the subproject did not start commercial operation until July 2000 when
the slag became available from the iron and steel plant. Since then, the cement plant has
operated at full capacity satisfactorily. The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) inspected the
project site and found the production facilities well maintained.

       3.      Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

3.     The main feature of the subproject was the utilization of waste slag, instead of clinker, as
raw material for cement production. For every ton of cement produced, 0.5 ton of clinker would
be saved. This would reduce electricity consumption in cement production from 90 kilowatt-
hours (kWh) per ton to 35 kWh/ton. With annual cement production of 1 million tons, the
subproject would have consumed 55 gigawatt-hours (GWh) more electricity per year if clinker
were used as raw material.

4.     The environmental benefits of the subproject were derived mainly from (i) the productive
use of 500,000 tons of waste slag per year, which otherwise would require a large land area for
disposal and would cause serious environmental pollution; and (ii) a 15% reduction in carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions from cement production in India compared to the national average.
Indo Rama Cement Ltd. is exploring the possibility of certified emission reduction trading with
Norway.

       4.      Issues of Concern

5.      The subproject was a greenfield investment, rather than an energy efficiency
undertaking in an existing facility. The acquisition of 62 acres of land and installation of new
equipment were required for the subproject. Furthermore, the subproject was close to
completion at the time of ADB approval, and ADB funds were used to replace IDBI's committed
funding for the subproject. For Indo Rama, the only benefit of switching to ADB funds was a
0.5% reduction in interest compared to the loans previously provided by IDBI. Thus, the catalytic
role of ADB financing in promoting energy efficiency at the project level was questionable.
30   Appendix 2



B.     Madras Fertilizers Ltd.

       1.         Project Scope

6.     The subproject was a minor part of a massive integrated expansion-cum-modernization
scheme, covering almost the entire fertilizer-manufacturing complex. The subschemes financed
under the Project, which were primarily for enhancing operating capacities rather than energy
savings, included:

       (i).       For ammonia production, the subproject envisaged replacing the primary
                  reformer, carbon oxide shift converter, CO2 removal system, methanator, syngas,
                  and process air compressors, and adding a pre-converter and an S-50 converter
                  in the synthesis loop. While saving energy, the production capacity was expected
                  to rise from 750 to 1050 tons per day (tpd). The energy savings were expected to
                  be about 5 million kilocalories (Mkcal) per ton of ammonia production--from 14­
                  15 to 9­10 Mkcal/ton.
       (ii)       For urea production, reactors, concentrators, air exhaust systems and
                  instrumentation system were to be replaced, increasing urea capacity from 885
                  to 1475 tpd.
       (iii)      For the compound fertilizer plant, the replacement of preneutraliser, slurry
                  pumps, and ammonia feed system, as well as the addition of a pipe reactor in
                  one of the trains, were to enhance the capacity from 1800 to 2200 tpd.

7.       The total cost of the subschemes was estimated at Rs4,500 million, for which Madras
Fertilizers Ltd. sought Rs250 million under the ADB loan. After the completion of the subproject,
energy cost per unit of production for the manufacturing complex was expected to improve by
37.67%.

       2.         Project Implementation

8.     Implementation of the modernization, expansion, and revamp scheme started in 1992, 4
years before ADB's approval in January 1996, with IDBI as the lead financial institution.
Although the subproject was completed in March 1998, at a cost of Rs6,014.3 million, it did not
become fully operational until 2002 due to technical problems. ADB's loan of Rs250 million
($8.10 million) for the subproject constituted 4.16% of the project costs.

9.      During the site visit, the plant was shut down for annual maintenance. Plant officials had
trouble demarcating specific items covered by ADB funding.

       3.         Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

10.    Energy efficiency improvements were limited in 1997­2003, according to the
subborrower's annual reports. Energy intensity for ammonia production declined by 19.4% from
1.321 tons of oil equivalent (toe) per ton of output in 1996/97 (1996/97 starting from 1 April 1996
and ending on 31 March 1997) to 0.802 toe/ton in 2002/03. However, during the same period,
energy intensities for urea and NPK production increased by 4.4% and 71.7%, respectively.

       4.         Issues of Concern

11.    Madras Fertilizers Ltd. started implementing this subproject 4 years before ADB's
review, meaning this was merely a repackaging exercise for appropriating a loan of Rs250
                                                                               Appendix 2      31


million equivalent from ADB. Energy efficiency improvements related to the subproject
implemented with ADB funds were not quantified separately, or tracked and reported
periodically. Policy changes, particularly in product pricing, constantly negated the
subborrower's operations. A water shortage in the subborrower's city forced the plant to be shut
down for 1 year, leading to financial losses. The price increase of the feed stock, naphtha, also
severely damaged the financial health of Madras Fertilizers Ltd. During the visit, the OEM was
informed that the subborrower had not been able to repay loans from financial institutions,
including IDBI, for several years. Madras Fertilizers Ltd. is negotiating a corporate debt
restructuring with IDBI and other financial institutions to get the company through its financial
crisis.

C.     Sintex Industries Ltd.

       1.      Project Scope and Implementation

12.    The subproject was to modernize Sintex Industries Ltd.'s textile processing facilities from
batch process to continuous process, and to replace narrow-width looms with wider rapier
looms. The project cost was estimated at Rs466.5 million ($11.5 million). Completed in June
2000, the subproject included the following installations:

       (i)     New factory building housing the new processing equipment,
       (ii)    Continuous process machinery, and
       (iii)   Imported rapier looms.

       2.      Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

13.     In the subborrower's Energy Audit Report of 19 March 2001, Sintex Industries Ltd.
reported that the subproject saved 34% in power and 33.5% in water, and reduced effluent
generation by 32.8%.

       3.      Issues of Concern

14.      Financing for the proposed subproject was secured by a loan of Rs350 million under the
Technological Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) of the Ministry of Textiles, routed through
IDBI, before ADB's approval of $6.16 million (Rs250 million) for the subproject in August 1999.
Internal accruals were to cover the balance Rs116.5 million. Under TUFS, the effective rate was
the primary long-term lending rate less 5%. IDBI merely appropriated a loan of Rs250 million
equivalent from ADB under the Project. The ADB funds did not provide any additional benefit to
the subproject, according to Sintex Industries Ltd. The subborrower prepaid the IDBI loan in full
1 year ahead of the final installment as another bank offered a lower rate.

D.     Sree Rayalseema Alkalies and Allied Chemicals Ltd.

       1.      Project Scope and Implementation

15.    The subproject had three components:

       (i)     Replacing 14 electrolyzers with 8 new ones of improved technology. This
               component was expected to avert earlier production losses of 4,800 ton per
               annum (tpa), and also provide additional production of 1,584 tpa and 19% power
               savings.
32   Appendix 2



       (ii)       Installing salt handling system, saturators and reactors, anthracite and chelating
                  tower, instrumentation, and certain electrical equipment for uninterrupted
                  production. The purported energy savings by this component were not quantified.
       (iii)      Setting up a caustic flakes fusion plant to reduce the transportation energy
                  requirement by 50%.

16.      Financing for the subproject was secured in 1995 by loans from IDBI and other financial
institutions. The total cost of the three components at completion was about Rs390 million, of
which ADB funding accounted for Rs216.75 million.

17.   Implementation of the subproject started in 1995, 1 year before the ADB's approval in
May 1996. The subproject was completed in December 1996. During the site visit, the OEM
observed the subproject equipment and auxiliaries working satisfactorily.

       2.         Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

18.     The lower energy intensity for manufacturing soda would reduce pollution.
Strengthening the caustic soda plant would increase efficiency in the production process,
lowering pollutant content. The conversion of caustic soda into flakes would reduce fuel usage
for transportation per unit of output, another positive impact on the environment. However, the
energy efficiency and environmental improvements achieved were not quantified.

       3.         Issues of Concern

19.     The subborrower started implementing this project 1 year before ADB's approval,
meaning the appropriation of Rs216.75 million ($6.283 million) as if financed by ADB was
merely an exercise. Subsequently, a subloan agreement between IDBI and the subborrower for
the ADB financing was not drawn up. As a result, the subborrower was not aware of any
obligations to ADB. Benefits from implementing the 3 components of this subproject were not
quantified separately, or tracked and reported periodically. A review of the subborrowers' annual
reports before and after implementing the subproject does not show the expected reduction in
power consumption of 500 kWh per ton of production.

E.     Star Paper Mills Ltd.

       1.         Project Scope and Implementation

20.          The subproject, as approved, was to modernize and expand Star Paper Mills Ltd.'s
paper production capacity from 46,200 to 59,000 tons per year by (i) rebuilding paper machines,
(ii) installing a chemical recovery boiler for enhancing recovery of chemicals, and (iii) adopting
additional steam generation and pollution-abatement measures. The project cost was estimated
at Rs885 million ($19.67 million). Financing was secured by a loan from domestic financial
institutions and internal accruals before ADB's approval of $3.07 million for the subproject in
December 1998.

21.    Implementation of the subproject started in 1995 and was completed in September
1997, 1 year before ADB's approval. As implemented under the Project, Star Paper Mills Ltd.
appropriated the following three components:

       (i)        Replacement of pneumatic chips blowing system with belt conveying system;
       (ii)       Installation of four film concentrator to improve steam economy and capacity; and
                                                                               Appendix 2      33


       (iii)   Installation of a new recovery boiler, replacing two old and inefficient recovery
               boilers.

22.    The OEM found that these facilities were installed and working satisfactorily.

       2.      Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

23.      Star Paper Mills Ltd. reported that the implementation of the belt conveying system
reduced power consumption by 52%. Installation of the film concentrators achieved 23%
savings in coal, according to the subborrower. Installation of the new recovery boiler yielded
savings of 9% in power, 35% in coal, and 52% in fuel oil, Star Paper Mills Ltd. reported. No
data was available on the environmental impact of the schemes.

       3.      Issues of Concern

24.    The energy savings schemes envisaged were changed after subproject approval
without ADB's prior concurrence, and the subborrower's progress reports to IDBI covered only
the changed schemes. The subborrower's main project pertained to modernization and
expansion of production capacity. No baseline data was available for the three components
before implementation. The subborrower considered the 0.5% reduction in interest on loans
previously provided by IDBI the only benefit of availing of ADB funds.

F.     Sunflag Iron and Steel Company Ltd.

       1.      Project Scope and Implementation

25.    The subproject was to set up a 15 megawatt (MW) power plant by installing a waste heat
recovery boiler (WHRB) and fluidized bed boiler (FBB), utilizing sensible heat of flue gases, coal
fines, and electrostatic precipitation dust from its production of sponge-iron. The cost at
completion was Rs461.3 million. Financing of the subproject was secured from IDBI 1 year
before ADB's approval of $5.37 million in November 1998.

26.    The implementation of the subproject started in 1995, 3 years before ADB's approval.
The WHRB and FBB were installed between December 1997 and May 1998. They became fully
operational in July 1998, 4 months before ADB's approval of the subproject. The OEM found the
power plant and auxiliaries constructed were well maintained and working satisfactorily.

       2.      Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

27.     In the progress report of March 2001, Sunflag Iron and Steel Company Ltd. reported that
power consumption per ton of steel produced increased from 1,000 kWh to 1,100 kWh after
implementation of the subproject. However, the amount of power purchased from the grid
dropped by 49.25%. Thus, the financial savings for the subborrower has been significant due to
the cost difference between purchased and captive power, plus the sale of surplus power to the
grid. Moreover, about 128,000 cubic meters per hour of flue gases, which had been wasted, are
utilized in the WHRB, reducing environmental pollution. The waste products from the captive
power plant are collected to manufacture bricks, which are used in the plant for the construction
of buildings and roads. The subproject is considered a successful model, which other sponge-
iron plants can replicate.
34   Appendix 2



       3.         Issues of Concern

28.    The subborrower considered the subproject entirely financed by IDBI, and refinanced by
ADB's subloan retroactively to avail of a 0.5% reduction in interest rate on the IDBI loans.

29.     Under the subproject, the turbo generator was imported from Skoda, in the former
Czechoslovakia. The WHRB and FBB were procured from Indian manufacturers. Since
equipment from nonmember countries of ADB are not eligible for ADB financing, the OEM was
told that the turbo generator was financed by alternative sources. However, the OEM was
unable to obtain from the subborrower a detailed cost breakdown of all equipment imported and
locally procured under the subproject.

G.     EID Parry (India) Ltd.

       1.         Project Scope and Implementation

30.     The subproject proposed by the sugar producing subborrower was to replace inefficient
boilers and turbines of the captive power plant with two new boilers and a steam turbo generator
of higher efficiency and capacity. In-house power generation was expected to rise from 8.5 MW
to 24.5 MW after implementation of the subproject. In addition to meeting the power requirement
for sugar production, the surplus power could be sold to the grid.

31.    The cost of the subproject at completion was at Rs750 million. Financing was secured
from IDBI and other sources before ADB's approval in November 1995. The 5-year term loan
from IDBI was at 16.5% interest per year. The subproject was completed in May 1997.

       2.         Energy Efficiency Improvement and Environmental Benefit

32.     At approval, the subproject was projected to achieve an energy efficiency of 175%
based on the increase in power generation for the same bagasse input. By adding electrostatic
precipitators in the boilers, particulate emissions would be reduced as well. However, no data
was available to verify the energy efficiency improvements and environmental benefits.

       3.         Issues of Concern

33.    The subborrower started implementing this subproject 1 year before ADB's approval.
The subborrower considered the subproject entirely financed by IDBI, and refinanced by ADB's
subloan retroactively to avail of a 0.5% reduction in interest charged by IDBI.

34.    Under the subproject, a steam turbine generator was imported from the former
Czechoslovakia, while all other equipment manufactured locally. Since equipment from
nonmember countries of ADB is not eligible for ADB financing, the OEM was informed that the
generator was financed by alternative sources. However, the OEM was unable to obtain from
the subborrower a detailed cost breakdown of all equipment imported and locally procured
under the subproject.
                                                                                              Appendix 3         35


                FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS OF SELECTED SUBPROJECT ENTITIES
                    Table A3.1: Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Limited (Rs million)

Item                                       1997­1998 1998­1999 1999­2000 2000­2001 2001­2002 2002­2003

Operating Results
Gross Income                                   3,662        5,764       7,904       9,920       9,325       10,322
Gross Profit                                     667        1,307       1,282       1,826       1,632        2,270
Interest                                         307          852       1,261       1,424       1,242          932
Depreciation                                     347          611         742         734         787          791
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation                  13      (156)        (722)       (331)      (396)         548
Prior Period Adjustment (net)                    -            -            -           -          (11)         (15)
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                             13      (156)        (722)       (331)      (408)         533
Provision for taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                     -                         -           -          -              45
  - deferred income tax                          -                         -           -          -            208
Profit/(Loss) After tax                              13      (156)        (722)       (331)      (408)         280
Dividend                                         -                                                             -
Tax on Dividend                                  -                                                             -
Retained Earnings (Loss)                             13      (156)        (722)       (331)      (408)         280

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                   375           375         459         459         459          459
Preferential Allotment
Application Money                                -            -           -           -           -            -
Reserves and Surplus                           3,914        3,739       3,669       3,219       2,815        2,729
Loans (net)                                    9,127        9,994       9,537       9,949      10,279        8,878
Deferred tax (net)                                                                    -           -            627
Total Funds Employed                          13,416       14,108      13,665      13,627      13,554       12,693

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                          13,664       14,995      14,897      14,891      15,925       16,122
Depreciation                                   2,007        2,618       3,347       4,062       4,970        5,803
Fixed Assets (net)                            11,656       12,277      11,550      10,829      10,954       10,319
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                           214          214         214         214         -            -
Investments                                      614          608         605         602         599          585
Current Assets (net)                             565          707         961       1,733       1,819        1,541
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off         367          302         335         250         181          248
Total Funds Applied                           13,416       14,108      13,665      13,627      13,554       12,693

Current Assets                              1,115.33      1,589.05    2,112.52    2,241.17    2,361.92     2,330.85
Current Liabilities                           967.40      1,581.10    1,726.62    1,152.15    1,089.23     1,379.61
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities       240.83         13.91     (279.77)    (295.64)     192.77     1,718.61

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                            0.29         (3.79)     (17.49)      (9.00)     (12.45)       8.80
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                  0.09         (1.04)      (4.85)      (2.22)      (2.56)       1.74
Debt/Equity                                     2.13          2.43        2.31        2.70        3.14        2.78
Self-Financing Ratio                            0.01          0.00       (0.02)      (0.03)       0.02        0.04
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                     0.01         (0.10)      (0.42)      (0.29)      (0.37)       0.39
Current Ratio                                   1.15          1.01        1.22        1.95        2.17        1.69

Source: Annual Report of Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Limited.
36     Appendix 3



                         Table A3.2: Upper Ganges Sugar & Industries Limited (Rs million)

                                                                     1999­2000
Item                                       1997­1998    1998­1999     (15 mos)       2000­2001       2001­2002     2002­2003

Operating Results
Gross Income                                   2,378        2,406         2,519          2,254           2,491         2,374
Gross Profit                                     361          386           346            282             201           169
Interest                                         192          188           224            186             212           199
Depreciation                                      63           61            80             66              74            78
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation              106          137               43              31          (85)        (107)
Prior Period Adjustment (net)
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                         106          137               43              31          (85)        (107)
Provision for taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                                                                    6             3             5
  - deferred income tax                           16           21                7          -               (38)          (41)
Profit/(Loss) After tax                           90          115               36              25          (50)          (72)
Dividend                                          24           25           -                   12            7           -
Tax on dividend                                    2            3           -                    1          -
Retained Earnings (Loss)                          64           88               36              12          (57)          (72)

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                    100          100           100            100               70            70
Application Money                                -            -             -              -               -             -
Reserves and Surplus                             692          777           814            699             552           481
Loans (net)                                    1,442        1,382         1,499          1,823           2,291         1,862
Deferred Tax (net)                                                                         -                 53            12
Total Funds Employed                           2,234        2,258         2,413          2,622           2,965         2,425

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                           1,282        1,329         1,356          1,542           1,693         1,733
Depreciation                                     351          409           486            539             605           681
Fixed Assets (net)                               931          919           870          1,003           1,088         1,052
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                           -            -             -              -               -             -
Investments                                      156          151           226            228             228           228
Current Assets (net)                           1,146        1,188         1,310          1,385           1,640         1,139
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off                                                     5               8             7
Total Funds Applied                            2,234        2,258         2,406          2,622           2,965         2,425

Current Assets                               1,404.48     1,539.83     1,437.03        1,570.97        2,118.28      1,565.44
Current Liabilities                            371.81       545.59       213.32          284.48          587.22        544.91
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities         21.56       396.02       127.00           52.65          (66.00)       669.62

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                           11.43        13.17          3.91            3.14           (8.04)       (13.03)
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                  7.06         8.69          2.64            1.63           (2.95)        (4.14)
Debt/Equity                                     1.82         1.58          1.64            2.28            3.69          3.38
Self-Financing Ratio                            0.02         0.44          0.14            0.05           (0.06)         0.16
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                     0.29         0.25          0.20            0.11           (0.15)        (0.20)
Current Ratio                                   3.78         2.82          6.74            5.52            3.61          2.87


Source: Annual Report of Upper Ganges Sugar & Industries Limited.
                                                                                              Appendix 3         37


                        Table A3.3: Associated Cement Companies Limited (Rs million)

Item                                       1997­1998 1998­1999    1999­2000     2000­2001   2001­2002    2002­2003
Operating Results
Gross Income                                  24,847    27,474       28,187        30,318      33,224       29,708
Gross Profit                                   2,201     3,506        2,274         4,056       4,982        4,036
Interest                                       1,191     1,625        1,618         1,702       1,467        1,039
Depreciation                                     855     1,038        1,245         1,413       1,511        1,646
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation             154        844         (589)         941        2,003        1,351
Prior Period Adjustment (net)
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                        154        844         (589)         941        2,003        1,351
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                                                           36         134           96
  - deferred income tax                          20         80          -            -            205           47
Profit/(Loss) After tax                         134        764         (589)         905        1,664        1,209
Dividend                                        206        205          157          341          512          427
Tax on Dividend                                  21         23            35           35         -             55
Retained Earnings (Loss)                        (92)       536         (780)         529        1,152          726

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                  1,368     1,368        1,709         1,709       1,711        1,711
Stockists' Deposits                              304       356          432           618         799          915
Reserves and Surplus                           8,561     8,892        9,620         9,809       8,488        9,056
Loans (net)                                   14,524    14,020       14,441        16,572      15,103       14,048
Deferred Tax (net)                                                                    -         2,330        2,377
Total Funds Employed                          24,757    24,636       26,202        28,707      28,430       28,106

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                          24,656    25,975       28,564        32,458      34,237       37,239
Depreciation                                   6,386     7,026        8,203         9,475      11,070       12,684
Fixed Assets (net)                            18,269    18,949       20,361        22,982      23,167       24,555
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                           -
Investments                                    1,895     1,467        1,722         1,815       1,753        1,278
Current Assets (net)                           4,234     3,784        3,247         3,209       2,773        1,752
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off         359       430          872           701         736          522
Total Funds Applied                           24,757    24,630       26,202        28,707      28,430       28,106

Current Assets                              6,080.90   5,681.10     5,897.90     6,011.90     5,501.30     5,654.40
Current Liabilities                         4,620.70   4,884.10     5,811.00     5,845.40     6,242.10     7,156.30
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities        874.5

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                            1.35      7.44         (5.19)        7.86       16.32        11.22
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                  0.55      2.94         (2.06)        2.79        4.86         3.25
Debt/Equity                                     1.46      1.37          1.27         1.44        1.48         1.30
Self-Financing Ratio                            0.05      0.00          0.00         0.00        0.00         0.00
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                     0.03      0.17         (0.10)        0.16        0.32         0.19
Current Ratio                                   1.32      1.16          1.01         1.03        0.88         0.79


Source: Annual Report of Associated Cement Companies Limited.
38     Appendix 3



                                      Table A3.4: Yash Papers Limited (Rs million)

Item                                          1997­1998      1998­1999      1999­2000      2000­2001      2001­2002      2002­2003

Operating Results
Gross Income                                        174            173            191            225            176            244
Gross Profit                                          11             14             19             26             34             46
Interest                                            -              -              -              -              -              -
Depreciation                                          10             10             11             12             10             14
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation                     1              3              8              14             24             32
Prior Period Adjustment (net)
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                                1              3              8              14             24             32
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                            0              0              1            1                 2              4
  - deferred income tax                                 0              0              0            0                 9             (1)
Profit/(Loss) After tax                                 1              3              8           13                14             29
Dividend                                                0              0              0            0                 4              4
Tax on Dividend                                         0              0              0            0
Retained Earnings (Loss)                                1              3              8           13                10             25

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                           39             39             39           39               39             39
Application Money                                        3         -              -              -
Reserves and Surplus                                    77             84             91         104             89             93
Loans (net)                                             88             85             91         103             61             66
Deferred Tax (net)                                                                -              -               45             44
Total Funds Employed                                207            207            221            246            233            241

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                                213            220            235            269            293            299
Depreciation                                         52             60             68             79             99            109
Fixed Assets (net)                                  161            160            167            191            194            190
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                              -              -              -              -              -              -
Investments                                           1              1              1              1              0                 0
Current Assets (net)                                 43             45             52             54             38                51
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off              2              2              1              1              0            -
Total Funds Applied                                 207            207            221            246            233            241

Current Assets                                          51             58             64             69             51             71
Current Liabilities                                     17             19             17             22             21             29
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities                  6             12             13             25             46              9

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                               0.84           2.54           6.49           9.12          10.62          21.92
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                     0.46           1.41           3.58           4.85           4.61           9.62
Debt/Equity                                        0.76           0.69           0.70           0.72           0.48           0.50
Self-Financing Ratio                               0.05           0.07           0.07           0.13           0.24           0.07
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                        0.07           0.18           0.49           0.64           1.14           1.12
Current Ratio                                      3.06           3.05           3.67           3.06           2.44           2.48


Source: Annual Report of Yash Papers Limited.
                                                                                             Appendix 3       39


                                 Table A3.5: Star Paper Mills Limited (Rs million)

Item                                        1997­1998 1998­1999 1999­2000 2000­2001 2001­2002 2002­2003

Operating Results
Gross Income                                     2,204       1,414     1,674         1,797     1,724       1,602
Gross Profit                                       132         (17)      148           358       225         303
Interest                                            61          85       136           172        99         123
Depreciation                                        46          40        48            52        53          75
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation                    25     (141)      (36)         134            73     106
Prior Period Adjustment (net)                      -
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                               25     (141)      (36)         134            73     106
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                            4                               11            4       3
  - deferred income tax                                 3                             -              36      47
Profit/(Loss) After tax                                22     (141)      (36)         123            33      56
Dividend                                           -           -         -            -          -           16
Tax on Dividend                                    -           -         -            -          -            2
Retained Earnings (Loss)                               22     (141)      (36)         123            33      38

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                     156         156        156          156       156         156
Application Money
Reserves and Surplus                             1,471       1,306     1,102         1,166     1,185       1,181
Loans (net)                                        618         956     1,104           990       847         790
Deferred Tax (net)                                 -           -         -                                   132
Total Funds Employed                             2,246       2,418     2,362         2,311     2,188       2,259

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                             1,916       2,155     2,303         2,319     2,321       2,341
Depreciation                                       425         489       560           624       649         709
Fixed Assets (net)                               1,491       1,666     1,743         1,695     1,672       1,632
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                             -           -         -
Investments                                        294         294       194          194        194         194
Current Assets (net)                               461         459       394          423        408         434
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off           -           -           31                    (85)        -
Total Funds Applied                              2,246       2,418     2,362         2,311     2,188       2,259

Current Assets                                  438.05      412.34    381.04     414.76       412.69      414.95
Current Liabilities                             311.03      301.49    223.80     245.45       292.95      284.04
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities         (60.51)      54.60    122.91     343.31       177.00      277.87

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                              1.35       (9.65)    (2.89)         9.31      2.49        4.17
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                    1.14       (6.55)    (1.58)         5.30      1.44        2.38
Debt/Equity                                       0.38        0.65      0.88          0.75      0.63        0.59
Self-Financing Ratio                             (0.04)       0.03      0.07          0.20      0.11        0.04
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                       0.08       (0.47)    (0.16)         0.54      0.25        0.37
Current Ratio                                     1.41        1.37      1.70          1.69      1.41        1.46


Source: Annual Report of Star Paper Mills Limited.
40    Appendix 3



                             Table A3.6: Madras Fertilizers Limited (Rs million)

Item                                        1997­1998 1998­1999 1999­2000 2000­2001 2001­2002 2002­2003
Operating Results
Gross Income                                    5,468     17,542       6,370        14,048      10,976      11,391
Gross Profit                                      129      2,400         830         1,421         920       1,597
Interest                                          590      1,867         563         1,304       1,120       1,128
Depreciation                                       92        605         204           415         456         392
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation              (552)        (71)            64      (298)       (656)             77
Prior Period Adjustment (net)                     -
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                         (552)        (71)            64      (298)       (656)             77
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                     -            -           -            -           -            -
  - deferred income tax                          -            -           -            -           -            -
Profit/(Loss) After tax                         (552)         (71)            64      (298)       (656)             77
Dividend                                         -            -           -            -           -            -
Tax on Dividend                                  -            -           -            -           -            -
Retained Earnings (Loss)                        (552)         (71)            64      (298)       (656)             77

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                   1,618      1,619       1,621         1,621       1,621       1,621
Stockists' Deposits                               -
Reserves & Surplus                                140        143         133           134         134         134
Loans (net)                                     7,165      8,095       8,064         8,382       7,256       7,119
Deferred Tax (net)                                -
Total Funds Employed                            8,923      9,857       9,818        10,137       9,011       8,874

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                            7,019      6,614       6,442         6,218       5,968       5,654
Depreciation                                                 -           -
Fixed Assets (net)                              7,019      6,614       6,442         6,218       5,968       5,654
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                            -           -           -             -           -           -
Investments                                        17         17          17            17          17          17
Current Assets (net)                              346      1,763       2,020         2,367         940       1,345
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off        1,543      1,463       1,339         1,535       2,087       1,859
Total Funds Applied                             8,925      9,857       9,818        10,137       9,011       8,874

Current Assets                               3,210.50    2,881.20    4,135.50      5,138.90    4,911.30    4,156.20
Current Liabilities                          4,278.60    3,891.60    4,821.30      5,317.90    1,537.20    2,339.80
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                           (31.42)      (4.04)      3.62         (16.95)     (37.38)      4.36
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                  (7.87)      (1.07)      0.99          (4.78)     (10.99)      1.35
Debt/Equity                                      4.08        4.60       4.60           4.78        4.13       4.06
Self-Financing Ratio                             0.00        0.00       0.00           0.00        0.00       0.00
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                     (0.13)      (0.02)      0.01          (0.06)      (0.43)      0.03
Current Ratio                                    0.75        0.74       0.86           0.97        3.19       1.78


Source: Annual Report of Madras Fertilizers Limited.
                                                                                 Appendix 3      41


          Table A3.7: Kothari Sugars and Chemicals Limited (Rs million)

Item                                        1998-1999     1999-2000    2000-2001    2001-2002
Operating Results
Gross Income                                      952          941         1,100        1,222
Gross Profit                                      (93)         (26)          115           94
Interest                                          289          291           255          261
Depreciation                                      122          122           122          114
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation              (504)         (439)        (263)        (282)
Prior Period Adjustment (net)                     118            49           19
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                         (622)         (488)        (281)        (282)
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat
  - deferred income tax                             0                          3
Profit/(Loss) After tax                          (622)         (488)        (284)        (282)
Dividend                                          -             -            -            -
Tax on Dividend                                   -             -            -            -
Retained Earnings (Loss)                         (622)         (488)        (284)        (282)

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                     289           289          289          289
Stockists' Deposits                               -             -            -            -
Reserves and Surplus                              338           338          338          338
Loans (net)                                     2,314         2,631        2,763        3,007
Deferred Tax (net)                                -             -
Total Funds Employed                            2,941         3,259        3,391        3,635

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                            2,396         2,395        2,404        2,404
Depreciation                                      494           614          737          851
Fixed Assets (net)                              1,902         1,781        1,667        1,554
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                             -            -            -            -
Investments                                        62            35           16           16
Current Assets (net)                              177           155          136          211
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off          799         1,288        1,572        1,854
Total Funds Applied                             2,941         3,259        3,391        3,635

Current Assets                                 352.00        510.15       568.27       632.98
Current Liabilities                            238.24        393.14       465.94       461.41
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                            (99.16)      (77.84)      (45.30)      (44.89)
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                  (25.96)      (20.39)      (11.83)      (11.71)
Debt/Equity                                       3.69         4.19         4.40         4.79
Self-Financing Ratio                              0.00         0.00         0.00
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                      (2.61)       (1.24)       (0.60)       (0.61)
Current Ratio                                     1.48         1.30         1.22         1.37


  Source: Annual Report of Kothari Sugars and Chemicals Limited.
42    Appendix 3



                                      Table A3.8: Sun Paper Mill Ltd. (Rs million)

Item                                             1997­1998 1998­1999 1999­2000 2000­2001 2001­2002 2002­2003
Operating Results
Gross Income                                           452       458          464     563         597        576
Gross Profit                                            29        38           33      74          87         84
Interest                                                11        13           42      40          37         32
Depreciation                                             7         8           22      22          22         22
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation                        11         17       (31)        12          28         30
Prior Period Adjustment (net)                               1         (1)              -                4     -
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                                   10         17       (31)        12          24         30
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                               3           5                    2         2            4
  - deferred income tax                                                                              47            4
Profit/(Loss) After tax                                    10         12       (31)        10      (25)           22
Dividend                                                    1         11         0          6      -               6
Tax on Dividend                                                   -            -       -           -
Retained Earnings (Loss)                                   9           1       (32)         4      (25)           16

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds:
Share Capital                                              8          91       89          89          89         89
Stockists' Deposits
Reserves and Surplus                                     98      100            68      72         47         63
Loans (net)                                            129       231          238     236         216        186
Deferred Tax (net)                                     -         -            -       -            47         51
Total Funds Employed                                   236       421          394     397         399        389

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                                   288       481          489     500         517        529
Depreciation                                            80        88          110     132         154        176
Fixed Assets (net)                                     208       393          379     368         363        353
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                                 -                               -           -          -
Investments                                                 0      0            0       0           0          0
Current Assets (net)                                       28     26           14      27          35         35
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off               -           2            1       1           2          1
Total Funds Applied                                    236       421          394     397         399        389

Current Assets                                      160.94      82.16       53.60          80          80         98
Current Liabilities                                 162.34      84.29       67.61          89          75         83
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                                  9.62       6.35       (20.11)   6.52      (18.47)     14.48
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                        3.56       2.51        (6.43)   2.10       (4.85)      4.15
Debt/Equity                                           1.21       1.21         1.52    1.47        1.59       1.23
Self-Financing Ratio                                  0.00       0.00         0.00    0.00        0.00       0.00
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                           0.06       0.21        (0.47)   0.13        0.32       0.36
Current Ratio                                         0.99       0.97         0.79    0.89        1.07       1.19


Source: Annual Report of Sun Paper Mill Limited.
                                                                                          Appendix 3         43


                           Table A3.9: Sunflag Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. (Rs million)

Item                                         1998­1999      1999­2000     2000­2001     2001­2002      2002­2003
Operating Results
Gross Income                                       3,518         4,211        4,214         4,098           4,256
Gross Profit                                         546           751          747           639             593
Interest                                             380           423          384           295             268
Depreciation                                         209           241          249           250             255
Profit/Loss Before Investment,
    Allowance, Reserve and Taxation                  (43)           88           114              94              69
Prior Period Adjustment (net)                        338            (3)        2,612          -                   (1)
Profit/(Loss) Before Tax                            (380)           91        (2,498)             94              71
Provision for Taxation:
  - current income tax - mat                           1             9        8,413                6               4
  - deferred income tax                               16             0                                        -
Profit/(Loss) After tax                             (397)           81       (10,911)             88              67
Dividend                                                                         -            -               -
Tax on Dividend                                                                  -            -               -
Retained Earnings (Loss)                            (397)           81       (10,911)             88              67

Sources and Application of Funds
Source of Funds
Share Capital                                      1,622         1,622        1,622         1,622           1,622
Advance Application Money                              84           84           84            84             -
Reserves and Surplus                                   18           55          158           246             312
Loans (net)                                        2,735         2,429        2,131         1,846           1,693
Deferred Tax (net)                                   -
Total Funds Employed                               4,459         4,190        3,995         3,799           3,627

Application of Funds
Fixed Assets (Gross)                               5,006         4,967        5,032         5,145           5,250
Depreciation                                       1,633         1,850        2,097         2,346           2,600
Fixed Assets (net)                                 3,372         3,117        2,935         2,799           2,650
Contribution Supply of Power,
   Water, and Services                               -             -            -             -              -
Investments                                          -             -            -                            -
Current Assets (net)                               1,021         1,057        1,052           999            977
Miscellaneous Expenses to be Written Off               21            16           7           -
Total Funds Applied                                4,415         4,190        3,995         3,799           3,627

Current Assets                                  1,384.21       1,518.35       1,456         1,576           1,495
Current Liabilities                               709.59         604.62         647           831             871
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities

Ratios:
Return on Equity (%)                              (24.19)         4.83       (613.11)        4.72            3.44
Return on Net Fixed Assets (%)                     (7.92)         1.63       (216.82)        1.71            1.27
Debt/Equity                                         1.67          1.45          1.20         0.99            0.87
Self-Financing Ratio                                0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00
Debt Service Coverage Ratio                        (0.54)         0.15         (3.86)        0.11            0.08
Current Ratio                                       1.95          2.51          2.25         1.90            1.72




Source: Annual Report of Sunflag Iron and Steel Company Limited.
    MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE PROJECT PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT
         ON THE INDUSTRIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROJECT IN INDIA
                            (Loan 1343-IND)



       On 25 April 2005, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department,
received the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of
Management:


      1.     Management finds the PPAR well prepared and makes a candid
      assessment of the project's performance. While agreeing with the overall rating
      and the lessons learned, Management would like to make the following comments
      on several aspects of the lessons proposed by the PPAR.

      2.    The PPAR argues that the lower-than-expected demand for ADB funds led to
      the relaxation of subproject selection criteria and the simplification of disbursement
      procedures, undermining the attainment of the project objectives and goals.
      Management agrees with the need for rigorous demand analysis during project
      preparation as suggested in the PPAR. On the other hand, Management would like
      to point out that applying flexible approaches is also necessary in implementing a
      project under frequently changing environment. It is understood that the
      abovementioned relaxation in the selection criteria and the disbursement
      procedures was made to adapt to the changing environment.

      3.     The PPAR also suggests that ADB future financing for a similar project is
      not justified unless specific measures have been put in place to address the
      issues highlighted in the PPAR. It is noted that such a broad statement may have
      overstated the issues when we consider that the policy environment for energy
      efficiency in India has changed. For instance, the Government of India passed
      the Energy Conservation Act in 2001 (the Act) that gives the central and state
      governments the requisite statutory powers for promoting and enforcing a
      progressive regime of energy conservation. The Act also requires these entities
      and their designated agencies to (i) promote mass awareness for energy
      conservation, consumer education and consumer guidance; (ii) encourage
      preferential treatment for energy efficient equipment and appliances; and (iii)
      establish an Energy Conservation Fund at both the central and state government
      levels to provide grants or loans for promoting energy conservation. This now
      provides a more conducive environment for ADB to assist the Government in
      promoting energy efficiency in India. In addition, given the current high prices for
      energy in ADB's DMCs, which are expected to continue, there is a role for ADB
      to assist its DMCs in enhancing energy efficiency.

      4.      The PPAR suggests that ADB needs to provide innovative financial
      instruments in response to changing financial markets, wherein the demand for
      rupee resources are quite large. It should be noted that ADB has already begun
      to introduce such innovative instruments. ADB has recently issued Indian Rupee
      bonds and is exploring other innovative modalities to provide rupee-based
      financial instruments to the Indian private sector, including financing energy
      efficiency through leveraging local sources of funding in the energy sector.
