Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-301
Project Number: 34263
Loan Numbers: 1958 and 1959
December 2013




India: Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector
Development Program




Independent Evaluation Department
                                          ABBREVIATIONS

                ADB         ­     Asian Development Bank
                HDM4        ­     Highway Design Model version 4
                km          ­     kilometer
                MPRDC       ­     Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation
                PCR         ­     program completion report
                PWD         ­     Public Works Department
                SHA         ­     State Highway Authority
                TA          ­     technical assistance


                                                 NOTE

                                In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



                                             Key Words

adb, asian development bank, flexibility in execution, governance, india, labor force, land
acquisition, madhya pradesh, program loan, reform plans, road administrative management,
road sector



The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                        PROGRAM BASIC DATA
Project Number:        34263             PCR Circulation Date:   Jul 2011
Loan Numbers:          1958 and 1959     PCR Validation Date:    Dec 2013
Project Name:          Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program
Country:               India                                        Approved                  Actual
                                                                    ($ million)             ($ million)
Sector:                Transport and ICT Total Project Costs:
                                                    Program            80.20                  80.20
                                                    Project           261.20                 299.30
ADB Financing:         ADF: 0.00         Loan:
($ million)                                         Program            30.00                  30.00
                                                    Project           150.00                 150.00
                                         Borrower:
                                                    Program            50.20                  50.20
                                                    Project           111.00                 149.30
                       OCR: 180.00       Beneficiaries:                 0.00                   0.00
                                         Others:                        0.00                   0.00
Cofinancier:                             Total Cofinancing:             0.00                   0.00
Approval Date:             5 Dec 2002    Effectiveness Date:       5 Mar 2003              16 Dec 2002
Signing Date:              5 Dec 2002        Closing Date:
                                                         Program         30 Jun 2005       29 Mar 2006
                                                         Project         30 Jun 2008       10 Dec 2008
Project Officers:                            Location:                       From              To
                       S. Wu                 ADB headquarters              Dec 2002         Oct 2003
                       N. Zhang              ADB headquarters              Nov 2003         Dec 2003
                       A. Akanda             India Resident Mission        Jan 2004         May 2005
                       A. Motwani            India Resident Mission        Jun 2005         Sep 2005
                       S. Tsukada            India Resident Mission        Oct 2005         Oct 2007
                       P. Dutt               India Resident Mission        Nov 2007         Dec 2008
Validator:             C. Willoughby,        Peer Reviewer:             E. Kwon, Principal Evaluation
                         Consultant                                       Specialist, IED2
Quality                C. Kim, Principal     Director:                  H. Hettige, IED2
Reviewers:              Evaluation
                        Specialist, IED2
                       R. Vasudevan,
                        Evaluation
                        Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 1, IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR =
program completion report.

                                 I.        PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.      Rationale

1.      Madhya Pradesh, one of India's larger and poorer states, was one of the focal states for
lending activities of the Asian Development Bank (ADB). A dilapidated road system's serious
effects on economic performance made the state a priority case for piloting focused improvement
efforts on the management of roads. ADB designed a support package comprising a program
loan, a project loan, and technical assistance. The Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector
2


Development Program was approved and signed in December 2002. 1 In this report, both
program and project components are reviewed jointly, and whenever necessary, reference is
made either to the program or the project.

B.        Expected Impact

2.      The program was expected to support the economic and social development of Madhya
Pradesh, leading to poverty reduction in the state. Rehabilitation of state roads combined with
modernization of the government's road management practices was expected to have significant
impact on economic growth and on the welfare of poor people living near the upgraded roads.
As skills of staff improve and reforms diffuse, these impacts are expected to increase.

C.        Objectives or Expected Outcome

3.      The main objective of the program was to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
Madhya Pradesh's road sector management and undertake institutional reform of Madhya
Pradesh's Public Works Department (PWD). The idea was to establish a state highway
authority (SHA), which would apply modern management practices, be a lean organization
efficiently staffed with the right skills mix, and be responsible for road sector policy, resource
management, development planning, and asset management. The PWD's labor force was to
be reduced by some 15,000 staff by 2005. The project was to rehabilitate 1,750 kilometers
(km) of deteriorating and damaged state roads, including some 200 km of rural connector
roads, state highways, roads in major industrial centers, and major district roads. The work
was to be contracted out to private enterprises and completed by the end of 2007.

D.        Components and Outputs

4.       The objectives of the program were to be achieved by (i) instituting measures for good
governance of the sector, (ii) improving capability and building capacity for better road asset
management, (iii) enhancing capacity to improve institutional effectiveness and efficiency, and
(iv) initiating steps to identify pilot cases for outsourcing and promoting private sector
participation. The implementation of the program required the Madhya Pradesh government to
undertake a number of actions. These are described below.

5.      Change in organizational structure. This involved (i) setting up a state highway zone
within the PWD as an interim measure, with the necessary staff and institutional authority to
integrate key responsibilities and functions in managing state roads, implement the program,
and prepare for transforming the zone into the SHA; (ii) transforming the state highway zone
into the SHA as a self-contained and fully functional agency to take over state road
management; and (iii) organizing a lean and efficient SHA at headquarters and in the region,
employing the right staff to be responsible for road sector policy, resource management,
development planning, and asset management.

6.     Introduce modern management practices. This involved (i) implementing modern
planning and decision-making tools, and preparing five-year plans and annual road sector
development and maintenance plans based on economic and other clearly-defined sector
performance criteria; and (ii) improving internal business processes to enhance operational
and financial efficiency, management accountability, transparency, and service quality.
1
    ADB. 2002. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance Grant to India for the Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program. Manila.
                                                                                                               3



7.     Rationalize staff and labor. This meant implementing a staff and labor rationalization
program in the PWD as approved by the Madhya Pradesh government; following its voluntary
retirement scheme for government employees; and statutory reduction of nonpermanent
employees following the Industrial Dispute Act 1947 to free more funds for road maintenance
works.

8.      Engage in financing and regulatory activities. This involved (i) obtaining adequate
budget allocation to ensure sustainable funding of road maintenance in the near term until
further economic development and traffic growth supported the establishment of a road
maintenance fund, and (ii) introducing effective vehicle overloading controls to preserve roads
and road safety programs to reduce road deaths and injuries.

E.        Provision of Inputs

9.       A program loan of $30 million from ADB's ordinary capital resources was provided for
implementation over 30 months. The program loan was to be released in two tranches. The
first tranche of $12 million was scheduled for release in December 2002 and the second
tranche of $18 million in June 2005. In addition, a loan of $150 million was provided from
ADB's ordinary capital resources to finance 81% of the foreign exchange cost and 2% of the
project's local currency cost, or 57% of the total project cost. Funds from the program loan
were disbursed to the Government of India, which in turn passed the rupee equivalent to the
Madhya Pradesh government to cover the components for the road sector reform.

F.        Implementation Arrangements

10.     The Finance Department of the Government of India was the executing agency for the
program loan. Initially, the PWD was both executing agency and implementing agency for the
loan project. When the Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation (MPRDC) was
established on 14 July 2004, it became the implementing agency, which dealt with daily
project implementation, while the PWD retained responsibility for overall project coordination.
The MPRDC worked closely with the technical assistance (TA) consultant team and the
consultants hired to supervise the large roadwork program under the project, and used these
services to help train MPRDC staff. When the MPRDC became the state highway authority in
October 2005, it took over a network of more than 8,333 km and relieved the PWD of that
function. Subsequently, the length of state highways increased to over 10,000 km.

G.        Technical Assistance

11.      The program provided technical assistance2 to assist the Madhya Pradesh government
in implementing institutional reforms in the road sector. The TA project was to (i) build
institutional capacity to support the recovery and development of the state road network;
(ii) strengthen capabilities in transport planning, project financing and investment
management, and environmental management by introducing internationally recognized
practices; (iii) provide training programs to disseminate findings and recommendations on
reforming and improving the state's management of the road sector; and (iv) assist the PWD to
implement the labor rationalization and social safety net programs for the employees to be
retrenched. The technical assistance financed by the Government of the United Kingdom (UK)

2
    ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to India for Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for the Madhya
    Pradesh State Road Sector. Manila (TA 4013-IND).
4


amounted to $1.5 million. The Madhya Pradesh government provided the $0.4 million
equivalent. The TA project was extended three times and the UK government increased its
allocation by $600,000 to enable the consultants to provide support until December 2006, half
a year longer than originally planned.

                      II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

12.     The program completion report (PCR) rated the program highly relevant to the needs of
the country and/or state at the time of appraisal.3 It continued to remain equally relevant upon
completion. The effort was consistent with the state government's development strategy and
ADB's country partnership strategy. In terms of program content, the PCR emphasizes good
adaptation of the institution-building design to local needs, which effectively stressed ways to
achieve and maintain good governance and sound administrative management. The PCR
noted with approval the program's flexibility in adapting engineering changes to the specific
conditions of each site and its users, and the major adjustment of the plans and approaches to
rationalize the labor problem. The project roads component appears to be generally well-
designed. These roads were selected and subsequently rehabilitated under the project.
Although a few engineering design features were revised, these were done based on site
conditions' needs.

13.      While often contributing to program success, such flexibility would not have been
necessary had the initial design of alternatives been more realistic in terms of how much of the
PWD employment reduction might actually be achieved in a short time. The large shortfall in
the planned PWD staff reduction reflected the political opposition to earlier government efforts
to sharply reduce government employment, court decisions in some cases, and the election of
a new government in 2003, and indicated limitations in program design. The retrenchment
could have been an obstacle preventing disbursement of the program loan's second tranche.
ADB staff did well in attending to this issue, taking account of the state's persistence in looking
for effective and politically feasible means to gradually resolving this inherited obstacle. They
obtained Board support for considering the relevant tranche disbursement condition as
"partially complied with," so that disbursement could proceed on 29 March 2006, some 9
months behind the original schedule. A more realistic target for the cutback of public sector
employees working on road maintenance would have reduced the scale of the expensive
administrative effort involved in subsequent renegotiations within the country and adjustment
of the commitments undertaken internationally through the program. Considering these
program design issues, this validation downgrades the program to relevant.4

B.        Effectiveness in Achieving Project/Program Outcomes

14.     The PCR rated the overall program highly effective in delivering the outcomes. The
program made good progress in implementing the required institutional and management
reforms. The program benefited especially from the tranche release conditions of the program
loan for broader policy issues and from the initial implementation of works under the project
loan. In mid-2004, a new public sector company, the MPRDC, was created to manage
contracts and supervise road rehabilitation projects. The state legislature approved the
transfer of responsibility for roads from the long-established PWD to a new SHA. Budget

3
    ADB. 2011. Completion Report: Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program in India. Manila.
4
    The concerned regional department expressed the view to maintain the highly relevant rating in the PCR.
                                                                                                     5


provisions for maintaining the state's roads were increased in line with the quite ambitious
targets that had been agreed. The task of rehabilitating and subsequently maintaining about
2,000 km of roads was competitively contracted on a build­operate­transfer basis, with
revenues being earned from tolls. Modern financial management and accounting systems
were introduced for the roads sector. More transparent and competitive public procurement
was established. Modern planning tools, including the Highway Design Model version 4
(HDM4), to help establish economic priorities and sound spending plans, were introduced; and
the ground laid for the development of a strong road database. The creation and development
of a wholly new body, initially working entirely on program-assisted elements, and taking over
full responsibility from the PWD during its second year proved to be effective for bringing about
the required structural changes. The MPRDC, with strong backing from the state government,
effectively delivered on the main elements of modernized management of a state road system.
Another particularly important program initiative, somewhat beyond original intentions but
strongly supported by the TA consultant, was the effective introduction of practices and
management skills that enabled the use of large numbers of staff for road maintenance.

15.     Rehabilitation of state roads under the ADB-assisted project continued, only a year or
two behind the planned schedule, but fell nearly 10% short in aggregate upgraded, at 1,603
km. While the project-financed road-building programs ended up slightly smaller in terms of
coverage than originally planned, the more important outcomes from the overall effort were the
effective establishment of the improved management practices and their readiness for wider
application to the state's full road network. The validation therefore gives the program a highly
effective rating, appropriate for three reasons: (i) overall success achieved on the main issues,
including the most difficult ones, during program execution; (ii) the significance of the visible
consequences in network performance; and (iii) the sound basis for further development,
which has indeed been pursued. Other than the unrealistic initial targets set by the state
government for reducing public sector employment, timely action on all the program loan
tranche conditions significantly strengthened the broader policy framework.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

16.     The PCR rated the overall program and its components efficient, considering both the
improved overall management of the state's road sector and the roads rehabilitated with
project funds. Despite the shortfall in length of rehabilitated roads, total costs on the project
part of the overall program ran some 15% over planned cost, with the excess financed entirely
by the Madhya Pradesh and Government of India. The costs of the works and their
supervision averaged $178,000 per km, 29% above appraisal. The increase was attributed
mainly to inflation in prices of construction materials and, to a smaller extent, adjustments of
design to local site conditions, which exceeded the approximately 10% contingency that had
been allowed equally for price and physical adjustments.

17.     The various forms of support mobilized under the program contributed to the design
and implementation of reforms. The reforms responded well to the identified weaknesses,
improving overall performance in both the scale and the time schedule as foreseen. Results of
individual road projects are consistent with this picture. The projects were selected with the aid
of the HDM4 tool installed in the MPRDC. Analysis of an initial group of these projects at
appraisal indicated economic internal rates of return (EIRR), mainly from vehicle operating
cost savings of 25% overall and ranging from 19% to 34% for individual Phase 1 projects
(those eventually contracted in September 2004).
6


18.     Reevaluation by the completion review mission of December 2010, again using the
HDM4 methodology but applying updated input on investment, traffic, and operating costs,
indicated returns of 21.6% on Phase 1 roads; 30.6% for Phase 2 roads (that had been
contracted in December 2005 and January 2006); and 28.1% for the project as a whole.
Presumably, the effects of the higher-than-expected investment costs were offset partly by the
price increases in vehicle operating costs and more particularly by higher-than-expected traffic
growth. The new analysis took account of road-by-road traffic experience and made cautious
assumptions about future traffic growth, with rates of annual increase declining over time. This
validation also rates the program efficient.

D.         Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

19.     The PCR rated sustainability likely, taking account of the improved trends in the state's
economic performance, and the government's continued efforts to deepen and spread the
improved management of the road system and the quality of service provided. The completion
review mission found the rehabilitated roads still in good condition because of more adequate
maintenance and management budgets. It emphasized the need to continue building up the
MPRDC capacity, deepening reforms in the PWD, and further strengthening efforts and systems
to reduce overloading and services to respond to road accidents. The effort has been sustained
after program completion: (i) two further loans were obtained from ADB for additional road
works,5 and (ii) opportunity is being taken towards progress on issues that were introduced but
could not move further within the program period--such as performing safety audits to identify
remedial measures for black spots, and opportunities for performance-based contracting for the
maintenance of government-managed roads. Additional domestic financing was also mobilized.
This validation also rates the program likely to be sustainable.

E.         Impact

20.     The PCR did not rate the program's impact but used available evidence to describe it.
Enterprises and commercial activities using the roads directly benefited from lower costs and
significantly reduced travel time. During visits and inquiries and in surveys conducted by
consultants, many local inhabitants have indicated positive impacts such as improved access
to commercial and social services, better opportunities and prices for sale of household
products, and the rapid increase in the price of land alongside many of the improved roads.
Based on surveys conducted after completion of a road upgrade, the MPRDC estimated that
incomes of rural households in the affected areas had increased by an average of 15% to 20%
mainly because of higher prices for their agricultural products and construction materials, and
increased job opportunities. The validation rates the overall impact of the program on the
various dimensions mentioned significant.

                            III.     OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.         Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

21.     The borrower for the two loans was the Government of India, and the executing agency
for the program loan was the Government of India's Department of Finance, while that for the
project loan was the Madhya Pradesh PWD. The Madhya Pradesh government and the
5
     ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Technical
    Assistance Grant to India for the Second Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Project. Manila; ADB. 2011. Report
    and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance Grant to
    India for the Third Madhya Pradesh State Roads Project. Manila.
                                                                                                             7


Government of India's Department of Finance provided the required counterpart funds and
necessary support in a timely manner. Establishment of the MPRDC in July 2004 as
implementing agency greatly facilitated project execution. The PCR emphasized the MPRDC's
critical role in bringing to life the major management reforms, correctly describing the program
experience and key factors to success. This validation agrees with the PCR and rates the
performance of the borrower and the executing agency satisfactory.

B.        Performance of the Asian Development Bank

22.     The PCR rated ADB's performance satisfactory. It gave a generally fair and balanced
assessment, noting the substantial guidance given to Madhya Pradesh government institutions
that were involved with ADB for the first time in roads--sound advice on technical issues and
matters of contract administration, and the periodic yet thorough review missions to encourage
progress and avoid potential problems. This validation also rates ADB's performance
satisfactory because of ADB's important contributions--at the cost of high expenditure on
analysis and discussion during project execution--to help Indian authorities overcome
obstacles and achieve important improvements.

C.        Others

23.     At appraisal, no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement was envisaged since the
roads would be improved within their existing alignments. However, arrangements were made
in 2006 for possible local variations in this regard, with adherence to appropriate standards.
Local authorities have put great emphasis in finding solutions within the existing rights-of-way.
For this overall program, no land was acquired--one temple was moved out of the right-of-way
and payment of cash was made for the frontage of one house.

24.     Due to the characteristics of the selected geographic areas, major environmental
impacts were not expected and the project was assigned environmental category B. However,
environmental monitoring and management plans were developed for each project to respond
to any issues that might arise, and the MPRDC established an environmental and social cell.
Reviews by ADB specialists indicated that environmental safeguards were adequate and that
the main effects perceived by local people have been improvements in the form of reduced air
and noise pollution, some improvements in drainage, and generally good management by
contractors of their activities. The PCR gave appropriate attention to several other program-
related issues and the coverage was adequate. The PCR also touched on the support ADB
provided to help discharged PWD staff and workers find new sources of livelihood.

            IV.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.        Overall Assessment and Ratings

25.     The PCR mistakenly assigned an overall rating of highly successful to the program and
project even while the aggregated score fell under the successful rating.6 This validation rates
the program successful (see table). The program developed by Madhya Pradesh and ADB and
ADB's package of support were critical in conceiving and actually developing institutions and
capacities that reversed deteriorating trends in the state roads. The program opened the way to
achieving the economic development sought by the state. The solutions envisaged at appraisal

6
    ADB. 2006. Guidelines for Preparing Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations (amended in
    2013). Manila.
8


did not prove entirely realistic but they initiated the cooperative effort, advanced the hard work
developed, and applied solutions that proved to adapt well to local circumstances.

                                                Overall Ratings
    Criteria                              PCR          IED Review         Reason for Disagreement and/or
                                                                                      Comments
    Relevance:                   Highly relevant     Relevant           Diagnosis is relevant but remedies
                                                                        had to be changed. The very large
                                                                        public-sector labor retrenchment
                                                                        proved politically and socially
                                                                        unfeasible and had to be substituted
                                                                        by a combination of more limited,
                                                                        phased cutbacks with substantial
                                                                        productivity-increasing management
                                                                        improvements of retained staff (para.
                                                                        13).
    Effectiveness in Achieving   Highly effective    Highly effective
    Outcome:
    Efficiency in Achieving      Efficient           Efficient
    Outcome and Outputs:
    Preliminary Assessment of    Likely              Likely
    Sustainability:
    Overall Assessment:          Highly              Successful         The PCR mistakenly rated the project
                                 successful                             highly successful even while the total
                                                                        score fell under a successful rating
                                                                        (para. 25).
    Borrower and Executing       Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    Agency:
    Performance of ADB:          Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    Impact:                      Not rated           Significant        Refer to para. 20
    Quality of PCR:                                  Satisfactory       Refer to para. 29.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = program completion report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.        Lessons

26.      The PCR appropriately highlighted the experience with the MPRDC in this case, and the
merits of developing an entirely new body rather than trying to reform a long-established existing
authority. The need for modernizing management of relatively small roads as part of the PWD's
functions and the difficulty of bringing about this change amid the agency's many inimical
traditions and practices were so great that the fresh start was probably the right solution in this
case. ADB's initial road rehabilitation project offered an ideal opportunity for introducing the new
institution. The PCR also highlighted lessons from the MPRDC's initial years, particularly the
importance of early initiatives and sustained cooperation among the relevant public and private
parties for the job.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Up

27.    The PCR noted that the need to further build up the MPRDC, the assurance of
adequate financing for the roads sector, and parallel initiatives to result in broader
development were being pursued under ADB's follow-on projects in Madhya Pradesh. It
suggested that it might be worthwhile to prepare a project performance evaluation report
                                                                                                  9


(PPER) in 2015 or later to include the two follow-on loans approved and focus on the trends
achieved in maintenance and management, the actual economic benefits attained, and the
effects on the social and economic well-being of the poor.

                    V.     OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

28.     The report and recommendation of the President (RRP) emphasized that the important
responsibility of consultants hired to assist in project implementation would be the
establishment of a project performance management system (PPMS), which would regularly
gather key data particularly relating to the welfare of poor people in the areas served, access
to social services, income and employment, agricultural production, and costs of transport
services used. The PCR asserted that "PPMS reports containing key indicators were
prepared." These reports must refer to the consultant field assessments carried out in 2007 for
the 332 km of road rehabilitated under Phase 1, and in 2008 for the 1,271 km covered in
Phase 2. The impact-related assessments and comments in para. 20 were based on these
studies. These important perceptions, which have already helped plan subsequent initiatives in
the state, must be updated as more comprehensive and new evidence becomes available.

B.     Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

29.     The PCR quality is rated satisfactory. It is a thorough and balanced document although
it assigned a wrong overall success rating. It touches briefly on the shaping of the reform
program. The annex on loan conditions describes why compliance with two loan conditions
had to be considered only partial. The report sufficiently covered important issues such as
safeguard issues and economic reassessment, and made judicious use of available
information. The PCR could have explored in greater depth the ways in which the difficult
public sector staff and management problems could have been resolved with less
administrative cost (especially to ADB) than eventually required in 2004­2005 to pursue the
relevant conditions in the loan agreement. The underlying issue addressed by ADB was
certainly important and common--so that fuller consideration of alternative ways of handling
the issue would have corresponded directly to the priority function stressed in ADB's PAI 6.07
on learning lessons that could help improve the performance of ADB-supported projects in
general.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

30.   This validation referred to related documents from ADB's website, the RRP for the
Madhya Pradesh state road projects, and project files for Loans 1958 and 1959 from 2004 to
2005.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

31.     The preparation of a PPER after the complete disbursement of the two follow-on loans
could be a good opportunity to refine and deepen the current assessment on the economic
significance and impact of such projects.
