Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-425
Project Number: 31435
Loan Number: 1839
October 2015




India: Western Transport Corridor Project




Independent Evaluation Department
                                          ABBREVIATIONS


             ADB            ­      Asian Development Bank
             ADTA           ­      advisory technical assistance
             FIRR           ­      financial internal rate of return
             ha             ­      hectare
             km             ­      kilometer
             NHAI           ­      National Highways Authority of India
             O&M            ­      operation and maintenance
             PCR            ­      project completion report
             PIU            ­      project implementation unit
             PPER           ­      project performance evaluation report
             PPMS           ­      project performance management system
             PSP            ­      private sector participation
             RRP            ­      report and recommendation of the President
             VOC            ­      vehicle operating cost
             WTC            ­      western transport corridor




                                                 NOTE

                                In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



                                             Key Words

adb, asian development bank, highways, india, lessons, performance evaluation, project
completion report, project sector participation, roads, transport, western transport corridor




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                      PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:       31435              PCR Circulation Date:         Aug 2014
Loan Number:          1839               PCR Validation Date:          Oct 2015
Project Name:         Western Transport Corridor Project

Country:              India                                              Approved              Actual
                                                                         ($ million)         ($ million)
Sector:               Transport and ICT       Total Project Costs:          378.0              460.4

ADB Financing:        OCR: 240.0              Loan:                         240.0             145.6
($ million)
                                              Borrower:                     138.0             314.8
                      ADF: 0.0                Beneficiaries:                  0.0                0.0
                                              Others:                         0.0                0.0
Cofinancier:                                  Total Cofinancing:              0.0                0.0
Approval Date:        20 Sep 2001             Effectiveness Date:        90 days after      4 Feb 2002
                                                                       loan agreement
                                                                          was signed
Signing Date:         14 Dec 2001             Closing Date:             31 Dec 2005         26 Aug 2008
Project Officers:                             Location:                     From:             To:
                      S. Tsukada              ADB headquarters            Dec 2001         Feb 2002
                      N. Patel                ADB headquarters            Mar 2002         May 2005
                      T. Nakazaki             ADB headquarters             Jun 2005         Apr 2006
                      N. Zhang                ADB headquarters            May 2006          Jul 2006
                      T. Nishimura            ADB headquarters            Aug 2006         Dec 2006
                      A. Motwani              India Resident Mission       Jan 2007        Mar 2007
                      S. Tsukada              India Resident Mission       Apr 2007         Oct 2007
                      P. Dutt                 India Resident Mission      Nov 2007         Aug 2008
Initial Reviewers:    J. Supangco,            Peer Reviewer:           S. Palle Venkata, Evaluation
                         Consultant                                       Specialist, IED2
                      F. D. De Guzman,
                         Senior
                         Evaluation
                         Officer, IED2
Quality Reviewer:     B. Nguyen, Senior       Director:                B. Finlayson, IED2
                         Evaluation
                         Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 2; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR = project completion report.

                                 I.         PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.     Rationale

1.      India's long-standing problems in the highway sector included lack of funding, weak
capability to implement projects, poor policy coordination, and delays in decision making. The
government took actions to fill up the financing gap, such as increasing the funds for highway
development and facilitating private sector participation. Despite these efforts, fundamental
issues still remained including introducing more sophisticated financial instruments, diversifying
methods to involve the private sector, and enhancing the financial and managerial autonomy of
the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) for eventual corporatization.
2


2.      On the investment side, the government faced the immediate need of upgrading key
arterial corridors, particularly the National Highways Development Project (NHDP) and the
Golden Quadrilateral of which the western transport corridor (WTC) was considered the busiest
part. The construction of a continuous transport linkage throughout the WTC was deemed to
have a significant impact on economic growth that will allow trickle-down effects to the poorer
areas.1

3.       The project was conceived to remove capacity constraints on a critical section of the
project highway and enhance road safety by introducing design features that could reduce traffic
accidents. The project was also aimed at enhancing the corporate finance capability of NHAI to
facilitate its eventual transition to an efficiently managed autonomous entity, including possible
corporatization; and to increase private sector participation in the development and operation
and maintenance (O&M) of the national highway systems (Report and Recommendation of the
President [RRP], para. 41).

B.        Expected Impact

4.       The project's expected impact was to contribute to sustainable economic growth. The
impact indicators were (i) reduced transport cost for goods and passenger, thus, increasing
the efficiency of economic activities; and (ii) increased job opportunities in India.

C.        Objectives or Expected Outcomes

5.      The project's expected outcomes were (i) increased efficiency of the transport system by
expanding the capacity of the existing road network, with increased participation of the private
sector in highway development and maintenance; and (ii) enhanced road safety. For the first
envisaged outcome, the performance indicators were reduction in volume to capacity ratio from
0.63 to 0.30 by 2005, and reduced travel time by 3 hours for cars and by 3.5 hours for trucks
along the project section by 2005. The other indicator was an increase in the length of highways
developed by the private sector from 9% to 24%, and increase in highways operated and
maintained by the private sector from 10% to 41%. For the second envisaged outcome, the
performance indicator was reduced number of fatalities along the project section from 262 to 90
by 2005.

D.        Outputs

6.      The project had two intended outputs. The first output pertained to project investment
and involved highways upgrading and road safety enhancement. The upgrading of highways
was to focus on the rehabilitation and widening to a four-lane divided highway of the 259.2
kilometer (km) Tumkur-Haveri section of the National Highway 4. Of these, 18.3 km was to be
transformed into a new four-lane divided highway to avoid congestion in urban areas, 2.7 km
new four-lane divided highway to realign a short length of highway with substandard geometry,
and 5.5 km two-lane single carriageway to relieve the existing Hariyur bypass. The project
highway was to have a design speed of 100 km/hour with reduced design speed of 80 km/hour
for the Harihar and Chitradurga bypasses due to right-of-way constraints. Safety features will
need to be incorporated to enhance road safety, such as (i) adoption of limited access and use
of service roads to separate local traffic from high-speed, long-distance traffic; and (ii) building
of overpass and underpass structures at 63 locations.

1
    ADB.2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Technical
    Assistance Grant to India for the Western Transport Corridor Project. Manila.
                                                                                                                     3


7.      The second output was to involve capacity building to enhance the corporate financial
capability of the NHAI. It was also to include the development of build-operate-transfer tender
documents for toll road O&M of the project.

E.        Provision of Inputs

8.      The project was approved on 20 September 2001 and became effective on 04 February
2002. The project was envisaged to be implemented over 48 months, inclusive of procurement
and pre-construction activities, and was expected to be completed by 30 June 2005 (Project
Completion Report [PCR], para. 15). 2 The civil works were completed 86 months later than
anticipated at appraisal (PCR, para. 17). Loan closing date was extended twice in view of the
slow progress of civil works and was actually closed on 26 August 2008, 2 years and 8 months
later than expected (Target: 31 December 2005).

9.      The total cost of the project at the time of approval was estimated at $378.0 million.
However, the actual cost increased to $460.4 million due to an increase in the cost of all civil
works contracts (75% higher). The PCR attributed the increase in cost to the termination of
three contracts, and the rebidding for the completion of the balance of works, litigation, and
eventual award at a higher cost due to the higher prices of material, labor, and other inputs.
Likewise, the cost for consulting services increased by $19.1 million (192.6% higher), due to
prolonged implementation period. In addition, the actual cost for the land acquisition and
resettlement increased by $15.3 million. 3 The interest during construction and commitment
charges increased by $12.0 million (59.7% higher) due to the extension of the loan closing date
by 3.5 years (PCR, para. 11).

10.      The project was to be financed by an Asian Development Bank (ADB) loan of $240.0
million (64% of the total project cost) and government funds of $138.0 million (36%). At
completion, ADB financed $145.6 million or a decrease of 31.6% while government financing
increased to $314.7 million (68.4%). There was a prolonged delay in project implementation due
to litigation brought about by the termination of contracts. This concern and the uncertainty in
the awarding of new contracts for the completion of the balance of works led the government to
fund the completion of the remaining civil works using its own resources, to close the loan
prematurely, and to cancel the balance amount of $94.4 million (PCR, para. 12).

11.     The project was classified Category B under the ADB environmental categorization
requirements. The initial environmental examination report indicated that the project was
deemed unlikely to cause any significant adverse environmental impacts as the proposed
highway improvements will not involve any lengthy realignment or major earthworks. Likewise,
the project was not likely to disturb cultural and heritage sites and other environmentally
sensitive areas (RRP, para. 83). The PCR noted that an environmental management action
plan, which summarized the mitigation proposals and allocated the responsibility for
implementing and monitoring, was implemented. Monitoring reports indicated that the project
did not cause any significant adverse environmental impact.

12.     During project preparation, the project was to acquire 611.7 hectares (ha) of privately
owned land affecting 3,151 households, and 541 privately owned structures affecting 541
families. A total of 35.1 ha of government land and 27 government-owned structures were to be
acquired, including social infrastructure such as schools, clinics, and government offices. The

2
    ADB. 2014. Completion Report. Western Transport Corridor Project in India. Manila
3
    Both RRP and PCR indicated the estimated and actual resettlement costs but not the costs for land acquisition.
4


acquisition of structures without formal titles was also to affect 310 families. At completion,
686.7 ha of land were acquired, comprising 43.8 ha of government land and 643.0 ha of private
land, which affected 5,150 persons, 1,561 structures, and 67 common assets. At project
completion, resettlement cost had increased from the appraisal estimate of $5.8 million to $10.7
million or an 84.5% increase (PCR, Appendix 3, Table A3.1). Both the PCR and the RRP did not
indicate if the project affected indigenous peoples.

13.     Consultancy staffing inputs were estimated at 2,630 person-months, comprising 480
person-months of international consulting services and 2,150 person-months of national
consulting services. Due to implementation delays in the progress of the civil works, a total of
9,242 person-months of consulting services were provided, broken down into 588 person-
months of international consulting services and 8,654 person-months of national consulting
services. An advisory technical assistance (ADTA) of $700,000 was provided to build the
capacity at the NHAI in financial management and organizational restructuring. 4 The ADTA
project was rated successful in delivering useful information and recommendations for NHAI's
implementation to enhance its capacity in modernizing financial management and dealing with
social impacts.5

F.        Implementation Arrangements

14.      The NHAI was the executing agency for the project. A project implementation unit (PIU)
was to implement the project. A general manager-level staff was assigned as project director,
assisted by five deputy general managers, each responsible for one contract package. The
activities of the PIU was overseen by the chairperson of NHAI, who was assisted by a chief
general manager in charge of the National Highway 4 development. The PCR indicated that
sufficient administrative authority was delegated to the PIU for effective and timely decision
making on project implementation matters. This validation finds the implementation
arrangements appropriate and sufficient for the requirements of the project.
15.     The project complied fully with 23 out of the 25 covenants. Two covenants were partially
complied with--(i) the implementation of the first securitization project by NHAI, and (ii) the
project performance management system (PPMS). The PCR indicated that loan and project
covenants related to project implementation, institutional development, among other things,
were complied with (PCR, para. 20).

                     II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

16.     The PCR rated the project relevant to the government's development objectives and
plan and to the ADB country partnership strategy and lending policy. It noted that the project
was part of the government's strategy to develop a national highway network under the NHDP,
as to the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012).6 The PCR also noted that the project was in line
with the ADB country partnership strategy. However, in assessing relevance, the PCR largely
based its rating on project objectives matching country and ADB strategies.



4
    ADB. 2001. Enhancing the Corporate Finance Capability of National Highway Authority of India. Manila.
5
    ADB. 2014. Technical Assistance Completion Report: Enhancing the Corporate Finance Capability of National
    Highway Authority of India. Manila.
6
    Planning Commission, Government of India. 2008. Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007­2012. New Delhi.
                                                                                                5


17.      This validation is of the view that the project's responsiveness to underlying
development problems was well established, especially on easing capacity constraints on a
critical section of the highway and in enhancing road safety. It notes the increases in costs and
changes in government and ADB financing contributions that resulted in the cancellation of
39.3% of the loan (para. 10). However, the project's scope was well defined and the design
remained generally unchanged during implementation. The project design incorporated a
number of road safety features. Given these observations, this validation assesses the project
relevant.

B.     Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcome and Outputs

18.     The PCR rated the project effective in achieving its outcomes and outputs. It noted that
259.2 km of the project highway along the WTC were upgraded and widened to four lanes, as
envisaged at appraisal, with road safety features incorporated in the works. The PCR indicated
that the operation of the project highway was awarded to private sector entities. A section--
comprising km 72 to km 189--is being operated by a build-operate-transfer concessionaire that
is responsible for its O&M. The remaining highway sections were entrusted to two private
operators upon completion. The capacity building on enhancing the corporate finance capability
of the NHAI was implemented through the attached ADTA project (para. 13).

19.      In terms of outcomes, the PCR noted that the average vehicle speed on the project
highway increased to 60­80 km per hour, resulting in travel time savings of 1.94 hours for cars
and 2.16 hours for trucks (Target: 3 hours for cars and 3.5 hours for trucks).Vehicle operating
costs (VOC) declined by an average of 40%, resulting in substantial reduction in passenger and
freight transport costs.

20.     The PCR also noted that the government was developing financially viable national
highway sections through private sector participation (PSP). As of 1 April 2011, total national
highway projects completed through PSP constituted 26.5%, and projects under implementation
through the PSP constituted 78.0%. This validation notes that these were higher than the
appraisal target of 24.0%.However, while the O&M of all completed projects were being
undertaken by the private sector, it could not be determined if this complied with the appraisal
target.

21.     The PCR indicated that the annual average daily traffic in 2012 was compared with the
appraisal estimate of 6.3% during 2001-2012. This increased by 13.8% in 2013 after project
completion (PCR, Appendix 11, para. 5). The volume to capacity ratio decreased from 0.63 to
0.33, slightly above the target of 0.30. Road accidents per vehicle-km were on the decline due
to the separation of the carriageway and incorporation of road safety features. Fatalities per
year along the project road was reduced from 262 (no baseline year was indicated) to 163 in
2011 and 152 in 2012 (PCR, Appendix 1). This validation notes this was still below the target
reduction of 90 fatalities by 2005. On the whole, this validation assesses the project effective.
C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

22.    The PCR rated the project less than efficient. It indicated that even though traffic growth
on the project highway had been high and the results of economic reevaluation were favorable,
the project experienced substantial delays due to the poor performance of the contractors. Civil
works were completed 86 months later than the appraisal estimate (para. 8). This, in turn, led to
slow disbursements, loan extensions, and cost overruns. Total cost for all civil works contracts
was 75.0% higher than the contract value when it was awarded (para. 9) while the total project
6


cost was 21.8% higher than the appraisal estimate (PCR, para. 11). The PCR noted that the
termination of two major contracts due to poor contractor performance led to litigation and
uncertainty in the re-awarding of contracts for the remaining civil works. The government
decided to withdraw the completion of these contracts from ADB financing and complete them
using its own funds (para. 10).

23.     The PCR reestimated the economic internal rate of return at 20.9%, which was lower
than the 38.0% estimated at appraisal. This validation notes that delays were already
considered in the recomputation of the economic internal rate of return. However, it observes
that a further 10.0% was added to the VOC and time savings to reflect other benefits. In
addition, the traffic projection in the PCR appeared to be on the high side with the compound
average growth rate of about 7.0%­8.0% for 15 years during 2014­2030 (PCR, Appendix 12,
Table A12.3). The higher traffic may only be an initial surge, after which traffic growth may settle
to lower growth rates. Based on these observations, this validation assesses the project less
than efficient.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

24.     The PCR rated the project likely sustainable. It recalculated the project's financial
internal rate of return (FIRR) based on actual capital and O&M costs, revised traffic forecast,
and existing toll rates. The recalculated FIRR was 13.3% compared to the appraisal estimate of
11.1%, despite the implementation delays and increase in project costs. The higher FIRR was
attributed mainly to the higher toll rates charged. Both the RRP and the PCR did not estimate
the weighted average cost of capital.

25.     The PCR indicated that the O&M of the project highway sections was awarded to the
private sector entities through short-term contracts (PCR, Appendix 11, para. 1).It also indicated
that adequate budgetary resources are being provided by the NHAI for the maintenance of the
highway through the private sector whenever required. The PCR stated that the toll revenue is
adequate to cover both O&M and capital cost (PCR, para. 36). This validation observes that the
PCR-recomputed FIRR and results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that the project is
generating more than sufficient revenues to pay for all project costs. Likewise, the PCR
indicated that through the attached ADTA, the project was able to assist the NHAI in enhancing
capacity in the area of modernizing financial management and in dealing with social impacts
(PCR, para. 45). On these bases, this validation assesses the project likely sustainable.

E.     Impact

26.     The PCR rated the project's impact significant. It noted that for the project highway, the
VOC was reduced by about 40%. Also, the PCR noted that the project utilized 426,252 person-
months of local workers for construction, consisting of unskilled and semi-skilled workers (38%),
skilled workers (43%), technical workers (15%), and other workers (4%). About 400 full-time
staff was employed at the toll plazas on the project highway. A large number of roadside
businesses had been established or expanded providing significant opportunities to the local
population. Connectivity for rural areas and poor residents had improved, although there is still
scope for further improving public transport services. Based on these discussions, this validation
assesses the project impact significant.
                                                                                                       7


                       III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

27.     The PCR rated the performance of the borrower and the executing agency satisfactory.
It noted that concerned government agencies participated in the coordination and monitoring of
project implementation during the tripartite project review meetings. The NHAI established the
required PIU and undertook the project's preparatory activities well. The PCR noted that NHAI
complied with the conditions of the loan covenants. However, there were two covenants where
compliance was only partial (para.15), the more important of which was the sustained operation
of the PPMS.

28.     This validation notes that the project's soft components, such as the Toll Study, were
completed successfully and recommendations implemented by the government. The attached
ADTA was also successful in strengthening the capacity of NHAI in financial management and
social issues, but continued implementation of the recommended reforms should be monitored
closely. It also notes that the government was deeply committed to completing the project and
opted to provide the additional financial requirements when loan closing was already imminent
and further loan extension was no longer an option. This increased its financial share of project
cost (para. 10). Based on these, this validation considers the performance of the borrower and
executing agency satisfactory.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

29.      The PCR rated the performance of ADB satisfactory. The project was administered by
ADB headquarters, but was subsequently delegated to the India Resident Mission. The PCR
notes that ADB was closely involved in identifying and resolving issues during implementation
through tripartite project review meetings and regular project review missions. It provided
substantial inputs in preparing an action plan to expedite project implementation and conducted
nine loan review missions, including two special project administration missions for resettlement
and disbursement issues. Documents were approved in a timely manner at both the processing
and implementation stages. Based on government requests, ADB extended loan closing twice
to facilitate project implementation and made four partial cancellations of loan proceeds. The
government recognized the role of the ADB missions in providing timely advice on technical and
contract administration matters. Based on these, this validation considers the performance of
ADB satisfactory.

          IV.    OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Overall Assessment and Ratings

30.     The PCR rated the project successful. This validation rates the project successful. This
validation also assesses the project relevant in view of its responsiveness to the development
issues in the project area. It rates the project effective as it achieved most of the expected
outcomes and outputs. On efficiency, this validation holds a similar view with the PCR that
process efficiency may have been undermined by implementation delays and cost overrun, and
rates the project less than efficient. Sustainability is considered likely. This validation observes
that O&M project highway sections were awarded to private sector entities and institutional
capacity was improved.
8


                                             Overall Ratings
    Criteria                       PCR             IED Review             Reason for Disagreement
                                                                             and/or Comments
    Relevance                 Relevant          Relevant
    Effectiveness in          Effective         Effective
    achieving outcome and
    outputs
    Efficiency in achieving   Less than         Less than
    outcome and outputs       efficient         efficient
    Preliminary assessment    Likely            Likely
    of sustainability         sustainable       sustainable
    Overall assessment        Successful        Successful
    Impact                    Significant       Significant
    Borrower and executing    Satisfactory      Satisfactory
    agency
    Performance of ADB        Satisfactory      Satisfactory
    Quality of PCR                              Satisfactory       Refer to para. 35.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.        Lessons

31.      The PCR identified a few important lessons from the experience with contractors. The
criteria for the qualification of contractors under a joint venture and for the award of multiple
contracts should be strengthened. The PCR did not elaborate how this can be accomplished.
This needs to be further assessed to formulate concrete steps to ensure that prequalified
contractors are indeed capable as claimed and have the technical and financial resources to
complete the proposed project. While performance bond requirements seek to guarantee
contractor performance, this seemed ineffective under this project. There is also a need to
strengthen provisions related to contractors' performance, such as mobilization, staffing,
deployment of equipment and funds, release of payments, bonus for early completion, and
penalties so that poor contractor performance could be discouraged. Likewise, the performance
of the contractor should be assessed at the initial stages of the contract and the decision on
termination, if warranted, should not be delayed. This validation finds these lessons appropriate
and has no further lesson to offer.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Up

32.     The PCR recommended the need to undertake a benefit monitoring and evaluation
study after the full development benefits have been realized to assess and document the
socioeconomic benefits, and the lessons learned for incorporation in future projects. This
validation is of the view that ADB could follow up on the implementation of various project
outputs, notably the following: (i) commercialization of the O&M of the project and other NHAI-
managed roads, (ii) conduct of road safety audits, (iii) implementation of toll system study
recommendations, and (iv) effects of NHAI capacity building program and institutional
restructuring.

33.     The PCR further recommended that to avoid implementation delays in future projects,
project preparation and readiness should be enhanced. Most of the recommended actions are
already being implemented in ADB-financed projects including (i) carrying out sufficient
assessments on the capacities of the PIU and contractors, (ii) developing appropriate
qualification criteria for contractors and contractual provisions to ensure implementation
                                                                                                  9


progress, and (iii) enhancing project monitoring and management. The focal area could be on
project monitoring and management, which should effectively signal the occurrence of delays
and implementation issues for which immediate and firm action should be made. How these
issues are handled by the PIUs should be carefully analyzed. Allowable actions that can be
taken in accordance with ADB guidelines to resolve these implementation issues should be
clear to all prior to implementation.

                   V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

34.     The project's PPMS was not sustained. The PCR acknowledged that only baseline and
an update survey were undertaken (PCR, para. 49). Eventually, no further update surveys,
including those after project completion, were undertaken. The PCR attributed this to the
government financing of the various contracts after loan closing, although the PPMS was
clearly a loan condition and should have been continued.

B.     Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

35.      The PCR quality is rated satisfactory. It is frank in its assessment, concise and
consistent with the ADB Project Administration Instructions 6.07A guidelines. Analysis was
generally adequate to substantiate the ratings although the quality could have been improved
if the assessment on relevance was not confined to the project's consistency with ADB and the
government's development strategies.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

36.     Data sources for this validation included the project's RRP, PCR, loans review mission
reports, ADB Country Operational Strategy Study India, Country Assistance Plan India 2001­
2003, ADB Country Strategy and Program 2003­2006 of India, and India's 10th and 11th five-
year plans.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

37.     In the absence of an operational PPMS for the project, the preparation of a project
performance evaluation report (PPER) is not recommended. The absence of reliable historical
project data would make the PPER preparation extremely difficult and the findings unreliable.
The PCR recommended that PPER preparation be undertaken in 2017 since it noted that the
widening of the project highway to six lanes would be completed and, therefore, traffic growth,
O&M through private sector participation, public transport services, and impacts on poverty
could be better assessed. If the project highway is widened to six lanes, the more reason why
a PPER should not be undertaken as attribution of benefits would become a compelling issue.
