Validation Report




Reference Number: PVR-268
Project Number: 34262
Loan Number: 1871
November 2013




India: Private Sector Infrastructure Facility
at State Level Project




 Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

                   ADB        ­     Asian Development Bank
                   ICICI      ­     Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
                   IDBI       ­     Industrial Development Bank of India
                   IL&FS      ­     Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services Limited
                   PCR        ­     project completion report
                   PPP        ­     public­private partnership
                   PSIF I     ­     Private Sector Infrastructure Facility (of ADB)
                   PSIF II    ­     Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at State Level Project
                                    (of ADB)
                   RRP        ­     report and recommendation of the President
                   TA         ­     technical assistance



                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                           Key Words
 adb, asian development bank, borrower-intermediaries, finance, india, infrastructure, icici,
 idbi, il&fs, on-lending program, performance-based criteria, project completion report, public-
 private partnerships, subloan, subloan repayments, validation report


The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                               PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:          34262                 PCR Circulation Date: Dec 2010
Loan Number              1871                  PCR Validation Date:       Nov 2013
Project Name:            Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at State Level Project (PSIF II)
Country:                 India                                              Approved             Actual
                                                                            ($ million)       ($ million)
Sector:                  Multisector            Total Program Costs:          100.00             50.40

ADB Financing            ADF:      0.00            Loan:                            100.00             50.40
($ million):                                       Borrower:                           0.00              0.00
                         OCR: 100.00               Beneficiaries:                      0.00              0.00
                                                Others:                                0.00              0.00
Cofinancier:                                   Total Cofinancing:                      0.00              0.00
Approval Date:           11 Dec 2001           Effectiveness Date:                5 Nov 2002       21 Oct 2002
Signing Date:            5 Aug 2002            Closing Date:                     21 Oct 2007       6 Sep 2007
Project Officers:                              Location:                            From:                To:
                         R. M. Limjoco         ADB headquarters                    Mar 2002          Nov 2002
                         V.V. Subramanian      ADB headquarters                    Dec 2002          Jun 2003
                         D. Mittal             India Resident Mission              July 2003         Jul 2003
                         M. Ravi               India Resident Mission              Aug 2003          Jul 2007
                         T. Ito                India Resident Mission              Aug 2007          Sep 2007
Validator:               J. Lufkin, Consultant Peer Reviewers:                 N. Subramaniam, Senior
                                                                                  Evaluation Specialist, IED2
                                                                               L. Hauck, Senior Evaluation
                                                                                  Specialist, IED2
Quality Reviewer:        C. M. Kim, Principal     Director:                    H. Hettige, IED2
                            Evaluation
                            Specialist, IED2
                         R. Vasudevan,
                            Evaluation
                            Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department
(Division 2), OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = project completion report.

                                          I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Rationale

1.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility
(PSIF I) to India in November 1996 1 and the Urban Environmental Infrastructure Facility in
1997.2 The PSIF I had been more successful, having been largely drawn down and re-lent to a
range of 11 eligible infrastructure subprojects (e.g., power, ports, and roads) through borrower-
intermediaries--Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI) Bank Limited, and
Industrial Finance Corporation of India (IFCI) Limited. The PSIF I and its subprojects were
considered successful, and ADB wanted to build upon its successes through a successor



1
    The PSIF I comprised Loan 1480-IND of $150 million to ICICI and Loan 1481-IND of $100 million to IFCI.
2
    The Urban Environmental Infrastructure Facility, approved by the ADB Board in December 1999, comprised Loans
    1719-IND of $90 million to ICICI, Loan 1720-IND of $80 million to ICICI, and Loan 1721-IND of $30 million, also to
    ICICI, plus and an associated technical assistance (TA-2936). Loans 1719 and 1721 were subsequently closed
    with no utilization.
2


project, the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at State Level Project (PSIF II),3 with a more
sophisticated design in terms of reform incentives and fine-tuning. Based on the report and
recommendation of the President (RRP), two loans of $100 million each for two different
institutions were approved for (i) Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services Limited (IL&FS),
and (ii) Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI). However, IDBI dropped out of the program
early in the cycle. The project completion report (PCR) focused only on one loan, the IL&FS.4
Hence, this validation relates only to the IL&FS loan.

2.       At the time of approval of the PSIF II, it was assumed that purely market-based solutions
to infrastructure finance in India could become feasible only after an interim period of public­
private partnerships (PPPs) with state governments and various state and national financial
institutions of India. It was also accepted that national scale efforts to remove constraints to
infrastructure development were unrealistic compared to the possibility of attempting the same
at state level, beginning with the most progressive states, through reform and adoption of best
practices.

3.       By focusing assistance to a few selected and cooperative states, and supporting
innovative projects that would become models to the market, the PSIF II would then help
institutionalize a progressive state performance that can be used (i) as a key factor in credit
evaluation by financial institutions in India, (ii) in the credit rating of infrastructure and industrial
projects (particularly, those backed by state guarantees), and (iii) in the provision of central
government guarantees for state obligations. The result would be an increased flow of capital to
the more progressive, performing states, thus giving other states the incentive to push similar
reform packages. It was also thought that PSIF II would promote a cross-fertilization of ideas
among the states about implementing these reforms and capturing a share of the projected flow
of investment capital for infrastructure.

4.      The participating states--Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and
later, Tamil Nadu--were selected based on their willingness to undertake reforms in the area of
infrastructure financing and to create the necessary enabling environment for private sector
participation. A set of state eligibility criteria based on reform-mindedness was established and
included in the loan agreement.

B.       Expected Impact

5.      The project's stated objective was to reduce poverty in the respective states by
increasing economic activity through upgraded infrastructure, especially in roads. The project
also had complex policy reform objectives such as encouraging, through conditional access to
capital, progressive reform behavior among the selected state governments, and indirectly, of all
state governments in India. The PSIF II included a related technical assistance (TA) project 5
that aimed to support participating state governments in enacting reforms, mobilizing private
financing for infrastructure, improving the enabling environment for PPPs in infrastructure, and
increasing the number of viable projects reaching financial closure.



3
  ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans to
   Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services Limited and Industrial Development Bank of India and Proposed
   Technical Assistance Grant to India for the Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at State Level Project. Manila.
4
  ADB. 2009. Completion Report: Private Sector Infrastructure Facility at State Level Project in India. Manila.
5
  ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance to India for Enhancing Private Sector Participation in Infrastructure Development
   at the State Level. Manila.
3


C.        Objectives or Expected Outcomes

6.      The stated expected outcome was to enhance private sector participation in
infrastructure development, financing, and operations and maintenance in several Indian states,
and to increase the number of projects reaching financial closure.

D.        Components and Outputs

7.      The PSIF II consisted of the following two components: (i) two separate loans to the
participating financial institutions in equal amounts and on identical terms for on-lending to
infrastructure projects in specified infrastructure sectors in four selected states--Andhra
Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, and Madhya Pradesh; and (ii) a TA grant of $1.5 million to the four
selected states that would receive PSIF II financing, to enhance private sector participation in
infrastructure development.

8.      The project's target outputs were (i) relending by participating financial institutions--
IL&FS and IDBI--in the four states, (ii) developing an enabling environment for private sector
participation in infrastructure, (iii) strengthening the public­private interface, (iv) establishing an
incentive structure for promoting private sector participation, and (v) developing risk-reduction
strategies.

E.        Provision of Inputs

9.      ADB was to extend to IL&FS and IDBI two parallel 20-year London interbank offered rate
(LIBOR)-based ordinary capital resources loans of $100 million each, guaranteed by the
Government of India, for a total of $200 million. The borrowers were to make subloans of the
proceeds subject to various restrictions and covenants. First, in order to simultaneously
contribute to the development of a market for tradable project-financed debt securities in India,
subloans were to be in the form of purchase of Indian rupee-denominated marketable securities
from project entities, which were to be accomplished through various possible mechanisms as
outlined in the RRP. Second, subloans had to be individually approved by ADB before
disbursement. Third, subloans had to be in Indian rupees, with the US dollar­Indian rupee risk
hedged by the borrower; four options for executing this--through various swaps and forwards--
were outlined in the RRP. Fourth, the states where projects were located had to be eligible
under the policy reform criteria and their governments would be required to make certain
undertakings with ADB regarding their reform policies. Fifth, projects had to be under certain
infrastructure sectors.6 And finally, performance-based criteria for initial eligibility and facility
access were to be employed as incorporated in the design of PSIF II.

10.     The IL&FS cancelled $49.60 million ($25.16 million effective 16 November 2006 and
$24.438 million effective 14 August 2007) and utilized only $50.40 million of the $100 million
loan facility.




6
    Approved sectors included (i) power distribution and transmission, (ii) state roads, (iii) privately run urban mass
    transit systems, (iv) minor ports under private concession where connectivity is clear, (v) optic fiber cable
    connections that are privately funded but not private telecommunication projects where commercial financing is
    readily available, (vi) airports with services under private management or for privatization, (vii) privatized water
    supply and sanitation services or services that are under private concessions, (viii) cyber parks for private
    companies, and (ix) special economic zones.
4


F.        Implementation Arrangements

11.     The executing agencies were the Infrastructure Authority for Andhra Pradesh, Ministry of
Finance for Gujarat, and the finance departments for Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh. The
implementing agencies were the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation for
Andhra Pradesh, the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board for Gujarat, the line
departments for Karnataka, and the Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation
for Madhya Pradesh. Each state would be asked to submit an undertaking, committing to fulfill
the Continued Access Criteria agreed with ADB as contained in a Letter of Intent, and to provide
necessary assistance to ADB consultants. Each state designated an executing and/or
implementing agency to coordinate with ADB and the participating financial institutions, and to
be the focal points for efforts to meet the Continued Access Criteria under the PSIF II.

                       II.     EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

12.     The PCR rated this project relevant. Among others, it noted that the expected outcome
was consistent with ADB strategies and with the government's priorities as it focused on
developing an enabling environment for PPPs in the states and on financing eligible projects
through a qualified domestic financial institution, and further noting that the IL&FS was an
appropriate choice of borrower-intermediary. The PCR also mentioned that the design did not
sufficiently emphasize state-level capacity-building, which resulted in a weak pipeline of
projects. This validation also rates the project relevant as the project's design was broadly in
line with ADB strategy towards India, and with the government's own priorities to increase
private sector participation in infrastructure financing.

13.     The PCR discussed different aspects of the project's design, which this validation
endorses. The PSIF was also consistent with the ADB operational strategy for India at the time,
which was focused on removing infrastructure bottlenecks and catalyzing more infrastructure
investments through private sector participation. The ADB operational strategy towards India at
the time had started to shift from national to state levels due to the high degree of autonomy of
states in the Indian system, and the fact that state governments are at the front line of social
services and infrastructure delivery, and that PSIF II sought to further this in the four
participating states. PSIF II continued to remain consistent with ADB's focus on infrastructure as
one of five core areas on which ADB should concentrate its resources per its Strategy 2020.7
The PCR also discussed the project's consistency with India's development objectives by citing
the government's general emphasis on infrastructure, and the private sector's participation in
infrastructure delivery in the Ninth Five-Year Plan, which was in effect at the time the project
was designed, and continues to be relevant under the (current) Eleventh Five-Year Plan. On
adequacy of design, the PCR explained how the project was designed to address targets
through the various features of the on-lending program and the related TA project. Nonetheless,
the high degree of complexity of the facility's design is noted.

B.        Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcomes

14.      The PCR rated the project less effective in achieving its outcomes, based on the low
utilization of the loan, citing the fact that the loan had a resource mobilization of around six

7
    ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank, 2008­2020.
     Manila.
5


times, higher than the three times envisaged in the RRP. The PCR also cited that, although few
in number, the subprojects were pioneering and expected by their respective state governments
to have demonstration effect. Two of these projects were in Gujarat and one was in Tamil Nadu
state. However, the progress in identifying a suitable project was slow. The PCR noted the
following reasons: (i) excessive liquidity resulting in competing sources of funds; (ii) long period
required for developing projects such as airports and special economic zones; (iii) limited
capacity in many state governments to structure a bankable private sector project; and
(iv) apprehension on the procedural requirements of ADB, especially social safeguard
procedures. After the midterm review, attempts were made to increase the number of projects
but these did not have much success.This validation also rates the project less than effective,
given the fact that only approximately 25% of the originally approved loan amount of $200
million was actually drawn and on-lent, and what was drawn was invested in only three projects
in two sectors.

C.         Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outputs and Outcomes

15.     The PCR rated the loan less efficient in achieving outcomes and outputs, citing the lack
of profitability in two of the three subprojects in the initial years due to erroneous traffic and/or
demand forecasts, requiring debt restructuring. This validation also rates the project less than
efficient as the facility required highly sophisticated monitoring and management by ADB staff
(and by the borrower-intermediaries), in relation to the amount actually disbursed.8 The PCR
noted that the three subprojects were all completed with little or no cost or time overruns (PCR,
para. 56).

D.         Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

16.     The PCR rated the project likely to be sustainable, citing the current profitability of the
two road subprojects. As the proceeds of subloan repayments were intended to be redeployed
into additional eligible projects through a "revolving fund," and as IL&FS has institutional
experience in finding, structuring, and managing such infrastructure investment projects, the
PCR stated that IL&FS is likely to be in a position to utilize this revolving fund to finance
additional projects. This validation also rates the project likely to be sustainable, but notes the
lack of information in the PCR on the actual likelihood that IL&FS will remain engaged in the
project long enough to recycle loan repayments into additional subloans after the first are
repaid. The PCR has no analysis of the amortization schedule of the three subloans but they all
mature during the period 2015­2019. By that time, it is likely that India's infrastructure finance
market will have evolved very substantially from its state at the time this facility was designed,
and the facility may have become irrelevant, and therefore not sustainable as a program,
despite the sustainability of the individual subprojects.

E.         Impact

17.     The PCR did not assign a numerical or qualitative rating to the project in terms of impact,
but mentioned that the loan did mobilize additional financing for the subprojects, supported
increased economic activity and generated employment, and described a number of ongoing
ADB engagements with the government in the infrastructure finance field. This validation agrees
with those impacts and notes that subsequent ADB engagements with India in encouraging
private sector participation in infrastructure financing seem to have evolved more or less directly

8
    A rough calculation shows that, in mission travel alone, not including staff time at HQ or consultant time spent in the
     related TA project, this loan required one man-day for every $198,000 disbursed.
6


along these lines. However, the impact of the project per se is assessed by this validation to be
negligible.

                             III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.         Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

18.    The PCR had no rating on the performance of the borrower and executing agency.
However, it contained an extensive and thorough discussion and analysis of IL&FS operational
and financial performance that covered organization, management and staffing, personnel
administration, lending and other operations, financial statements, and financial ratios.
Operationally and organizationally, the PCR assessed IL&FS as a competently run and
professionally managed financial institution, effective in its risk management, financial
performance, compliance with the Reserve Bank of India standards, and other measures.

19.     The PCR also had extensive information on the performance of IL&FS in loan
implementation and its capacity as lender to the subprojects. It provided a thorough discussion
of the three subprojects, examining in some detail issues of their financial viability and/or
sustainability,9 the difficulties they (and IL&FS) faced in attaining strict compliance with ADB
social and environmental safeguards, and related reporting. The PCR made no comments on
the performance of the three executing agencies. This validation rates the performance of the
borrower and executing agency satisfactory.

B.         Performance of the Asian Development Bank

20.      The PCR noted that ADB conducted regular review missions and tripartite meetings with
IL&FS and the Government of India's Department of Economic Affairs, and rated the overall
performance of ADB satisfactory. The PCR further noted that ADB responded to the slow
process of loan implementation, by the time of the midterm review, by adding Tamil Nadu to the
list of participating states, although IL&FS had also requested to include projects of the National
Highways Authority of India. The PCR further stated that ADB had contributed to mitigation of
social safeguard risks by increasing the coverage of project-affected families and the levels of
assistance.

21.      Based on information provided, ADB seemed to have followed its own procedures
correctly, fielding the required missions in a timely manner and monitoring the loan properly.
There was, however, a weakness in how the overall project was originally designed, given the
realities of the financial markets in India and capacities of state governments at the time.

22.      The goal of the project's design seemed unrealistic--trying to influence simultaneously
the reform policies of state governments, to influence the evolution of India's project bond
market, and to provide support for infrastructure financing institutions (e.g., IL&FS and IDBI)
while, at the same time, funding specific projects that had to meet strict eligibility requirements
and then go through complex processing involving both IL&FS and ADB. The PCR was
objective on this subject and realistic in its ex post evaluation and the reasons why the project
has only utilized around 25% of its funds. This validation agrees with the PCR generally, and
finds it to be complete and fair in its evaluation and assessment of ADB's performance and role
in this project.

9
    The subloans to Ahmedabad Mehsana Toll Road Project (toll road) and New Tirupur Area Development Project
     (water supply) both encountered difficulties due to less-than-projected traffic and/or demand.
7


C.      Others

23.     The PCR noted that environmental safeguards for the project had been adequately
implemented. However, reporting to ADB on the implementation of the environmental
management and monitoring plan had been weak. On social safeguards, some of the pipeline
subprojects could not be financed because of difficulties in complying with ADB social safeguard
requirements. To ensure compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement Policy of ADB, a social
safeguard review mission was conducted and recommended several measures including the
preparation of a revised resettlement plan for the New Tirupur Area Development Project. The
completion of the revised resettlement plan was delayed due partly to issues on land
acquisition. In general, IL&FS had complied with most of the covenants, although some areas
could have had timely or better compliance.

             IV.      OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.      Overall Assessment and Ratings

24.      The PCR rated the project partly successful (see table). This validation also has an
overall assessment of less than successful based on the fact that $100 million of the facility was
cancelled when IDBI dropped out of the project, and the remaining $100 million was only 50%
utilized by IL&FS due to lack of viable subproject candidates for subloans. This dearth of viable
subprojects could have been better addressed by the TA project through transaction capacity
building in the state governments, but the TA project experienced its own implementation
problems and shortcomings. The overall project seemed to have been overambitious in its
expectations given the realities at state government level and the capacity of local authorities to
comply (and to document their compliance) with ADB safeguards. It also seemed to have
"overengineered" in terms of the complexity of its conditions, incentive mechanisms, structural
requirements (as purchase of marketable securities) for sub-financings, reporting overhead, and
attempt to combine reform incentives and capital markets development with a straightforward
project financing facility.

                                               Overall Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for Disagreement
          Criteria                   PCR                 IED Review                 and/or Comments
Relevance                     Relevant             Relevant
Effectiveness in achieving    Less effective       Less than effective
outcome
Efficiency in achieving       Less efficient        Less than efficient
outcome and outputs
Preliminary assessment of     Likely                Likely
sustainability
Overall Assessment            Partly successful Less than successful

Borrower and executing        Not rated            Satisfactory
agency
Performance of Asian          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Development Bank
Impact                        Not rated             Negligible                 Refer to para. 17.
Quality of PCR                                      Satisfactory               Refer to para. 28.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report.
Note: From May 2012, IED views the PCR's rating terminology of "partly" or "less" as equivalent to "less than" and
uses this terminology for its own rating categories to improve clarity.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.
8


B.         Lessons

25.     The PCR cited the following as lessons of this project: (i) the continuing need to enhance
the capacity of state governments to develop bankable projects; (ii) that ADB must carefully
evaluate the safeguards compliance and monitoring capacity of intermediaries and take steps to
improve where needed; (iii) that ADB should move safeguards compliance resources closer to
projects and get them involved earlier in the project development cycle; (iv) that ADB should
coordinate more closely in India those resettlement matters with land acquisition functions of
local authorities (as land acquisition may not be handled well by the financial intermediary); and
(v) that ADB should be more careful and critical with regard to demand risk, traffic projections,
and others, and/or look to structure with annuities. This validation concurs with those
observations, and adds a cautionary note on the effectiveness and efficiency of project designs
that attempt to combine program loans to promote PPP environment and capital markets
development with project finance facilities to invest in specific projects, particularly when they
involve wholesale loans to financial institution intermediaries.

C.         Recommendations for Follow-Up

26.      While the government had policies to attract private sector participation in infrastructure
at the time of the approval of PSIF II, only over the last few years has the government shown its
preference for PPPs as the mode of financing infrastructure. The engagement of ADB with the
government in promoting PPPs has been deepening, with several initiatives on mainstreaming
PPPs and sovereign lending to the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (PCR, para.
63). ADB initiatives include a TA project,10 which aims to institutionalize PPP skills at the state
level. The lack of a pipeline of eligible subprojects under PSIF II suggests that ADB may
continue its interventions in the PPP area to assist in creating a shelf of bankable PPP projects
at the state level. Further, many of the PPP projects are in the road sector and the focus of ADB
should be to develop replicable PPP structures in the urban and water supply sectors, which are
considered difficult sectors for attracting private investment. In addition to continuing to provide
finance through the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited to address financial
constraints in infrastructure, ADB may also consider nonsovereign loans (without government
guarantees) in difficult sectors, which will build confidence on the bankability of the projects and
assist in catalyzing additional competitive financing.

                            V.       OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.         Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

27.     The PCR indicated in Appendix 7 on compliance with loan covenants that the benefit
monitoring and evaluation reports for the subprojects were submitted by IL&FS although with
delay. However, the establishment of the benefit monitoring and evaluation reports or the
project performance monitoring and evaluation system was not discussed.

B.         Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

28.    The PCR quality is rated satisfactory. It is generally complete in its scope and detail of
coverage, and fair in its evaluation and assessment of the project. One small criticism is what
was not included--this validation believes that the PCR could have drawn additional valid
lessons and recommendations if it included a fuller discussion of the reasons and

10
     ADB. 2006. Technical Assistance to India for Mainstreaming Public­Private Partnerships at State Level. Manila.
9


circumstances surrounding the early withdrawal of IDBI from the project (which immediately cut
its potential impact in half by reducing the loan amount from $200 to $100 million). The scope of
documentary input from IL&FS seemed to have been specified only very generically in the ADB
special loan administration mission report. 11 Perhaps if the ADB special loan administration
mission had requested more details from IL&FS and those had been included in the PCR, it
could have been more complete. The PCR might also have profitably examined in more detail
the capacity-building activities undertaken through the TA project in the participating states, and
their relationship with the lack of investible deal flow available for IL&FS to finance in those
states.

C.         Data Sources for Validation

29.    This validation is based on the project's RRP, PCR, minutes of the meeting of the Board
of Directors, back-to-office reports, interview notes, and the presentation made for the India
Resident Mission on PPPs.

D.         Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

30.        No IED follow-up is recommended.




11
     Special Project Administration Mission, Back-to-Office Report dated 10 April 2008, Appendix 3, "Suggested Topics
     for Project Completion Reports to be Completed by Borrowers (loans to development finance institutions)."
