Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-335
Project Number: 36308
Loan Numbers: 2141, 2142, and 2442
November 2014




India: Assam Governance and Public Resource
Management Sector Development Program




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

           ADB                 ­         Asian Development Bank
           DMF                 ­         design and monitoring framework
           FMU                 ­         fiscal management unit
           FRBM                ­         fiscal responsibility and budget management
           GDP                 ­         gross domestic product
           IT                  ­         information technology
           MTFP                ­         medium-term fiscal plan
           PCR                 ­         program completion report
           PPTA                ­         project preparatory technical assistance
           PSE                 ­         public sector enterprise
           RRP                 ­         report and recommendation of the President
           SDP                 ­         sector development program
           TA                  ­         technical assistance
           VAT                 ­         value-added tax


                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                           Key Words

adb, assam, budget management, comprehensive treasury management information system,
fiscal responsibility, india, medium-term fiscal plan, tax information management system, policy
reform program




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                     PROGRAM BASIC DATA
Project Number:       36308             PCR Circulation Date:  Oct 2013
Loan Numbers:         2141, 2142, 2442  PCR Validation Date:   Nov 2014
Project Name:         Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector
                      Development Program
Country:              India                                     Approved                   Actual
                                                                 ($ million)             ($ million)
Sector:               Public sector     Total Program Costs:
                      management        Program I (2141)           125.00                   125.00
                                        Project (2142)              25.00                    22.03
                                        Subprogram II (2442)       100.00                   100.00
ADB Financing:        ADF: 0.00         Loan:
($ million)                                          2141          125.00                   125.00
                                                     2142           25.00                    22.03
                                                     2442          100.00                   100.00
                                        Borrower:                     0.00                    0.00
                      OCR:                   Beneficiaries:                  0.00              0.00
                      2141 ­ 125.00
                      2142 ­ 25.00           Others:                         0.00              0.00
                      2442 ­ 100.00
Cofinancier:                                 Total Cofinancing:              0.00              0.00
Approval Date:                               Effectiveness Date:
          2141        16 Dec 2004                        2141          16 Mar 2005    17 Dec 2004
          2142        16 Dec 2004                        2142          16 Mar 2005    17 Dec 2004
          2442        17 Sep 2008                        2442          12 Jan 2009    17 Nov 2008
Signing Date:                                Closing Date:
          2141        16 Dec 2004                        2141          31 Dec 2007 25 Jun 2007
          2142        16 Dec 2004                        2142          20 Jun 2010 14 Feb 2013
          2442        14 Oct 2008                        2442          31 Mar 2012 6 Feb 2012
Project Officers:                            Location:                    From:             To:
                      A. Goswami             ADB headquarters           Dec 2004          Jun 2006
                      K. N. Shin             ADB headquarters            Jul 2006         Feb 2012
Validator:            G. Walter,             Peer Reviewer:            R. Vasudevan, Evaluation
                        Consultant                                        Specialist, IED1
Quality Reviewer:     E. Gozali, Principal   Director:                 W. Kolkma, IED1
                        Evaluation
                        Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 1; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR = program completion report.

                                I.      PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

A.     Rationale

1.    The Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector Development
Program was approved by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 2004 as a cluster program
comprising two subprograms that were to be implemented over 5 years and a project loan.
The 2004 report and recommendation of the President (RRP) indicated that the program
would support the government's efforts in the stabilization and consolidation of state
2


finances.1 The first program was provided with a loan of $125 million, together with a project
loan of $25 million. The second program loan of $100 million was approved in 2008. 2 It
included a technical assistance (TA) grant of $600,000 for capacity building and support for
program implementation.

2.      The government of Assam faced fiscal- and governance-related structural problems.
Its fiscal position was weak due to stagnation in tax and nontax revenues and growing
recurrent expenditures. Subsidies for loss-making public sector enterprises (PSEs) and
increasing pension liabilities added to the fiscal strain. From the central government
perspective, inadequate fiscal consolidation at state level was seen as having the potential to
undermine the sustainability of recent economic performance and the delivery of promised
economic prospects. Reform efforts in fiscal and governance issues at the state level was
seen as key to effective national-level fiscal management, helping to reduce the fiscal deficit
as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP).

3.      State-level reform effort was seen as particularly critical in Assam (the gateway to the
northeast) to help bridge the widening development gap between different parts of India;
Assam lagged most states in India in development, including in growth and per capita income.
During the 9th Five Year Plan period (1997­2002), India's GDP grew at 5.4%, while Assam's
corresponding state domestic growth was only 2.1% and its per capita income was half the
national level. Assam is rich in natural resources but was geographically isolated, had limited
infrastructure, and was prone to natural disasters, such as earthquakes and flooding.

4.       The program completion report (PCR) did not refer to the loan modality (i.e., program
cluster approach within a sector development program), 3 but the RRP noted this allows a
holistic approach to the reform of public finances over the medium term, addressing
institutional challenges by sequencing institutional development prior to introducing legislation.
The addition of the project loan (as part of a sector development program [SDP]) provided
essential support for institutional strengthening and capacity building. The program cluster
approach has been used by ADB in different countries for several programs supporting
financial reforms where continued support for sequenced reforms was needed.4 The addition
of the project loan provided the important capacity building support needed in such reform
programs.

B.      Expected Impact

5.     The anticipated impacts of the SDP are best segregated as (i) stabilized and
consolidated state government finances for subprogram 1, and (ii) greater efficiency in
resource use and improved financial flexibility for subprogram II. Both culminate in enhancing
economic growth of the state and in reducing poverty. The project loan component under the
SDP provided support to subprograms I and II in the form of training, information and

1
   ADB. 2004. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Program Loan
   Cluster and Project Loan to India for the Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector
   Development Program. Manila.
2
   ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Technical
   Assistance Grant to India for the Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector Development
   Program (Subprogram II). Manila.
3
  ADB. 2013: Completion Report: Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector Development
   Program in India. Manila.
4
  For example, see the IED 2009 Performance Evaluation Report on Cambodia: First Financial Sector Program Loan
   Cluster.
                                                                                              3


communication technology systems, and administrative support. As such, the project
component does not have a separate impact statement. The SDP activities covered five main
areas: reform of state finances, revenue administration, expenditure management and
governance, debt management, and PSE reform and reorientation of the role of the state.
Together with reduced subsidies for PSEs, this would allow additional resources to be made
available for priority spending to increase growth, improve the quality of public expenditures,
promote social and physical infrastructure development, enable poverty-targeted subsidies,
and ultimately reduce poverty. The design and monitoring framework (DMF) for subprogram I
did not include specific indicators for impact, referring only to a level of compliance with
targets in the medium-term fiscal plan (MTFP) and to the Assam Fiscal Responsibility and
Budget Management Act (FRBM Act). The DMF of subprogram II included more specific
indicators: deficits to be within the prescribed limits under the FRBM Act, and a fiscal deficit
target of 3% to be attained by FY2008 and maintained during the entire program period,
together with a revenue surplus.

C.     Objectives or Expected Outcome

6.      Similar to the impact level, outcomes of subprogram I covered actions necessary to
sustain reduction in fiscal and revenue deficits, including achievement of the MTFP revenue
mobilization and sustainable debt level targets, and containment of wages and salaries.
Outcomes of subprogram II covered four areas: (i) increased tax revenues, (ii) reorientation of
expenditures (to allow greater investment and maintenance of assets), (iii) optimal debt
servicing, and (iv) mitigation of PSE fiscal risk. The PCR assessed the two subprograms as a
whole program, linking activities and achievements of subprogram I with follow-on activities
under subprogram II, and grouping them under five components, as in para.7. Appendix 3 of
the PCR provides a diagram showing linkages between the two subprograms. The objective
of the project loan was to enhance the state government's capacity to support the fiscal and
governance reform efforts and strengthen implementation processes.

D.     Outputs

7.      The SDP activities were grouped into five main activities: (i) reform of state finances,
(ii) revenue administration, (iii) expenditure management and fiscal governance reforms,
(iv) debt management, and (v) public sector enterprise reform and reorientation of the role of
the state.

8.      Tranche conditions were attached to each component; they are set out in detail in the
Policy Matrix included as Appendix 3 in the RRP. Appendixes 1 and 2 of the PCR present the
achievements for each activity. The PCR text did not provide a summary of tranche conditions
for the program, but the two appendixes gave adequate detail of achievement by component
and tranche.

9.     Reform of state finances. The approval of the MTFP for FY2005/06, with projections
for 2005­2009, establishment of a fiscal management unit, and passing of the FRBM Act were
the main first tranche release conditions under subprogram I.

10.    Revenue administration. Both subprograms included reforms to broaden the tax base
and improve tax collection. Tranche release conditions covered improvements in revenue
administration and tax policies and administration, including value-added tax (VAT).
4


11.     Expenditure management and fiscal governance reforms. The two subprograms
covered improvements in state budget planning and administration, improvements in capital
and operation and maintenance expenditure with a core investment program, improved
financial management and treasury systems and reporting, introduction of outcome-based
budgeting, and improvements in the fixed asset register and pension management.

12.     Debt management. The tranche release actions under both subprograms were debt
management and restructuring; and improved policy and management, including data
collection and management.

13.    Public sector enterprise reform and reorientation of the role of the state. These
were key components of both subprograms, with policy guidelines and PSE closures, social
safety net programs, and voluntary retirement scheme compensation disbursement guidelines
as tranche release actions. Public­private sector partnerships were to be strengthened under
subprogram II.

14.    The project loan provided capacity building, training, studies, and assessments to help
build capacity for the program as a whole, complemented by information technology (IT)
support, including equipment.

E.         Provision of Inputs

15.     Two subprogram loans amounting to $225 million and a project loan of $25 million
were provided. The first tranche for subprogram I of $45 million was released in December
2004, an incentive tranche of $45 million in December 2005, and the second tranche of $35
million in June 2007 (6 months later than scheduled). The use of an incentive tranche was
unusual; the rationale was to provide for flexibility based on progress as it could be released
at any point during the program. For subprogram II, the first tranche of $40 million was
released in November 2008, the second tranche of $40 million in December 2009 (as
scheduled), but the third tranche of $20 million in November 2011 was 6 months behind
schedule.

16.     Local currency funds generated by the loans were used to finance the costs of
structural adjustment under the program, including the establishment of funds (e.g., new
employee pension scheme), debt swapping and settlement, and a state fund for PSE reforms.
Program adjustment costs are discussed later in the evaluation of efficiency.

17.     Technical assistance. Four technical assistance (TA) grants were provided for
different phases of the program. These included two project preparatory technical assistance
(PPTAs) prior to the approval of subprogram I funded by the United Kingdom,5 and a third
PPTA for subprogram II funded by the Government of Japan Special Fund ($500,000). A TA
grant of $600,000--funded by the Government of Japan Special Fund--was also provided to
subprogram II to assist in program implementation.

F.         Implementation Arrangements

18.   Implementation arrangements set out in the RRP were followed with the state Finance
Department as the executing agency, with a program steering committee chaired by the

5
     $1.0 million for a PPTA for the loan and $0.7 million was provided to help the government design and develop a
    time-bound strategy and action plan for reforms under subprogram I.
                                                                                                                    5


principal secretary and comprising other secretaries to provide a strategic overview. A fiscal
management unit (FMU) was established in the Finance Department, headed by a project
manager, for the day-to-day program management and liaison with ADB and other
stakeholders. An asset management cell was established in Assam Industrial Development
Corporation under subprogram II to estimate and manage the assets of the PSEs identified for
closure and liquidation.

                       II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

19.     The PCR rated the program highly relevant. It noted that while the scope and number
of conditions included in the policy matrix were ambitious, these were essential for addressing
the fiscal reform needs in proper sequence and led to improving the state government's
compliance with the FRBM Act. The loan tranches adequately covered the adjustment costs
and helped mitigate potential adverse effects on the labor market and the budgetary burden of
the PSE restructuring. The project component of the SDP was highly relevant, providing
necessary technical infrastructure, capacity building, and training. Consultations with key
stakeholders had helped ensure the relevance of the design and actions.

20.     The PCR stated that the program was consistent with the ADB country program for
India, citing the 1996 shift in strategy to promote reforms at state government level.6 The ADB
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009­2012 refers to inclusive growth, 7 specifically
referring to the inclusion of weakly performing northeastern states in ADB operations, such as
Assam. At completion, the SDP was relevant to the ADB Strategy 2020, 8 where good
governance, capacity development, and private sector development are key drivers of
change.

21.      This validation rates the program highly relevant. The program is in line with ADB
country strategies and India's national and state needs where sustainable state reform efforts
on fiscal and governance issues were a key to the central government efforts for (i) effective
fiscal management, (ii) elimination of the revenue deficit, and (iii) reduction of the national fiscal
deficit, which were essential for achieving the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002­2007) goals.9 While
the program's design was ambitious in terms of potential challenges faced during
implementation, the program actions, including consultations and capacity building at the early
phase, were appropriately sequenced leading to anticipated outcomes. Buy-in of stakeholders
helped ensure design relevance. The TA grant and ADB support for implementation helped
make the design achievable. This validation notes a minor design shortcoming in the
overlapping consultancy resources provided under the TA grants associated with the SDP and
the project loan. This issue is also mentioned in sections discussing efficiency and
performance of the ADB.




6
    ADB Country Operational Strategy Study, dated July 1996, as cited in ADB. 2007. Country Assistance Program
    Evaluation: India. Manila. India itself had changed strategy, allowing states to borrow directly from multilateral
    banks.
7
    ADB. 2009. Country Partnership Strategy: India, 2009­2012. Manila.
8
    ADB. 2008. Strategy 2020: The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank, 2008­2020.
    Manila.
9
    Planning Commission, Government of India. 2002. 10th Five Year Plan. New Delhi.
6


B.         Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcome and Outputs

22.     The PCR rated the program highly effective. It noted that the primary indicator of
effectiveness is improvement in the economy and fiscal condition of the state, and cites
evidence that previous revenue and fiscal deficits were replaced by surpluses in four
consecutive fiscal years from FY2005/06 to FY2008/09, as total revenue receipts increased
with tax reforms. Similarly, current expenditures related to salaries, pensions, and PSE
budgetary support were moderated. Fiscal space was created to allow higher capital outlays
and social sector expenditures,10 and the state's own expenditures in education and social
welfare were protected from compression. With the fiscal space created, the government
launched various investment projects in the following sectors: infrastructure, transport,
construction, power, IT, education, and tourism (the PCR cited some examples). Appendixes
1 and 2 of the PCR provided some figures for target achievements on fiscal, debt, and
economic outcomes, while Appendix 8 of the PCR provided data on GDP growth, revenue
collection, expenditures, capital outlay, fiscal and revenue deficits, and debt levels. These
show that the government has achieved substantial fiscal consolidation under subprogram I.
Appendix 8 of the PCR is a substantial appendix, which this validation cannot verify. Appendix
2 of the PCR showed outcome achievements for PSEs, covering the numbers closed and
restructuring costs.

23.     The PCR also referred to the achievement of output measures, which demonstrate the
effectiveness of the reforms, such as the simplification of procedures and automation of
revenue and expenditure systems (e.g., tax administration, treasury payments, cash
management, and adoption of computerized treasury), which collectively have streamlined
budget planning and implementation and improved the convenience and efficiency of tax
service transactions. There was also transparency and promptness in service delivery, such
as in property registration, PSE closures, and settlement of PSE-related debts. These
achievements are summarized in the DMF presentation in Appendix 1 for subprogram I, and
Appendix 2 for subprogram II. Specific figures were cited showing achievements against DMF
targets where appropriate (e.g., VAT users and e-payment transactions, and excise
department operations), although several were achievement of planned actions. Again, this
validation cannot confirm these achievements, but they are logically presented with supporting
details, and the ADB review missions had reported progress on many of these.

24.    Achievements recorded in the PCR for Revenue Administration include the
introduction of the VAT in May 2005, and changes in excise taxes. An IT-based tax
information management system and a comprehensive treasury management information
system were introduced to improve the efficacy of the revenue and treasury functions.

25.    Expenditure management was improved, with more transparency in state budgeting,
use of updated MTFP projections for revenue and expenditure, and steps taken to introduce
outcome-based budgeting, linking the budget cycle to the achievement of specified outcomes
rather than input-based line-item budget. An actuarial estimation of pension liabilities was
completed to assess the vulnerability of state finances, and agreements made with the
National Pension System Trust for the operation of the new, defined contribution pension
scheme and for the collection of arrears from employees. Funds were transferred to dedicated
National Pension System accounts from program disbursements.



10
     On capital outlay, the state GDP ratio improved from 1.88% in FY2005/06 to 3.95% in FY2012/13.
                                                                                                 7


26.     Debt management improved, with debt swaps and consolidations to reduce interest
rates, creating fiscal space. The total volume of guarantees to be issued by the state
government for PSEs was capped at 50% of own revenues or 5% of state GDP, whichever was
lower. A guarantee redemption fund was established as a mechanism for addressing liabilities
arising from the enforcement of such guarantees.

27.    Four key policy actions were introduced to limit unproductive public expenditure and
budgetary support for loss-making PSEs, establishing the foundation for the restructuring of
certain PSEs. Among the loss-making PSEs, 15 were closed with one-time settlement of
government-guaranteed loans. Employees of these PSEs were compensated through a
voluntary retirement scheme. The social safety net program provided financial and career
counseling. Impediments to private investment were reviewed to strengthen public­private
sector partnerships and a single-window mechanism introduced for investment facilitation and
promotion. An employee database and a public administration rationalization policy were
adopted to contain public administration expenditures and improve the quality of service.
Anticorruption mechanisms were reviewed and strengthened.

28.    Tranche conditions. The PCR noted that of the total 72 conditions for subprogram I,
67 were fully complied with, while 42 out of 46 conditions were complied with for subprogram
II. Those conditions that were only partially complied with involved the creation of property
and land registration data, which are were still being revised. The employee and pension
databases were also being continuously updated. No tranche condition was reported not
complied with.

29.      The PCR provided a thorough assessment of achievements and a highly effective
rating, as given in the PCR, could thus be appropriate. However, this validation considers that
such a rating may suggest an almost perfect program outcome, which is not yet the case. As
noted in para. 6 earlier, the intended outcomes of the program were to (i) support the state
government's efforts in stabilizing and consolidating its finances, and (ii) improve key ratios on
tax revenues, expenditures, debt servicing, and mitigate fiscal risks originating from the loss-
making and/or inoperative PSEs. Consolidation and stabilization have been achieved.
However, there are indications (PCR, Appendix 2) that improvement in key fiscal ratios was
still prone to significant fluctuation and regression during the SDP implementation. A more in-
depth evaluation of the program at a later date may be able to better determine the efficacy of
the SDP, including impacts on poverty. In the meantime, this validation rates the program
effective.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcomes and Outputs

30.     The PCR rated the program efficient. The assessment is relatively brief, noting in
particular that no major change in scope was required, tranche releases were disbursed
generally on time (except for two that were unavoidably delayed by elections), and funds were
used as planned. The project loan was not as efficient, with implementation delays, and
overlaps and redundancies in the PPTAs.
31.    This validation rates the program efficient. The size of the loans was related to
estimates of the cost of the reforms. The RRP tentatively calculated adjustment costs of the
program as $347 million over the anticipated 5 years, comprising (i) state debt restructuring
($159 million), (ii) cash management reform ($20 million), (iii) pension liabilities ($30 million),
and (iv) PSE reform ($138 million). The ADB review mission reports and PCR showed the
funds were used to cover these planned actions. The PCR showed disbursements for each
8


tranche broken down into these components. The use of funds was matched to the identified
actions yielding the intended outcomes. Calculation of rates of return is not appropriate, nor
feasible, for such a program. Efficiency also needs to be related to efficiency of progress in
implementation of reforms, and efficiency of program processes, including design and tranche
releases. As noted earlier, despite initial capacity constraints, the program progressed as
planned. Support from ADB and TA consultants helped the processes, and the government
itself had implemented the program diligently, following the agreed time schedules set out in
the policy matrix and DMF, and thus, was efficient.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

32.    The PCR rated the program likely sustainable based on the strong commitment of the
state government to fiscal consolidation, noting that mechanisms had been put in place to
make fiscal performance more resilient to changes in financial, economic, social, and political
circumstances. Fiscal and economic indicators in Appendix 8 of the PCR supported evidence
of sustainability of the program outcomes despite disruptions and costs following disasters
and ethnic insurgency, and the local and national elections. The program helped change
government attitudes, and the PCR reported concrete examples of the government's
continuing effort to reform PSEs. This validation has no basis on which to disagree with this
assessment, and given the improved institutional capacity created under the program to
implement and sustain achievements to date, the validation rates the program likely
sustainable.

E.     Institutional Development

33.     The PCR provided a rating for institutional development, assessing that the program
and the capacity building and training provided under the project loan and TA grant had a
substantial impact in reforming key legislative, regulatory, and administrative frameworks; and
in transforming ineffective and inefficient practices in public administration. It cited the FMU in
particular as being instrumental in managing public expenditures, establishing new systems,
improving service delivery, and increasing efficiency of resource management. Improvements
in many of the budget, tax, and reporting systems; and in corporate governance procedures
for PSEs have helped build safeguards against corruption. The PCR highlighted the advisory
and training roles of both ADB and the TA grants during the project implementation;
particularly the latter's significant contributions to capacity development, with both helping
implement policy and institutional changes that strengthened administration systems and
procedures in key reform areas. Based on a review of the TA completion report, this validation
rates the associated TA grant successful. There were noted improvements in the agencies'
systems and procedures, and changes in the institutional culture. As such, this validation can
concur with the PCR that the institutional development impact of the SDP at its completion
was highly significant (equivalent to substantial).

D.     Impact

34.      The PCR rated the impact of the program on economic activities in Assam state
significant, citing that increased revenue and budget surpluses have enabled increased
resource allocation to infrastructure, leading to increased attractiveness for public­private
partnership projects in economic sectors such as tourism and, potentially, energy. Phasing out
of inefficient PSEs has also encouraged the private sector. Accelerated economic growth will
likely contribute to poverty reduction. This validation notes the improvement in the fiscal
condition of the state and its economic growth, as presented in Appendix 8 of the PCR. State
                                                                                            9


GDP increased from around 2% to over 6% by 2007­2012, but its contribution to the program
is unclear as part of the GDP growth may have come from a growth in agriculture (which
recovered from floods) and services, and is but a drop in industrial growth. However,
improvements in the fiscal parameters and improvements in budget planning and
implementation were substantial. Thus, this validation rates program impact significant.

                     III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

35.    The PCR rated the performance of the borrower and executing agency satisfactory. It
notes that initially the government and the executing agency lacked the capacity to implement
such a complex program, but they gained experience as the program proceeded. A key factor
was continuity as government officers were retained on the program throughout
implementation. The PCR noted that many of the reforms were politically sensitive yet the
government's commitment remained strong, resisting "spending-oriented populist pressures
during the electoral cycles." The compliance status of the covenants under the three loan
agreements (two for the subprograms and one for the project) are in Appendix 6 of the PCR.
Covenants relating to counterpart funds, sound administrative practices, program
responsibilities and coordination, and reporting and program review requirements were
complied with. Based on the foregoing, this validation rates the performance of the borrower
and the executing agency satisfactory.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

36.     The PCR rated the overall performance of ADB satisfactory, referring in particular to
the program being appropriately designed with well-sequenced legislative, regulatory, and
policy-oriented reforms, addressing critical fiscal issues of the state. ADB provided advisory
and training assistance during implementation, which was important given the initial weak
capacity of the state government and the complexity of the program. The PCR, however, rated
the performance of ADB for the project component less than satisfactory, noting duplication of
the consultant's work under the loan with that of the PPTAs and advisory TA, resulting in
unnecessary expenditure allocations. It also pointed out the limited knowledge and experience
of ADB in the initial stages of the project in designing procurement packages, although this
improved over time.

37.     Review missions were conducted regularly, covering the period from August 2005 to
May 2011 (the PCR mission was fielded in 2013), with two review missions per year for
subprogram I and at least once a year for subprogram II (TA consultants assumed a regular
monitoring role). There was continuity of ADB staff, with the same mission leader for the
program from 2006 to 2011. The review mission reports showed a clear tracking of progress
in tranche release conditions. The preparation of subprogram II in 2008 provided a substantial
review of the reform progress which formed the basis for subprogram II. The RRP for
subprogram II included a sector analysis update. The review missions involved key
government staff indicating that ADB maintained good contact with the government during
implementation. This validation rates ADB performance satisfactory.
10


                IV.   OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.         Overall Assessment and Ratings

38.     The PCR rated the program successful. The PCR noted that the 2007 ADB special
evaluation study of support to public resource management in India provided similar ex-ante
ratings for subprogram I. 11 This validation notes the substantial improvement in the fiscal
condition of Assam as a result of improvements in budget planning and implementation,
increased revenue, and better expenditure allocations. The corporate governance of PSEs
has improved and the loss-making enterprises were closed. It is too early, however, to
measure the impact of the program on growth and reduction in poverty.

                                                Overall Ratings
     Criteria                         PCR             IED Review              Reason for Disagreement
                                                                                 and/or Comments
     Relevance                  Highly relevant    Highly relevant
     Effectiveness in           Highly effective   Effective            The program was very effective in
     achieving project                                                  achieving fiscal stability and/or
     outcome and outputs                                                consolidation (outcomes of subprogram
                                                                        I).However, there was no clear
                                                                        indication that improvement in key
                                                                        fiscal ratios (outcome of subprogram
                                                                        II) can be sustained as indicators were
                                                                        fluctuating during the SDP
                                                                        implementation (paras. 22­29).
     Efficiency in achieving    Efficient          Efficient            The PCR and this validation rated the
     outcome and outputs                                                performance of the project loan--as a
                                                                        component of the SDP--less than
                                                                        efficient. The SDP on the whole is
                                                                        considered efficient (paras. 30­31).
     Preliminary assessment     Likely             Likely
     of sustainability          sustainable        sustainable
     Institutional              Substantial        Highly significant
     development                                   (substantial)
     Impact                     Significant        Significant
     Overall assessment         Successful         Successful
     Borrower and executing     Satisfactory       Satisfactory
     agency
     Performance of ADB         Satisfactory       Satisfactory         ADB performance on the project loan
                                                                        was rated less than satisfactory but for
                                                                        the whole SDP, it was considered
                                                                        satisfactory (paras. 36­37).
     Quality of PCR                                Highly               The PCR covers two large reform
                                                   satisfactory         subprograms and significant efforts
                                                                        were put in assessing and providing
                                                                        evidences. However, more explanation
                                                                        could have been provided in the rating
                                                                        assessment of relevance and efficiency
                                                                        (para. 42).


11
     ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study: ADB Support to Public Resource Management in India. Manila.
                                                                                                        11


ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = program completion report, SDP
= sector development program.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.      Lessons

39.      The PCR listed several valuable lessons although they are not new and have been
identified in many PCRs and evaluations. Nevertheless, these are very important and this
validation considers them justified to be repeated, as follows: (i) appropriate timing and
sequencing of reforms is essential for any reform program; (ii) focus should be on core
reforms essential to the program, numerous policy actions should be avoided; (iii) capacity
building and development of core competencies are essential for both implementation and
sustainability of reform programs; and (iv) involvement of officials and building of institutional
memory are essential in institutionalizing and sustaining reforms.

C.      Recommendations for Follow-Up

40.    The PCR cited the following recommendations and further action to make the program
more effective: (i) connectivity and fuller use of the comprehensive treasury management
information system, (ii) fuller use of the capabilities of the tax information management
system, (iii) IT resources to be used for property and land records, and (iv) use of security
equipment at check posts.

                      V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.      Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

41.     The ADB review missions used the tranche conditions policy matrixes for subprogram
monitoring, and the review mission reports indicated these were effective in tracking
developments and progress. This regular, ongoing interaction with the Department of Finance
was adequate for monitoring. No specific monitoring and evaluation system was included for
the program, apart from this. Program implementation and monitoring arrangements were
established as envisaged in the RRP, with a program steering committee and the FMU as key
elements in program monitoring.

B.      Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

42.     The PCR is clearly written and of a high standard and this validation rates it highly
satisfactory. It covers two large reform program loans and significant effort has been put in
assessing and providing evidences.

C.      Data Sources for Validation

43.     The primary sources for this validation were the (i) RRP for the SDP and the RRP for
subprogram II; and (ii) the PCR, which included the TA completion reports as appendixes.
This validation also reviewed the (i) ADB review mission reports for May 2011, June 2010,
August 2009, April 2007, and December 2006; (ii) India Country Operations Business Plan for
2011­2013 and 2013­2015; and (iii) India Country Partnership Strategy for 2009­2012 and
2013­2017. Also used were the (i) Country Assistance Program Evaluation of 2007; (ii) 2013
validation of the Country Partnership Strategy, 2009­2012; and (iii) 2007 Special Evaluation
Study on ADB Support to Public Resource Management in India.
12


D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

44.     A follow-on study can be considered for the 2007 special evaluation study, focusing
on the effectiveness of delivering reform programs such as this, through the cluster and SDP
modalities. This may focus on India or deepen the 2007 study.
