Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-334
Project Number: 30303
Loan Number: 1704
November 2014




India: Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal
Environmental Management Project




Independent Evaluation Department
                                             ABBREVIATIONS

            ADB              ­         Asian Development Bank
            EIRR             ­         economic internal rate of return
            GSP              ­         gross state product
            ha               ­         hectare
            KUIDFC           ­         Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and
                                       Finance Corporation
            O&M              ­         operations and maintenance
            PCR              ­         project completion report
            PIU              ­         project implementation unit
            PPER             ­         project performance evaluation report
            SEZ              ­         special economic zone
            ULB              ­         urban local body




                                                  NOTE

                                 In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                              Key Words

asian development bank, capacity building, coastal environmental management, community
participation, evaluation, india, IED, low-cost sanitation, solid waste management, storm
drainage, urban local bodies, wastewater management, water supply




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                           PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:           30303                PCR Circulation Date: Nov 2012
Loan Number:              1704                 PCR Validation Date:   Nov 2014
Project Name:             Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental
                          Management Project
Country:                  India                                         Approved           Actual
                                                                         ($ million)     ($ million)
Sector:                   Water and other      Total Project Costs:         251.40          240.87
                           municipal
                           infrastructure and
                           services
ADB Financing:            ADF:      0.00       Loan:                        175.00          145.00
($ million)                                    Borrower:                     76.40           95.87
                          OCR: 175.00          Beneficiaries:                  0.00            0.00
                                               Others:                         0.00            0.00
Cofinancier:                                   Total Cofinancing:              0.00            0.00
Approval Date:            26 Oct 1999          Effectiveness Date:     17 Aug 2000      21 Sep 2000
Signing Date:                                  Closing Date:
         Original         19 May 2000                                  30 Jun 2005      25 Nov 2009
         Amended          24 Jul 2002
Project Officers:                              Location:                   From:            To:
                          J. Lynch             ADB headquarters          Dec 1999        Dec 2000
                          C. Bunchandranon     ADB headquarters          Dec 2000        May 2001
                          A. Jorgensen         India Resident Mission    Jun 2001        Aug 2002
                          M. Alam              India Resident Mission    Sep 2002        Apr 2003
                          A. Jorgensen         India Resident Mission    May 2003        Jun 2007
                          V. R. Karbar         India Resident Mission     Jul 2007       May 2008
                          S. Muramoto          India Resident Mission    Jun 2008        Jun 2008
                          S. Dasgupta          India Resident Mission     Jul 2008       Dec 2009
Validator:                I. Green, Consultant Peer Reviewer:         R. Vasudevan, Evaluation
                                                                       Specialist, IED1
Quality Reviewer:         E. Gozali, Principal Director:              W. Kolkma, IED1
                             Evaluation
                             Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 1; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR = project completion report.

                                      I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Rationale

1.      The report and recommendation to the President (RRP) explained that urban growth in
coastal districts of Karnataka had far exceeded the capacity of existing infrastructure and
services with resulting negative impacts on human welfare, economic growth, and the natural
environment.1 In response to this, the project design focused on improving the living conditions
in 10 urban centers located along the west coast of the state with a total population of about 1
million at the time of project preparation. Improvements were to be achieved through the
provision of essential urban infrastructure and municipal services in the 10 selected towns to
meet basic needs and to support the sustainable development of the region. In this way, the
project also responded to the state's intention to realize the social and economic development
1
    ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the
    Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environment Management Project. Manila.
2


potential of urban areas other than Bangalore, which was the main center of urban and
industrial growth in Karnataka.

B.     Expected Impact

2.      Three sector and/or area goals are stated in the project framework (RRP, Appendix 1).
These are to (i) improve the quality of life in the urban areas, (ii) improve gross state product
(GSP), and (iii) improve the guided planning of urban areas. For item (i) goal, the associated
performance indicators or targets are (a) to increase economic activities and revenue base of
municipalities, and (b) achievement of time savings due to improved services and reduction in
morbidity due to improved public health conditions. For item (ii) goal, the performance indicator
or target is for the GSP to increase at a faster rate. For item (iii) goal, the performance indicators
or targets are (a) land optimization within an appropriate planning and regulatory framework, (b)
reduction in nonconforming uses, and (c) optimization of infrastructure network. It is noted that
the discussion on impact is not an end-state statement, and the indicators and targets lack
baseline data and quantitative measures of performance.

C.     Objectives or Expected Outcome

3.      The purpose of the project, as stated in the project framework, is to improve urban
infrastructure, management, and resource mobilization in project cities. Associated performance
indicators and targets include the (i) provision of basic urban infrastructure and essential
municipal services in 10 project towns with a projected total population of over 1.2 million by
2006; (ii) cost recovery, devolution of powers to urban local bodies (ULBs), improvement in
financial and technical capability of ULBs, and enhancement of asset management capability of
ULBs; and (iii) introduction of public­private partnerships. As in the discussion on impact, the
outcome is not defined as an end-of-project state, and the performance indicators and targets
also lack baseline and quantitative measures.
D.     Outputs
4.       The project was designed with 14 outputs. The RRP explained that these outputs are
organized into six components, as follows: (i) Part A: capacity building, community participation,
and poverty reduction; (ii) Part B: water supply rehabilitation and expansion; (iii) Part C: urban
environmental improvements; (iv) Part D: street and bridge improvements; (v) Part E: coastal
environmental management; and (vi) Part F: implementation assistance. Outputs included (i)
improved water supply, (ii) improved wastewater management facilities, (iii) improved storm
drainage, (iv) improved solid waste management, (v) improved municipal services and facilities,
(vi) improved community amenities, (vii) improved urban transport, (viii) improved infrastructure
facilities in slums, (ix) improved sanitation through low-cost sanitation facilities, (x) improved
municipal offices, (xi) coastal resource management and conservation plan, (xii) industrial
pollution control and environmental monitoring program, (xiii) coastal erosion protection through
afforestation, and (xiv) the Mangalore Urban Waterfront Rehabilitation Plan. The output
indicators and targets of the design and monitoring framework, generally, were not based on
baseline data, which implies that the overall intention to "improve" infrastructure and services
cannot be measured.

E.     Provision of Inputs

5.     The total cost of the project--including physical and price contingencies, duties, taxes,
and interest and other charges during construction--was estimated at $251.4 million equivalent.
Foreign exchange costs were estimated at $93.9 million and local currency costs, including
                                                                                                           3


duties and taxes, were estimated at $157.5 million equivalent. The Asian Development Bank
(ADB) provided a loan of $175 million (70% of the total cost), the state Government of
Karnataka was expected to provide $55.3 million, and the local government was expected to
provide $21.1 million.
6.      Component costs were to be distributed as follows: Part A, $8.5 million; Part B, $69.0
million; Part C, $41.4million; Part D, $14.9 million; Part E, $4.3 million; and Part F, $8.8 million.
Major variations in actual costs were in (i) Part C with increased expenditure to $75.6 million, (ii)
Part D with increased expenditure to $23.2 million, and (iii) Part F with a very significant
increase in expenditure to $27.2 million largely due to the delayed closing date (by almost 4.5
years). However, downward adjustments to expenditure in other components and the use of
contingencies enabled the project to be completed below the original overall cost estimate, at
$240.9 million. A total of 2,613 person-months of consulting services were required, with 134
person-months for international consultants and 2,479 person-months for domestic consultants.
F.        Implementation Arrangements
7.     The executing agency for the project was the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC). At the state level, an Empowered Committee
provided strategic guidance and facilitated resolution of implementation and inter-department
coordination issues. A district-level Project Advisory Team endorsed the subproject scope,
reviewed progress, and provided guidance and coordination assistance to project
implementation units (PIUs) in obtaining site clearance and statutory clearances, and in
redressing grievances. Municipal councils were responsible for approving the scope, feasibility,
and preliminary design of subprojects. Two regional PIUs were established--one in northwest
and another in southwest Karnataka--and were each responsible for five towns. The regional
PIUs were responsible for facilitating the detailed engineering design, obtaining right-of-way
clearances, and supporting town-level PIUs in contract management, monitoring, and
implementation. Town-level PIUs were established for the construction supervision of civil works
contracts and field coordination. Two design and supervision consultants and the project
management consultants were engaged to provide the necessary technical and project
management support to KUIDFC. Two regional nongovernment organizations were recruited to
implement the Community Awareness and Participation Program. KUIDFC also engaged third-
party quality assurance consultants to monitor and report on the quality of construction.
8.      The majority of the loan covenants were fully complied with. Partial compliance was
noted in the loan covenants on (i) the reduction of nonrevenue water to 25% in all project towns,
and (ii) the inclusion of a drainage surcharge in water tariffs. The project completion report
(PCR)2 noted that a nonrevenue water assessment by KUIDFC showed that 8 out of the 10
towns have achieved the agreed target. To recover the operations and maintenance (O&M) cost
of sewerage systems, the Government of Karnataka issued an order for the mandatory
imposition of a sewerage surcharge, which is under consideration by the respective local
bodies.

                     II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation
9.      The PCR rated the project relevant and this validation agrees with this rating. The
project was in line with government's policy as stated in the 74th Constitutional Amendment

2
    ADB. 2012. Completion Report: Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management Project in
    India. Manila.
4


Act, 3 and with the objectives stated in India's past and current 5-year plan. The project
addressed the need for urgent improvements to urban infrastructure and the delivery of basic
municipal services in 10 towns along the west coast of Karnataka. The project also supported
the preparation of a coastal resource management and conservation plan to guide future urban
growth and industrial development in the three coastal districts of west Karnataka. It was
consistent with ADB's policy emphasis on integrated urban development through expansion and
rehabilitation of key urban infrastructure, capacity development of local governments for
improving service delivery, environmental sustainability, and empowering of the urban poor.4
10.     Although clearly relevant, the project was not ready for implementation and this was a
significant design weakness. It is noted that a review of urban projects undertaken by the
Government of India and ADB in 2003­2004 recommended the strengthening of project design
through advance support for implementation preparation 5 and this recommendation was
adopted. This approach was again taken up in the project performance evaluation report
(PPER) for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in 20076 and endorsed in
the Management Response to the Project Performance Evaluation Report of Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development Project in 2008.7 This approach could have benefited the project
and helped in avoiding the delays discussed in para. 15. In addition, the monitoring and
reporting dimension was inadequately incorporated into the project design and the project
framework did not provide baseline data or performance targets at sector and/or area goal, nor
purpose or output levels as basis for assessing improvements from the baseline. The use of the
project framework as a monitoring framework was limited and may have had a negative impact
on effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Further, the risk assessment at appraisal did not
give enough emphasis on the weak implementation capacity, and consequently, no risk
management strategy was put forward, which could have mitigated some of the implementation
delays.
B.        Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcome and Outputs
11.      The PCR concluded that overall, the project was effective and this validation agrees with
this rating. At the outcome level and against the first indicator, although no detailed baseline
information had been made available or performance targets had been set, project
achievements are clear--1.0 million people (or 212,770 households) have been provided with
an improved potable water supply, 0.4 million people (about 94,000 households) with access to
wastewater management services and sanitation, 0.8 million people (or around 172,200
households) provided with a municipal solid waste management system, and 1.2 million people
with access to urban transport facilities. Measures of improvement are provided in the output
monitoring recorded in the PCR.8

12.    On the second outcome indicator (again with no baselines or targets), the state has
devolved power as stipulated in the 74th Constitutional Amendment of India. The state has
appointed technical staff in each ULB and gave regular training to their staff to improve asset

3
    Government of India. 1992. The Constitution (74th Amendment) Act, 1992. New Delhi.
4
     ADB. 2009. India Country Partnership Strategy, 2009­2012 (Abridged version). Manila; ADB. 2010. Country
    Operations Business Plan for India, 2011­2013. Manila.
5
     Advance support to be provided through up-front capacity building of implementing agencies and institutional
    strengthening of the state's line departments.
6
    Independent Evaluation Department. 2007. Project Performance Evaluation Report: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
    Development Project in India. Manila: ADB.
7
     Management Response to the Project Performance Evaluation Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
    Development Project in India (Loans 1415- and 1416-IND), 11 January 2008.
8
    See, for example, outputs 3.1 and 3.2 summary statements in the "Project Achievements" column of the Project
    Framework presented in Appendix 1 of the PCR.
                                                                                                 5


management capability. On the third outcome indicator, Mangalore city signed an agreement
with a special economic zone (SEZ) authority for the operations and maintenance (O&M) of the
city's wastewater system. Under the agreement, the SEZ will operate and maintain pumping
stations and treatment plants in return for using effluent. Other towns are developing public­
private partnership schemes for providing water supply 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Public­
private partnerships, in the form of service contracts for the O&M of treatment plants, pumping
stations, and waste management have also been introduced. ULBs have engaged self-help
groups for the primary collection of municipal solid waste. These groups have been trained and
oriented under the project.

13.      Achievement of progress against output indicators and performance targets was
generally good with few shortfalls. Identified shortfalls include the following: (i) storm water
drainage with a target of 76 kilometers completed only 59 kilometers although, in this case, the
number of beneficiaries was reported to exceed the targeted number of beneficiaries; (ii) low-
cost sanitation had only over half the targeted number of twin-pit pour-flush latrines constructed;
and (iii) not all Coastal Resource Management and Conservation Plan outputs were achieved
although strategic and spatial planning for the coastal regulation zone was carried out along
with the preparation of coastal regulation zone mapping.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

14.     Overall, the PCR rated the project efficient. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR),
at completion, was analyzed for the water supply, sewerage, drainage, solid waste
management, and streets and bridges components. The EIRR for the water supply component
in the 10 cities ranges 15.9%­41.6% while that of the drainage component varies from 12.4% to
73.7%, which are higher than the appraisal estimates; the EIRR for streets and bridges is also
higher than appraisal estimates. Sewerage and solid waste management components were not
assessed at appraisal, but at project completion, the EIRR exceeded the cost of capital. The
reevaluation is considered to be reliable--in general, the approach used during appraisal was
applied in the recalculation of the EIRR. The analysis at completion also calculated the
sensitivity indicators relevant at project completion and it is noted that the subprojects were
found to be sensitive to increases in future O&M costs.

15.      The original loan closing date of 30 June 2005 was extended to 25 November 2009 for
several reasons: (i) the borrower delayed loan effectiveness by 12 months, pending selection of
project consultants; (ii) subsequently, it took KUIDFC 18 months to renegotiate onlending
agreements to secure ownership by the 10 participating municipalities and to adjust the project
scope to address local needs; and (iii) after finalizing the scope, the project consultants took
another 18 months for reappraisal, primary data collection, and detailed design and bid
document preparation. There were other reasons for the delays, such as (i) land acquisition and
obtaining right-of-way clearances from the National Highways Authority of India, and the railway
authorities took longer than expected; (ii) high turnover of personnel in consulting firms and
inadequate predesign investigations that led to delays in finalizing the designs and bid
documents; and (iii) international project management consultants were unable to provide
appropriate support because they lacked familiarity with local conditions. It is also reported in
the PCR that KUIDFC considered that, during the initial stages, the time taken by ADB to
approve some bids and make procurement decisions was slow. Project design could have
identified the implementation capacity risks and ensured a risk management strategy, but the
problems mostly reflect inefficient project implementation. However, given the robustness of the
EIRRs and the fact that they are above 12%, this validation rates the project efficient in
6


achieving its outcomes and outputs, although this is a borderline case given the delay in project
implementation.
D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

16.     Overall, the PCR rated the project likely sustainable. However, it was noted that the
operating expense ratios for the completed project facilities need improvement by improving the
share of own revenue. With still low tariffs and user charges, the financial internal rate of return
of the water supply subprojects was negative at project closing (PCR, Appendix 11). The PCR
(Appendixes 8 and 11) reported that the Government of Karnataka increased water tariffs in
various towns during the implementation period and also in 2012, but the progress toward cost
recovery--even only to cover O&M expenses--had been very slow. This was even slower for
sewerage services as only one town (Karwar) had started levying sewerage charges by project
closing. The PCR (Appendix 11) indicated that no revenue was raised by the municipalities from
solid waste services as of 2011.The shortfall in cost recovery must be covered by state and/or
municipal subsidies as a temporary measure. The PCR confirmed that all the project towns had
favorable financial status (PCR, Appendix 11) (current asset and debt­equity ratios). There had
been adequate and growing intergovernmental transfers of budget resources from the
Government of Karnataka, which ensured that all municipalities were able to meet regular
expenses and invest in municipal infrastructure. Strengthening of municipal revenues through
reforms is an ongoing process.This validation notes the innovative arrangement in Mangalore
city to work with the Mangalore SEZ and defray O&M costs of the sewerage facility in return for
the latter's use of effluents. This validation rates the project outcomes likely sustainable, with a
note that a more robust tariff and/or fee increases need to be pursued.
17.     The capacity building, community participation, and poverty reduction component is
most likely sustainable in the five southern project cities because of the strong base provided by
the project, coupled with the continued support and inputs of the nongovernment organizations
participating in the project.

E.     Impact

18.      The PCR did not provide an impact performance rating and this validation recommends
a rating of significant. There is general evidence of overall progress against the first indicator of
the initial subgoal: (i) the median monthly per capita consumption level in the urban areas of
coastal Karnataka recorded a100% increase during 2004­2005 and 2010­2011; and (ii) on
average, the revenue from property tax of participating municipalities has increased by 14% per
annum between 2000 and 2010. The project will have contributed to this but it is not known to
what extent. On the second indicator of the initial subgoal, the impact is more project-specific:
the average time taken for water collection was reduced from 30 minutes per day in the pre-
project scenario to no separate time spent on water collection at post-project. On the indicator of
the second subgoal, it is noted in the PCR that the GSP growth rate changed from 7.1% in the
pre-project scenario or during 1990­1999 to 7.8% during 2000­2010. However, the project's
direct contribution to this is uncertain.

19.     On the first and second indicators of the third subgoal, city development master plans
have been prepared for nine project towns to regulate the planned growth of land use and
development. These plans have provided a physical framework for land use for a projected city
population over a period of 10­20 years. In addition, the Government of Karnataka has also
launched a new project to create an urban property ownership records database, which
accurately records both the spatial details of the property as well as the nonspatial record of
rights. On the third indicator of the third subgoal, the existing infrastructure network has been
                                                                                                            7


integrated with the newly constructed facilities to achieve optimization in all towns across
different sectors.

20.    The Economic Survey of Karnataka for 2011­2012 reports a substantial reduction
(23.5%) of poverty incidence in the urban areas of coastal Karnataka between 2004­2005 and
2009­2010. 9 The report states that inequality in the region declined by 11.6% in the same
period and the median monthly per capita consumption level has increased by 100%.
Achievements in poverty and inequality reduction in the region were higher than that of the
Karnataka average (by over 10%). Although poverty and inequality reduction in the region
cannot be completely or directly attributed to the project, it is widely recognized that the project
contributed to greater regional prosperity and had significant positive impacts on the poor.

21.     The project is categorized as B for environment safeguard. At the time of approval,
there was no categorization on involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples. It was
however noted in the RRP that the project is not expected to require any resettlement but will
involve acquisition of 113 hectares (ha) of marshy lands or uplands normally used for
agricultural purposes. Overall, resettlement management followed the ADB social safeguards
requirements for the project. The PCR reported (Appendix 10, para.10) that 22 short
resettlement plans were implemented and affected persons were compensated in accordance
with the approved short resettlement plan's entitlement matrices. A total of 81.23 ha of private
land were acquired for various components. At project completion, 79.36 ha had been acquired,
while a small portion of 1.08 ha was still being acquired for an underground drainage in
Mangalore.

22.     Environment covenants under the project have been complied with. The project had
improved the overall environmental conditions of the 10 coastal towns. The improvement stems
from the addition of 2,000 ha of mangrove plantations, the provision of low-cost sanitation units,
and the creation of core water supply and sanitation infrastructure. The project also helped in
strengthening the environmental monitoring capacity at the regional level and in the planning
and conservation of coastal resources through the preparation of Coastal Regulation Zone
maps. The project has the potential to contribute further to improved environmental conditions
over time if facilities are maintained and operated properly.

                           III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.        Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

23.     The performance of both the borrower and KUIDFC was rated satisfactory by the PCR
and this validation agrees with this rating. There were extensive delays in achieving loan
effectiveness and in the mobilization of the project. There were also difficulties in
implementation, especially in land acquisition and right-of-way clearances. The executing
agency did manage to establish effective consultation, project implementation and progress
reporting procedures, monitoring mechanisms, and a grievance redress mechanism. It also
conducted awareness campaigns and improved transparency by regularly publishing all reports,
including project progress reports.




9
    Government of Karnataka. 2012. Economic Survey of Karnataka, 2011­2012. Planning Programme Monitoring and
    Statistics Department, Karnataka. India.
8


B.        Performance of the Asian Development Bank

24.     The performance of ADB was rated satisfactory by the PCR and this validation agrees
with this. ADB deployed 18 loan review missions and these missions helped ensure that the
project was effective and likely sustainable. However, and as with the performance of the
borrower and executing agency, the efficiency of the project was significantly constrained by the
largely predictable delays in loan effectiveness and mobilization, and by the land acquisition and
right-of-way clearances.

               IV.   OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.        Overall Assessment and Ratings

25.     Overall, the project is rated successful on the basis of its assessed relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. This validation agrees with this overall rating. It was
relevant to the government and ADB policies. The project effectively achieved its envisaged
outcomes, and was efficient in its resources utilization although less so in the timeliness of
implementation. Project investments are likely sustainable if the reform impetus is maintained.

                                             Overall Ratings
    Criteria                        PCR            IED Review              Reason for Disagreement
                                                                              and/or Comments
    Relevance                Relevant            Relevant
    Effectiveness in         Effective           Effective
    achieving project
    outcome and outputs
    Efficiency of resource   Efficient           Efficient          The recalculated EIRRs are robust.
    use in achieving                                                However, the project experienced
    outcome and outputs                                             various implementation delays. As
                                                                    such, the project was borderline
                                                                    efficient (para. 15).
    Preliminary assessment   Likely              Likely             Project municipalities were assessed
    of sustainability        sustainable         sustainable        as capable to subsidize facility
                                                                    operations as efforts are being made to
                                                                    reach higher levels of cost recovery.
                                                                    More robust tariff and/or fee increases
                                                                    need to be introduced (para. 16)
    Overall assessment       Successful          Successful
    Impact                   Not rated           Significant
    Borrower and executing   Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    agency
    Performance of ADB       Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    Quality of PCR                               Satisfactory       Refer to para. 29.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, IED = Independent Evaluation Department,
PCR = project completion report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.        Lessons

26.     This validation agrees with the lessons learned identified in the PCR, in particular, the
necessity of advance actions for consultant selection, procurement, land acquisition, and
statutory clearances, which can help in the timely completion of projects. This validation also
                                                                                                             9


supports the observed lesson for this type of project to use more standardized country systems
and processes and control mechanism, at least at the state level, to reduce implementation
effort and time. Further, this validation notes the need for awareness campaigns to change the
behavior of urban residents to assure the achievement of project impacts.

C.      Recommendations for Follow-Up

27.     This validation agrees with the recommendations in the PCR, particularly on the
recommendations on the very critical need for future tariff increases. The tariff increase should
be done in a phased manner and after careful assessment of affordability analysis. This
validation concurs with the recommendation moving forward to build the expertise of agencies,
such as the KUIDFC, to take charge of new investments and to effectively resolve technical and
project management issues. Without dedicated staff, the agency cannot accumulate institutional
knowledge and expertise.

                       V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.      Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

28.     The covenant to formulate and implement a monitoring and evaluation program was
complied with and the program was prepared by the project management unit. 10 A midterm
review that evaluated project progress was undertaken in 2004 as part of the covenant.11 The
project framework presented in the RRP was weak, with limited provision of baselines and
targets. Although there is no doubt that the project has achieved significant improvements in
infrastructure provision and service delivery, there is no evidence that the project framework and
its targets and indicators guided implementation. Measuring the performance of the project has
been inhibited and the management of the project has not been supported with an adequate set
of performance targets.

B.      Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

29.    The PCR quality is rated satisfactory. The PCR provided adequate evidence and
analysis to substantiate ratings and is consistent with the PCR guidelines. It is noted, however,
that the PCR did not refer to or discuss the 2007 project performance evaluation report
(PPER) for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project.12

C.      Data Sources for Validation

30.      Apart from the PCR, the RRP and loan review mission reports were available and used
for this validation.

D.      Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

31.    A PPER is recommended and should be prepared toward the end of 2015 by which time
all components should have been operational for at least 2 years.


10
   Loan Agreement, Schedule 6, para 9.
11
   Loan Agreement, Schedule 6, para 8.
12
   ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans and
   Technical Assistance for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in India (Loans 1415-IND and
   1416-IND). Manila.
