Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR­254
Project Number: 29120
Loan Number: 1647
December 2013




India: Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure
Development Project




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

             ADB          ­   Asian Development Bank
             BME          ­   benefit monitoring and evaluation
             EIRR         ­   economic internal rate of return
             PCR          ­   project completion report
             PMU          ­   project management unit
             RRP          ­   report and recommendation of the President
             RUIDP        ­   Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project
             UDT          ­   urban development tax
             UDD          ­   Urban Development Department

                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



                                           Key Words

adb, india, nonconforming uses, policy reforms, rajasthan, slum development, solid waste
management, storm water drainage, urban development tax, urban infrastructure, wastewater
management, water supply rehabilitation and expansion




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                         PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:            29120               PCR Circulation Date: Dec 2011
Loan Number:               1647                PCR Validation Date:  Dec 2013
Project Name:              Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project
Country:                   India                                      Approved                       Actual
                                                                      ($ million)                  ($ million)
Sector:                    Water and other     Total Project Costs:     362.00                       445.95
                           municipal
                           infrastructure
                           and services
ADB Financing:             ADF:       0.00     Loan:                    250.00                       250.00
($ million)                                    Borrower:                112.00                       195.95
                           OCR: 250.00         Beneficiaries:             0.00                         0.00
                                                   Others:                          0.00              0.00
Cofinancier:                                       Total Cofinancing:               0.00              0.00
Approval Date:             3 Dec 1998              Effectiveness Date:         29 Feb 2000       18 Jan 2000
Signing Date:              1 Dec 1999              Closing Date:               30 Jun 2005       11 Jun 2009
Project Officers:                                  Location:                       From:              To:
                           H. Kurihara             ADB headquarters                 1998             2000
                           A. Jorgensen            India Resident Mission           2001           Jul 2007
                           V. Karbar               India Resident Mission        Aug 2007         May 2008
                           S. Muramoto             India Resident Mission        Jun 2008          Jun 2008
                           S. Dasgupta             India Resident Mission         Jul 2008         Sep 2008
                           P. Srivastava           India Resident Mission         Oct 2008         Dec 2009
Validator:                 I. Green, Consultant    Peer Reviewer:              K. Hughes, Senior Evaluation
                                                                                  Specialist, IED1
Quality Reviewer:          C. Kim, Principal       Director:                   W. Kolkma, IED1
                             Evaluation
                             Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department
Division 1, IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = project
completion report.

                                    I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.      Rationale

1.      The Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project (RUIDP) was designed to
respond to the lagging urban development in India. Economic growth had stimulated
urbanization but commensurate investment in urban infrastructure and services was not
forthcoming. This lag resulted in the deterioration of the quality of life and people faced severe
social and public health problems. The poor, women, and children were especially
disadvantaged. The situation is expected to worsen at an accelerating pace unless extensive
urban renewal was undertaken. Comprehensive policy, institutional reforms, and capacity
building were needed to arrest this deterioration, along with the provision of expanded
infrastructure and services in almost every aspect of urban development, such as water,
sanitation, sewage, solid waste management, roads, hospitals, protection of historic sites, and
others. The project focused on the large cities of the state as these were the primary centers of
2


the state's economic growth. Project scope included the cities of Ajmer, Bikaner, Jaipur,
Jodhpur, Kota, and Udaipur. 1

B.      Expected Impact

2.      The project sought to improve social and economic life in urban Rajasthan through
policy reforms geared to strengthen urban management and lend support to priority investments
in urban infrastructure and services. The project sought to meet basic human needs, improve
the general quality of life, and stimulate sustainable development. The goal was to alleviate the
detrimental and difficult living conditions of the urban poor, particularly women and children.

C.      Objectives or Expected Outcomes

3.      Recognizing the role of urban centers in economic development, the project was
directed at the cities potentially capable of bringing economic development in the state. The
project sought to (i) address immediate infrastructure and service deficiencies and meet future
demand to fulfill basic human needs, (ii) act as a vehicle through which policy reforms could be
introduced in the sector and effectively executed, and (iii) spread urban development reforms in
other cities of Rajasthan and in other states of India through a demonstration effect.

D.      Components and Outputs

4.      The project design at appraisal comprised five parts. Part A sought to extend support for
capacity building and community participation, including community awareness and education.
Part B was to undertake water supply rehabilitation and expansion. Part C was concerned with
improving urban environmental quality, including wastewater management, solid waste
management, drainage, slum conditions, sites and services, firefighting service, and protection
of historic sites. Part D focused on improving and managing urban transport through upgrading
of streets, bridges, terminals, parking, and undertaking improved traffic management. Part E
provided implementation assistance covering incremental administration, equipment and
vehicles for implementation, design and construction supervision services, and project
management services.

E.      Provision of Inputs

5.     The total cost of the project was estimated at $362 million. At appraisal, two components
accounted for much of the expenditure. Part B covered water supply rehabilitation and
expansion costing $91 million, and Part C covered environmental improvement costing another
$96 million. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) provided a loan of $250 million from its
ordinary capital resources.

6.      At the request of the Government of India, ADB also prepared an innovative poverty
reduction project for financing by the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction to pilot sustainable
approaches to rainwater harvesting and slum development in slum areas in three of the project
cities--Bikaner, Jaipur, and Jodhpur. 2 This project was closely aligned with RUIDP and closed
on 31 March 2009.


1
   ADB. 1998. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
   for the Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila.
2
  ADB. 2002. Proposed Grant Assistance to India for Supporting Rainwater Harvesting and Slum Development in
   Rajasthan. Manila.
                                                                                                         3


7.      A total of 2,731 person-months of consulting services were required at appraisal (127
person-months international and 2,604 person-months domestic) for (i) project management, (ii)
design and construction supervision, (iii) benefit monitoring and evaluation, (iv) community
awareness and participation, (v) aerial photography and production of base maps, and (vi)
integrated computer systems for project cities.

F.         Implementation Arrangements

8.      The Urban Development Department (UDD) of Rajasthan was designated as the
executing agency and a project management unit (PMU) headed by a project director was
established. The PMU was assisted by the project management consultants. A committee
chaired by the Rajasthan minister of urban development was established in November 1999
with full decision-making powers on all matters relating to the project at the state level, with the
project director as member-secretary. Other members included the state secretaries of finance,
planning, tourism, art and culture, and of the Public Health Engineering Department, the Public
Works Department, and the UDD. Separately, city-level committees were established in
November 2001 in each project city to provide overall guidance and ensure stakeholder
consultation. Design and supervision consultants were engaged to help the city's project
implementation units prepare detailed designs and bid documents and supervise contract
packages.

9.     During implementation, savings were reported under the project, and this led to a major
change in scope with the addition of the Bisalpur Water Supply System as the sixth component,
which was aimed at enhancing water supply in Jaipur. This sixth component alone was
estimated to cost $120 million.

                       II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.         Relevance of Design and Formulation

10.     The project completion report (PCR) rates the project highly relevant. 3 The project was
designed to implement government and ADB country and sector strategies, and had been
prepared after extensive policy dialogue. The project was consistent with these policies and
continued to remain so up to completion. The project was in line with the government's Ninth
Five-Year Plan (1997­2002), which made poverty reduction and the provision of basic
infrastructure primary goals. On completion also, the project was in line with the focus on
infrastructure in the country's Tenth Five-Year Plan and Eleventh Five-Year Plan. The project
responded to the government's evolving needs and to ADB policy on support to weaker states,
the bridging of regional economic disparities, and the creation of conditions for inclusive growth.

11.     However, the project design and formulation overestimated the readiness and capacity
of the state government to implement this large, loan-funded project leading to the 18-month
delay in engaging consultants and dropping subcomponents from the project. Although these
were not significant in terms of the proportion of funds allocated, these were highly relevant to
the intended project outcomes and impact. These subcomponents were reportedly taken up by
the State using other sources of government funds. Examples of such subcomponents included
income-generation schemes in slum areas, establishment of neighborhood development funds,
and thrift and credit societies to benefit about 500,000 people in slum areas--all but one of the
economic generation activities originally planned for sites and services areas. This is a

3
    ADB. 2011. Completion Report: Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project in India. Manila.
4


significant project design weakness. The RUIDP required major changes in the scope of the
project and the project went through reappraisal before it could be implemented. 4 This validation
rates the project relevant.

B.        Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcomes

12.     The PCR rated the project effective. However, the effectiveness section of the PCR was
extremely limited in description. The PCR did not refer to outcome indicators and targets in
support of its assessment. It is not clear to what extent the targeted 14.5 million beneficiaries
have been reached. The achievements described in the PCR suggested that 7 million people
were provided with improved water supply, 3.5 million people with wastewater management
services, 3.7 million with storm water drainage, 3 million with urban transport, and 0.1 million
with slum improvement; but there is a high possibility of overlapping benefits and double
counting. On the second outcome indicator concerning policy reform, it is noted that the project
had some success with service contracts being introduced for the operation and management of
treatment plans, waste management, and historical sites. Although a number of subcomponents
were dropped from the project--including subprojects associated with improving the living
conditions in slums such as subcomponents for income-generating schemes and establishment
of neighborhood funds--this is considered to be due to the overambitious project design, as
noted earlier. In view of its significant outputs and outcomes, this validation also rates the
project effective.

C.        Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outputs and Outcomes

13.     The project was rated efficient by the PCR. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR)
for water supply components implemented in the six cities ranged from 12.4% in Jaipur to
16.7% in Jodhpur, comprising 55% of the project cost. The EIRR for the wastewater
management interventions in three cities was assessed as 14.9% in Jodhpur, 25.6% in Bikaner,
and 32.2% in Jaipur. The EIRR for drainage works in six cities ranged from 12.7% in Bikaner to
31.6% in Jaipur. On solid waste management, the EIRR in five cities ranged from 14.0% in
Bikaner to 15.3% in Jodhpur. The EIRR for the internal roads in five cities and bridges in six
cities ranged from 17.9% in Jaipur to 22.7% in Udaipur. No EIRRs were estimated for slum
improvement, fire fighting services, heritage protection, and medical services because these
benefits were considered to be difficult to quantify.

14.     The project was significantly delayed at the outset because of differences of opinion
between ADB and the UDD on the evaluation of consulting firms during recruitment of the
project management consultants. The issue was resolved with the intervention of the
Government of India. The delayed procurement had knock-on effects on personnel not being
available and the inadequacy of person-month rates. These problems contributed to delays in
planning and design. In addition, inadequate predesign investigations, design changes, and
delays in finalizing and issuing technical drawings led to problems during construction and the
need for variation orders. The PCR found the financial internal rate of return for the water
supply, sewerage, and solid waste management subprojects to be negative. Tariffs were
inadequate to recover even the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs while tariff revisions for
water and sewerage and the introduction of user charges for solid waste envisaged in the
financial improvement action plan at the time of appraisal were not carried out. This validation
also rates the project efficient.


4
    See PCR, p. 3, footnote 10.
                                                                                                                     5


D.        Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

15.    Overall, the PCR rated the project likely to be sustainable because the state and/or
national governments were considered likely to ensure the sustainability of the majority of the
components. This is the case for water supply systems in all project cities but it is noted that the
PCR rated the sustainability of sewerage, solid waste management, and heritage protection
subcomponents less likely to be sustained.

16.      The tariff level in the six project towns was last revised in September 2007, when an
infrastructure development water surcharge of 25% was introduced for water consumption of
15­40 cubic meters per month. The surcharge rises to 35% for monthly water consumption
above 40 cubic meters. Even with these tariff adjustments, the cost recovery level is extremely
low and water supply is highly subsidized by the state. The O&M cost recovery for financial year
2009­2010 in the six project cities ranged from 16.5% in Kota to 33.7% in Bikaner. Sewerage
tariffs are linked to water tariffs as a surcharge that ranges from 20% to 33% and is collected
with the water bill by the public health engineering department, which transfers the sewerage
charges to the municipal corporations that are responsible for the O&M of sewerage. The O&M
cost recovery is low and inadequate. No solid waste user charges are levied by the municipal
corporations to cover the O&M. In April 2011, the state government decided to levy a surcharge
on power tariffs to help meet the solid waste management expenses.

17.     It was noted that a property tax has been introduced through an urban development tax
and this may contribute to the financial sustainability of the project's outputs. 5 The project may
have contributed to the usefulness of such a tax through the reported increases in property
values in project areas. However, urban management capacity has not been enhanced as
anticipated in project design and as reflected in the project purpose (outcome). Very little
progress was made with enhancing the urban local body capacity to recover costs with
enhanced financial and technical capacities. Limited progress was made with the introduction of
public­private partnerships. Moreover, some project subcomponents that may have contributed
to economic development were dropped. Since the government is demonstrably supporting the
sustainability of the project outcomes and that there is potential for eventual cost recovery, this
validation also rates the project sustainability to be likely.

E.        Impact

18.      The PCR described the benefit monitoring and evaluation (BME) survey findings that
assessed project impact, but the assessment did not address the indicators and targets
described in the design and monitoring framework. The overall intended impact was
improvement in the quality of life in the urban areas measured by (i) increased economic
activities and revenue base of the municipalities, (ii) time savings due to improved services and
reduction in morbidity due to improved public health conditions, (iii) state gross domestic
product increasing at a faster rate, (iv) reduction in nonconforming uses, and (v) optimization of
the infrastructure network.

19.    Economic impacts included a rise in property values in project areas due to
improvements in the environment and quality of life. A special economic zone was developed
near Jaipur after the availability of enhanced water under the Bisalpur Water Supply System
5
    The revenue potential of property taxes has not been tapped in Rajasthan. In 2007, the state abolished its property
    tax and introduced a new urban development tax (UDT) for properties larger than 300 square yards. The UDT's
    potential as a significant revenue source has not yet been realized, however. In April 2011, the state government
    has decided to extend the UDT to other properties but has not worked out the modalities.
6


even though the full benefits of this water supply system could not be achieved. The
construction of flyovers increased access to outlying areas--for example, Sanganer near Jaipur,
and Basni near Jodhpur. This led to greater suburban prosperity beyond these cities. Initial
investments in urban infrastructure by ADB triggered investments in some project cities by other
donors, such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and Agence Française de
Développement. Compared with the 2004­2005 period, the revenue base for water supply and
wastewater management in 2009­2010 had increased by 5.1% in Ajmer, 5% in Bikaner, 11.6%
in Jaipur, 9.6% in Jodhpur, 7.7% in Kota, and 8.5% in Udaipur.

20.     The time spent for water collection was reduced from 13 minutes per day in Jodhpur and
52 minutes per day in Bikaner before the project to no separate time spent for water collection
after the project, as per the BME report. Incidence of waterborne disease was reported at 4.0%­
34.0% of households in pre-project scenario and reduced to 0.2%­1.0% in the post-project
scenario.

21.     The growth rate of state gross domestic product changed from 5.2% in pre-project
scenario (1990­1999) to 6.7% during 2000­2010, though not entirely attributable to the project.
Land optimization was achieved through town planning legislation enacted in October 2008 with
a new system for maintaining urban land records implemented for the six project cities.
Reduction in nonconforming uses was facilitated by long-term city development plans prepared
for all six cities to ensure appropriate development control regulations through land-use
controls. Optimization of infrastructure network was achieved by integrating the existing
infrastructure network with newly constructed facilities to optimize their use in all six cities
across different sectors. Based on the foregoing, this validation rates the project impact
significant.

                      III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

22.     The performance of both the borrower and executing agency was rated satisfactory in
the PCR. The borrower was represented by the Government of India's Department of Economic
Affairs, which chaired tripartite review meetings with ADB and executing agencies held at least
twice a year in the initial period and more frequently later on. It also chaired portfolio reviews
involving the executing agency and ADB at least twice a year. These meetings helped identify
bottlenecks and monitor project progress on disbursement targets and contract awards. The
borrower also facilitated major scope changes proposed by the UDD and helped enhance
project effectiveness.

23.    After a slow progress in the initial 2 years, the UDD improved its performance as the
executing agency. Acting through the PMU, it contributed significantly to project development
and identified the new components that were funded from loan savings. The UDD was
committed to meeting the implementation schedule and all but three contract packages were
completed within a reasonable time. This validation also rates the project satisfactory.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

24.     The performance of ADB was rated satisfactory by both the PCR and this validation. The
UDD found the training that ADB provided to the PMU and its support and expert advice,
particularly those related to contract packaging, highly useful and necessary. In the case of
sensitive decisions, ADB monitoring and its transparent procedures enabled smooth project
                                                                                                        7


implementation without political interference. Strong ADB commitment to the project was
evident by the conduct of regular review missions, close monitoring of project progress, and
discussions with the UDD to speed up disbursements. ADB also ensured the presence of UDD
at bilateral review meetings and portfolio review meetings chaired by the Department of
Economic Affairs. This helped the UDD address major hurdles. However, the UDD felt that ADB
consultant selection procedures were complex and time-consuming.

C.       Others

25.     The project fully complied with the majority of the loan covenants. The covenant on non-
revenue water reduction was partially complied with while covenants related to increases in
water tariffs and institutional reforms were partially complied with after a delay of about 2 years.
Covenants relating to water tariff reforms, resettlement, and environment planning and
monitoring were modified or added during the project period. To begin moving toward
compliance with clauses related to water tariff revision in the amended loan agreement, the
state government prepared a road map for water tariff rationalization in May 2004 and an action
plan for formulating water tariff structure adjustments that aimed for the full recovery of O&M
costs for water supply systems by 2007­2008.

26.    The Sociocultural, Resettlement and Environmental Analysis focused on resettlement,
which was generally managed well. 6 There were no significant resettlement issues and
implementation of the social action plan and the resettlement plan was satisfactory and
complied with the ADB Involuntary Resettlement Policy (1995).There is no specific evaluation of
gender impact although the report and recommendation of the President (RRP) had indicated
that women and young children, comprising at least 65% of the affected population, would
benefit from the improved access to better-quality water, sanitation, and improved
environmental conditions.

            IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.       Overall Assessment and Ratings

27.     Overall, the PCR rated the project successful and the different criteria were rated highly
relevant, effective, efficient, and likely sustainable. This validation agrees with all of these
except on relevance, which is rated relevant. The project was relevant to the government and
ADB policies at appraisal and remained so on completion. However, the project design and
formulation overestimated the readiness and capacity of the state government to implement this
large, loan-funded project. This resulted in the dropping of some project interventions that were
highly relevant to the intended project impact and outcomes. In this validation, the project is
assessed effective in achieving the envisaged outcomes as the project did improve water
supply, wastewater management services, storm water drainage, and urban transport; and
achieved slum improvement. The project led to significant improvement in the project
management abilities of the PMU and project implementation unit personnel, the consultants,
and contractors. A reassessment of economic returns of all completed projects revealed an
EIRR of over 12%. Cost recovery from urban services needs to be increased otherwise the
financial viability of the project may not be sustained. Overall, this validation also rates the
project successful.


6
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
    Financing Facility to India for the Rajasthan Urban Sector Development Investment Program. Manila.
8


                                                Overall Ratings
    Criteria                        PCR              IED Review          Reason for Disagreement
                                                                             and/or Comments
    Relevance                 Highly relevant     Relevant         The project design overestimated the
                                                                   readiness and capacity of the state
                                                                   government to implement this large,
                                                                   loan-funded project, leading to the 18-
                                                                   month delay in engaging consultants,
                                                                   dropping of subcomponents from the
                                                                   project and requiring reappraisal (para.
                                                                   11).
    Effectiveness in          Effective           Effective
    achieving outcome
    Efficiency in achieving   Efficient           Efficient
    outcome and outputs
    Preliminary assessment    Likely              Likely
    of sustainability
    Overall assessment        Successful          Successful
    Borrower and executing    Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    agency
    Performance of ADB        Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    Impact                    Not rated           Significant      Refer to para. 21.
    Quality of PCR                                Satisfactory     Refer to para. 32.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report.
Source: Independent Evaluation Department.

B.        Lessons

28.      The PCR identified 13 lessons, all of which are agreed by this validation. In view of
project implementation events, this validation particularly agrees that along with consultations
related to project formulation and design, consultation with participating towns on cost recovery,
tariffs, and user charges is crucial for sustainability.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Up

29.     The PCR recommended some follow-up under two categories--policy-related and
general. This validation agrees with the follow-up recommendations, especially the project-
related recommendation on the need to prepare a financial improvement action plan since a
project like this needs to involve the project cities if it is to be realistic and fully implemented. A
city's ownership and the likelihood that it will adhere to proposed reform measures, such as tariff
increases, needs to be assessed before covenants related to financial reforms are drafted at the
appraisal stage.

30.     Support is also given to the recommendation for additional assistance. Following a
review of the current status of the project completion, additional assistance could be considered
to increase project effectiveness, improve on its outcomes and benefits, and reach people not
included in the original project. Help is required to (i) provide similar levels of services to the
growing peri-urban areas in each of the six project cities; (ii) provide last-mile connectivity not
undertaken as part of the project contracts; (iii) supply water meters to further reduce
nonrevenue water in the project cities; and (iv) ensure the adequate collection, segregation, and
treatment of municipal solid waste to complement the landfill facilities that the project created.
                                                                                                 9


                    V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

31.     The RUIDP included a BME program to measure conditions before and after the project
and assess the benefits of subprojects. BME studies were conducted in the project cities of
Ajmer, Bikaner, Kota, Jaipur, Jodhpur, and Udaipur. The baseline sample survey was
undertaken in 2004 and the final-term data were collected in 2008. The BME program compared
the two sets of collected data (for the pre- and post-project periods) to assess the physical
benefits achieved and social impacts accrued through project implementation.

B.     Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

32.     Although the relevance and effectiveness sections of the PCR were poorly developed,
the PCR was generally well written and sufficiently detailed overall. This validation considers the
quality of the PCR to be satisfactory.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

33.    The validation used the RRP, PCR, back-to-office reports from December 2003 to May
2004, and the Midterm Review Mission report.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

34.   An independent evaluation of the project may be considered after all the components
have been completed and operational.
