Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-401
Project Number: 36343
Loan Number: 2281
July 2015




India: Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring
and Development Program




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

         ADB             ­        Asian Development Bank
         CCS             ­        cooperative credit structure
         DCCB            ­        district central cooperative bank
         KfW             ­        German Bank for Reconstruction and Development
         MOF             ­        Ministry of Finance
         NABARD          ­        National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
         NIMC            ­        National Implementation and Monitoring Committee
         NPL             ­        nonperforming loan
         PACS            ­        primary agriculture credit society
         PCR             ­        program completion report
         PPMS            ­        program performance monitoring system
         RCCRDP          ­        Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring Development
                                  Program
         SCB             ­        state cooperative bank
         TA              ­        technical assistance



                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                           Key Words

adb, asian development bank, ccs, cooperative credit structure, india, national bank for
agriculture and rural development, profitability, pacs, primary agriculture credit society, rural
cooperative, rural financing, validation




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                         PROGRAM BASIC DATA
Project Number:          36343               PCR Circulation Date:     30 Sep 2014
Loan Number:             2281                PCR Validation Date:      Jul 2015
Project Name:            Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring and Development Program
Country:                 India                                          Approved        Actual
                                                                         ($ million)  ($ million)
Sector:                  Finance             Total Project Costs:       1,428.00      1,048.76

ADB Financing:           ADF: 0.00               Loan:                          1,000.00             800.00
($ million)
                                                 Borrower:                        251.00             126.32
                         OCR: 1,000.00           Beneficiaries:                     0.00               0.00
                                                 Others:                             0.00               0.00
Cofinancier:                                     Total Cofinancing:
                         DFID TA                 DFID TA                            2.00              0.05
                         kfW                     KfW                              175.00            122.39
Approval Date:           8 Dec 2006              Effectiveness Date:           10 Mar 2007       21 Feb 2007

Signing Date:            11 Dec 2006             Closing Date:                  30 Jun 2010      30 Jun 2013
Project Officers:        A. Sharma               Location:                         From:            To:
                         V. Rao                  ADB headquarters                Dec 2006         Mar 2009
                                                 ADB headquarters                Apr 2009         Jun 2013
Validator:               C. Dingcong,            Peer Reviewer:                L. Hauck, Senior Evaluation
                            Consultant                                            Specialist, IED2
Quality Reviewer:        B. Nguyen, Senior       Director:                     B. Finlayson, IED2
                            Evaluation
                            Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; DFID = Department for International Development
of the United Kingdom; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2; KfW = German Bank for
Reconstruction and Development; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR = project completion report; TA = technical
assistance.



                                   I.       PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

A.      Rationale

1.       Until 2006, India's economic growth, although robust, had not been broad-based or
inclusive. Of particular concern was the poor performance of the agriculture sector that had been
on a long-term declining trend. With about two-thirds of the population deriving their livelihood
from agriculture and nearly three-quarters of the country's poor, or about 200 million people,
living in rural areas, the impact of the long-term decline in agricultural performance on the quality
of life of India's poor had been severe.

2.       The role of finance is a critical input for strengthening the rural economy and agricultural
production base. However, the response of the formal rural finance system had been
increasingly inadequate. The rural financial paradigm, for the most part, was driven by credit
expansion through government-owned or controlled financial institutions, particularly within the
credit cooperative structure (CCS) comprising of primary agricultural credit societies (PACSs),
district central cooperative banks (DCCBs), and state cooperative banks (SCBs). In 2006, with
about 135 million members, India's CCS was one of the largest rural financial systems in the
world.
2


3.      While the CCS was organized on the principles of self-governance and self-reliance,
there were fundamental policy, governance, legal, and institutional problems that impaired its
solvency, sustainability, and efficiency. As a result, the substantial network of CCS had neither
been able to effectively address the demand and supply gaps in rural finance, nor function as a
sustainable financial intermediary. Consequently, the objective of enhancing rural financial
intermediation, especially to the asset-poor and disadvantaged rural households, was not fully
realized.

4.      Given its role in rural transformation, it was of vital importance to reform the CCS to
make financial services to the rural poor more efficient and less expensive. Greater access to
capital would support agricultural growth, which would contribute to increased income and
employment for the poor. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved a $1 billion loan for the
Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring and Development Program (RCCRDP) in December
2006 to help the government carry out its reform agenda to improve rural households' access to
affordable financial services through an efficient CCS. 1 The program supported the reforms of
CCS in five participating states--Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and
Rajasthan--with the design based largely on the work of India's Vaidyanathan Committee,
which was convened by India's Ministry of Finance (MOF) in December 2004.

B.         Expected Impact

5.      The expected impact of the program was enhanced income and employment growth for
the rural poor in the participating states through better access to rural finance. The impact
indicators identified in the program framework were (i) increased rural per capita incomes by at
least 5% within 7 years, (ii) basic social indicators in the rural areas improved by at least 5%
within 7 years, and (iii) reduced incidence of rural poverty ($1/day) by at least 5 percentage
points within 7 years.

C.         Objectives or Expected Outcome

6.      The expected outcome of the RCCRDP was improved access by rural households to
affordable financial services through a sustainable and efficient CCS in the participating states.
The six outcome indicators specified in the program framework were (i) increased lending to
agricultural activities (at least 5% increase per annum during the program period), (ii)
increased number of small and marginal farmers having access to credit (at least 5%
improvement during the program period), (iii) reduced non-performing asset levels in the CCS
(at least 5% decline during the program period), (iv) improved repayment rate in CCS
(aggregate repayment rate improves yearly during the program period), (v) improved CCS
profitability (aggregate profitability improves yearly during the program period), and (vi)
diminished costs of services for the CCS (average costs reduced successively during the
program period).

D.         Outputs

7.    The program comprised three components: (i) establishing a policy reform and
implementation framework; (ii) building a facilitating legal, regulatory, and governance
framework for CCS; and (iii) initiating institutional reforms for the sustainability of the CCS.


1
    ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and Technical
    Assistance Grant to India for the Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring and Development Program. Manila.
                                                                                                                    3


8.       Expected outputs of the program consisted of (i) a nationwide policy framework for
strengthening the CCS, (ii) a conducive legal framework for autonomous CCS operations, (iii)
orderly development of the CCS and enhanced depositor protection, (iv) democratic character
of the CCS restored and governance enhanced, (v) international best practices mainstreamed
in the CCS, (vi) PACSs strengthened to provide stronger foundation for the CCS, (vii) DCCBs
reformed into sustainable institutions, and (viii) SCBs reformed to effectively perform as apex
institutions supporting efficiency and sustainability of the CCS (PCR, para.2). The program
had 45 output performance indicators based on the 89 tranche release conditions.

E.        Provision of Inputs

9.      ADB provided a loan of $1 billion from its ordinary capital resources, to be released in
four tranches over a period of 3.5 years. The first three tranches were disbursed totaling $800
million, with the second and third tranches being delayed due to unmet tranche release
conditions (paras. 14­15). The final tranche of $200 million was canceled because of unmet
conditions (PCR, para. 25). The German Bank for Reconstruction and Development (KfW)
provided parallel financing of 140 million to support the CCS reform. 2

10.      Based on the work of the Vaidyanathan Committee, the cost for implementing the
reform program in the five participating states was estimated at $1.43 billion. The support of
ADB and KfW was to cover about 80% of the cost. The costs of the program, however, were
underestimated, particularly for the recapitalization, which were based on the March 2004 data
that were not subjected to rigorous accounting standards (PCR, para. 15). As a result, the
central government had to increase its contribution to recapitalization from $2.0 billion to $3.4
billion.

11.    The program was classified Category C under the ADB environmental categorization.
An environmental assessment of the policy reforms was conducted and no potential
environmental impacts were identified.

12.      A technical assistance (TA) grant of $2 million on Capacity Building for Rural
Cooperative Credit Structure Reform was also approved in conjunction with the program loan. 3
The TA grant was funded by the Department for International Development (DFID) of the
United Kingdom. The TA grant was to strengthen implementation and monitoring of CCS
reform and enhance its social and gender impacts. Following the approval of the loan and TA
grant, the Grant Thornton Advisory was recruited using quality and cost-based method.
However, the program completion report (PCR) reported that no work was done under the TA
grant for reasons that were unclear as the documentation was limited and with little
institutional memory of the TA grant at ADB, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD), and DFID (PCR, para. 28). 4 After a period of inactivity, NABARD
requested in June 2007 for an amendment of the TA grant, which at that point was too late for
consideration because the DFID Trust Fund that funded it was about to be closed. 5 The TA
grant was canceled and no work was done under the contract. The TA grant was rated by the
PCR unsuccessful and the performance of consultants was not rated because no work was
done.

2
    At the time of the preparation of the program completion report, the parallel financing portion of KfW was not yet
    closed and had undisbursed portion.
3
    See footnote 1.
4
    ADB. 2014. Completion Report: Rural Cooperative Credit Restructuring and Development Program in India.
    Manila.
5
    The DFID Trust Fund was closed on 30 June 2008.
4


F.        Implementation Arrangements

13.     The Banking Division of the MOF was the executing agency for the program while
NABARD, the apex rural finance agency, was the implementing agency. High-level
coordination was provided by the National Implementation and Monitoring Committee (NIMC),
which served as the program's steering committee. Each state and district established an
implementing and monitoring committee to coordinate efforts of the reform program at their
level. ADB was not a member of any of these committees. The PCR pointed out that there
were deficiencies in the implementation arrangements. First, only the states of Andhra
Pradesh and Rajasthan had road maps for ineligible PACSs, which perpetuated unprofitable
and undercapitalized PACSs in the other states. Second, arrangements for monitoring and
collection of data were inadequate. The TA grant was to fund the setting up of the program
performance monitoring system (PPMS), but this was not carried out (para. 12). Third, the
composition of NIMC did not include ADB. For large facilities such as the RCCRDP, ADB
should have been given the opportunity to be a member in the implementing committees or at
least as an observer, to anticipate problems and influence implementation.

14.      Of the 89 tranche release conditions spread across four tranches, 67 were fully
complied with, 11 were substantially complied with, and 11 were partly complied with. Among
those fully complied with were the (i) participation of five states in the reform program, (ii)
amendments to the cooperative societies acts in all participating states, (iii) proposed
amendments to the Banking Regulation Act finalized by MOF, and (iv) phase out of the cadre
system. Among those conditions that were substantially complied with included the plans
issued by NABARD to participating states for the development of accounting standards, a
management information system, human resource development, and withdrawal of
government nominees in PACS boards. The conditions partly complied with included the (i)
development and implementation of plans for ineligible PACSs by all participating states, (ii)
insufficient support by NABARD for clearing the accumulated losses of eligible CCSs, and (iii)
partial compliance on the criteria for directors in the DCCB boards.

15.     Although the fourth tranche was canceled, of the 16 policy actions intended to be
supported by that tranche, seven were fully met and nine were not fully met. Unmet conditions
included counterpart funding, computerization, corporate governance reforms, and
implementation of action plans for ineligible PACSs (PCR, para. 25). This validation shares the
view of the PCR that the cancellation of the final tranche was appropriate because (i) the
program was already extended by 36 months, (ii) there was a considerable number of unmet
conditions, and (iii) it was likely that it will take several years to meet the remaining tranche
release conditions.

                      II.     EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

16.     The PCR rated the program relevant. At appraisal, the program was consistent with
India's Tenth Five Year Plan 6 that included agricultural growth as one of the focus areas to
promote inclusive growth, and to the ADB country partnership strategy 7 that identified
agriculture and rural development as an important feature to mainstream poverty reduction. At


6
    Planning Commission, Government of India. 2002. Tenth Five Year Plan, 2002­2007. New Delhi.
7
    ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program: India, 2003­2006. Manila.
                                                                                                                  5


completion, the program remained consistent with India's Twelfth Five Year Plan 8 that
considered agriculture a critical sector for inclusive growth, and the ADB country partnership
strategy (2009­2012), 9 where agriculture's systemic weaknesses were identified as a key
binding constraint.

17.     The program design followed the recommendations of a high-level task force--the
Vaidyanathan Committee--which was commissioned by MOF to overhaul the CCS. The task
force recommended fundamental legal, regulatory, and institutional reforms packaged as an
integrated set of measures to be implemented only in states that agree to carry out reforms in
its entirety. The ADB program loan essentially funded the implementation of these
recommendations in the five participating states.

18.     The program's basic premise of corporate governance reforms prior to recapitalization
was conceptually sound. However, there were weaknesses in the program design and
implementation. The magnitude of the problems of the PACSs could have been better
understood and resourced had there been a special audit before the program started. Greater
and early focus on computerization could have helped improve data collection and could have
supported program modifications. Not all of the legislative initiatives that required statutory
changes were necessary as alternative regulatory and executive actions were able to achieve
the desired outcome. 10 The time frame for implementation was unrealistic given the scope of
reforms and the number of institutions involved. The risk mitigating measures were insufficient
for the program's size (PCR, para. 52). As indicated by the PCR, additional risk mitigating
measures should have been taken, such as initially piloting the program in one or two states
prior to large-scale expansion, participation of ADB in NIMC, and conduct of a midterm
program evaluation. The program costs were based on 2004 balance sheet estimates that
were not subject to rigorous accounting standards (para. 10). In view of this, the loan program
should have adequately anticipated how to address possible cost overruns, e.g., additional
counterpart funding, expansion of ADB's facility, other donor support, and others.

19.     At program inception, it was envisaged that participating states would implement action
plans for PACSs that did not have reasonable prospects for recovery, i.e., those with loan
recovery rates of less than 30%.The CCS reforms envisaged that these institutions with no
turnaround prospects should be amalgamated or wound up. In its first meeting, NIMC modified
the eligibility for recapitalization by allowing PACSs to be eligible for recapitalization if their
recovery rate improved from below 30% to 50% within 3 years, and if they did not,
recapitalization would be left to the responsible DCCB. This weakened the criteria for eligibility,
and with poor baseline data, it was impossible to track how many of the over 100,000 PACSs
across India benefited from these changes. Further, it sent the impression that reforms could
be avoided and that there was regulatory tolerance for unviable PACSs.

20.    While the basic premise of good governance prior to recapitalization was sound, the
weaknesses in the design and change in the eligibility criteria for PACSs reduced the
program's relevance. In addition, the cancellation of the accompanying TA grant weakened the
program design. The TA grant could have funded ongoing data collection and performance
monitoring, which were vital in assessing the progress and effectiveness of the program. The

8
   Planning Commission, Government of India. 2013. Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2012­2017. New Delhi.
9
   ADB. 2009. Country Partnership Strategy: India, 2009­2017. Manila.
10
   For example, amendments to the Banking Regulation Act (BRA) of 1949 were required in the program to bring the
   CCS on par with the rest of the banking system. This required approval by the Parliament. However, the Reserve
   Bank of India, through executive and regulatory actions, was able to introduce reforms without having to wait for
   the actual amendment of the Banking Regulation Act.
6


TA grant could have provided external accountability through a team of consultants tasked to
assess and monitor the CCS reform implementation and helped address the program's data
deficiencies. On these bases, this validation assesses the program less than relevant.

B.         Effectiveness in Achieving Program Outcome and Outputs

21.    The PCR rated the program less than effective. The envisaged outcome of improved
access by rural households to affordable financial services through a sustainable and efficient
CCS in the participating states was not fully realized. Of the 16 conditions for the final or fourth
tranche release, only seven were met (PCR, Appendix 2). Hence, the fourth tranche was
canceled.

22.     Of the 45 expected outputs that were based on the program's 89 tranche release
conditions, 36 or 80% were achieved (PCR, Appendix 3).The notable outputs achieved were
the (i) enactment of the amended cooperatives societies acts by participating states, (ii)
establishment of standards for CCS board members and management, (iii) conduct of special
audits by NABARD, and (iv) discontinuation of the cadre-based secretaries in PACS.
However, the PCR indicated that some of the outputs achieved were of questionable
stringency. For instance, the minimum capital requirement set for PACSs was only 4%
compared to the international norm of 8% by Basel II. The outputs that were not fully met
included those that were important to the reforms. These were the (i) cleaning of the CCS
accumulated losses, which was a financial restructuring measure; (ii) implementation of plans
for ineligible PACSs to ensure viability; and (iii) computerization in CCS to improve record
keeping and monitoring.
23.      Despite the shortfalls in outputs and unmet tranche conditions, the program achieved
four of the six outcome indicators. First, agricultural lending increased by at least 14% and on
an average of 21% per annum, exceeding the target of 5% per annum during the program
period. Second, the number of PACS borrowers increased by 35%, exceeding the target of
5%. The PCR indicated the weaknesses of these two outcome indicators--that banks
generally do not lack incentives for increasing lending, the challenge, rather, is maintaining
profitability and sustaining growth. The third outcome indicator was also achieved with
aggregate CCS nonperforming loans (NPL) as percentage of aggregate loans falling from 22%
in 2006 to 14% in 2012, exceeding the target of at least 5% decline. However, the PCR doubts
this achievement; it was unclear as to what extent the target was attained without the debt
waiver scheme that provided relief for small farmers. 11 The fourth indicator of improved
repayment rate was likely achieved based on available data from SCBs and DCCBs--that
recovery of loans to demand ratio increased from 75% to 85% from 2006 to 2012. The fifth
outcome target of improved CCS profitability was not achieved with aggregate profits lower
than the preceding year in 5 out of 6 years. Sixth, the outcome target of diminished costs of
services from CCS was not achieved. Operating costs as percentage of revenues, or
efficiency ratio, of SCBs and DCCBs increased from 2006 to 2012 indicating increased
inefficiency in operations.

24.     This validation assesses the program less than effective. While there were notable
outputs achieved, there were also significant outputs critical to the reforms that were not fully
realized. The cancellation of the fourth tranche reduced the effectiveness of the program and
affected the attainment of the program's envisaged outcome.

11
     In 2008, MOF announced a debt waiver scheme that provided debt relief for small and marginal farmers. While the
     waiver may have improved the level of nonperforming loans, it encourages defaults and creates a strong
     disincentive for farmer borrowers to promptly settle their loans.
                                                                                                                7


C.         Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

25.     The PCR rated the program less than efficient. The program was extended twice for an
accumulated delay of 36 months. The delays were due to the unmet tranche release
conditions broadly associated with the time needed to implement the reforms, the higher-than-
anticipated costs, and resistance to the closure of ineligible PACSs.

26.      The PCR indicated that the program represented poor value for money in that the
government spent Rs98.6 billion or $1.6 billion to facilitate legal amendments, governance
reforms, and institutional development but the financial sustainability of the CCS was not
fundamentally altered. The SCBs and DCCBs have remained undercapitalized with about 50%
not meeting the 9% capital adequacy ratio--the standard for commercial banks and which
they must comply with by March 2017. The Reserve Bank of India estimated that Rs64.9
billion ($1.1 billion) of additional funding is needed for DCCBs alone to achieve the regulatory
minimums. 12

27.     This validation shares the view of the PCR that a smaller ADB loan could have
achieved similar value addition to the CCS. ADB had little role in designing the program and,
essentially, its contribution was in monitoring implementation. In view of the priorities to
develop agriculture and the rural sector, the government would have undertaken a similar
program with or without ADB support. Hence, there was no need to allocate $1 billion. A
smaller loan with strong support for monitoring would have been more efficient. Further, there
was no solid statistical evidence showing that ADB's engagement improved the financial
results. In fact, SCBs and DCCBs in general have not improved their efficiency of operations,
have remained undercapitalized, and had no substantial improvement in profitability (para. 29).

28.    In view of the substantial delays in implementation and since the amount spent for the
reforms did not fundamentally change the financial condition of the CCS, this validation
assesses the program less than efficient.

D.         Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

29.      The PCR rated the program less than sustainable. Data drawn by the PCR from the
Reserve Bank of India showed that while NPLs have fallen, they have remained normatively
high toward the end of the program period. In 2012, the NPL ratio of PACS was highest at
27%, while that of DCCBs was 10% and SCBs at 7%. The percentage of unprofitable DCCBs
and SCBs has generally declined but the percentage of unprofitable PACSs remained
relatively high toward the end of the program period. In 2012, the percentage of unprofitable
institutions was highest among PACS at 39%, while it was 14% for DCCBs and 10% for SCBs.
If the CCS is to be sustained without continued infusions of government capital, the NPLs
have to be reduced and their profitability improved. This validation also assesses the program
less than sustainable because, overall, the program achievements have not produced a
financially sustainable CCS system for rural finance.




12
     Reserve Bank of India. 2013. Report of the Expert Committee to Examine Three-Tier Short-Term Cooperative
     Credit Structure. Mumbai.
8


E.         Institutional Development

30.      The PCR rated the institutional development of the program significant. The program
did not achieve sustainability for the CCS but there were significant changes in the
development of institutions. These included the amendments to the cooperative societies acts,
introduction of statutory audits, adoption of standards for management and board members,
and discontinuation of the cadre system. For these reasons, this validation also considers the
institutional development of the program significant.

F.         Impact

31.     The PCR rated the impact of the program moderate. It indicated that while the impact
indicators were achieved, they were poorly specified and the link of increased rural incomes,
improved social indicators, and reduced poverty with the CCS reforms was weak. First, per
capita consumption expenditures 13 in participating states increased on average by 147%
during the program period, exceeding the target of at least 7%. Second, the impact indicators
for improved social indicators were met in terms of infant mortality, access to hospitals, and
literacy rates increasing by at least 5%. Third, poverty was reduced for the population living
below $1.25 per day with the percentage falling from 41.6% in 2005 to 32.3% in 2010.

32.     The PCR is of the view that appropriate indicators should have been included
particularly on CCS financial viability and adequacy of capital. If assessed based on these
indicators, the PCR rating of the program's impact is moderate. In terms of profitability, on the
aggregate, the CCS remained unprofitable with 39% of the unprofitable PACS driving the
system losses. In terms of efficiency, the efficiency ratio of SCBs increased from 10.3% in
2006 to 12.7% in 2012, while for DCCBs, it increased from 20.0% to 24.3%, indicating
increasing inefficiency of operations. Third, a significant number of SCBs and DCCBs have
remained undercapitalized with about 50% of them not meeting the 9% capital adequacy
requirement that applies to banks, and that will be applied to them by March 2017. This
validation shares the view of the PCR that these additional impact indicators are appropriate
and have stronger link with the CCS reforms. Based on these metrics, this validation also
considers the impact of the program moderate.

                             III.     OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.         Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

33.    The PCR rated the performance of MOF less than satisfactory. MOF did some
important contributions to the CCS reforms. First, MOF developed the program based on the
Vaidyanathan Committee's basic premise that corporate governance reforms should precede
recapitalization. Second, it accorded the project high-level support during the initial phase of
the program. Third, the cooperative societies acts of participating states were amended, and
management information systems, accounting standards, more qualified boards and chief
executive officers, and appropriate regulatory norms were introduced in varying degrees.
Fourth, the program design included an amendment to the Banking Regulation and NABARD
Acts but when this was stalled due to various domestic factors, including the time and process
involved in legislation, existing regulatory frameworks were used to achieve the same
outcomes.


13
     Per capita consumption was used as proxy indicator for per capita rural income.
                                                                                                     9


34.     However, there were countervailing measures that were unfavorable to the program.
First, 2 years into the program, the government announced a debt waiver scheme that
provided debt relief for farmers. This undermined the reforms, particularly the sustainability of
CCS, in that it created an atmosphere that encourages default and created strong
disincentives for borrowers to promptly repay their loans. Second, the shortfall in counterpart
funding made it difficult to meet the tranche release conditions particularly on cleaning
accumulated losses. Hence, the program was not completed. This left the CCS
undercapitalized and the governance reforms losing momentum. In view of the
counterproductive debt waiver scheme and the unmet tranche release conditions, this
validation views the performance of MOF as less than satisfactory.

B.         Performance of the Asian Development Bank

35.      The PCR rated the performance of ADB less than satisfactory. Five reasons were
indicated for this rating. First, the PCR is of the view that the government could have
undertaken the initiatives of the program in a similar manner with or without ADB support;
there was no statistical evidence to show that the ADB assistance improved financial results of
CCS (PCR, Table 3). Second, there were weaknesses in the program design that included (i)
a special audit of PACS that should have been conducted before the program started; (ii) lack
of earlier focus on computerization; and (iii) overreliance on legislative initiatives, not all of
which were necessary. Third, the program should have been tested with a smaller funding
facility and expanded if successful. In addition, the large funding facility for the program
restricted available funding for other initiatives in India and elsewhere. Fourth, there was lack
of institutional checks and balance and potential conflict of interest on the part of ADB--the
program's driver from origination to approval was disproportionately the director of the
originating division instead of the mission leaders. 14 Fifth, records of the program were not
centrally maintained, which made consolidation difficult especially for a multiyear program
where staff turnover is inevitable. In view of all these factors, this validation also views the
performance of ADB as less than satisfactory.

              IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.         Overall Assessment and Ratings

36.       The PCR rated the program less than successful. The envisaged outcome of improved
access by rural households to affordable financial services through a sustainable and efficient
CCS was not fully realized. There were weaknesses in the design and the change in the
eligibility criteria for PACSs affected the attainment of a sustainable and efficient CCS in the
participating states. The cancellation of the fourth tranche reduced the effectiveness of the
program and some significant outputs critical to the reforms were not fully realized. There were
substantial delays in implementation and despite the amount spent for reforms, the financial
condition of the CCS was not fundamentally changed. This validation rates the overall
performance of the program less than successful.




14
     The director was a former employee of NABARD and was involved in the design of the program.
10


                                              Overall Ratings
  Criteria                          PCR             IED Review          Reason for Disagreement
                                                                            and/or Comments
 Relevance                     Relevant           Less than       There were weaknesses in the design
                                                  relevant        and the change in the eligibility criteria
                                                                  for PACSs reduced the relevance of
                                                                  the program (paras. 17­20).
 Effectiveness in achieving    Less than          Less than
 outcome and outputs           effective          effective
 Efficiency in achieving       Less than          Less than
 outcome and outputs           efficient          efficient
 Preliminary assessment        Less than          Less than
 of sustainability             sustainable        sustainable
 Institutional development     Significant        Significant
 Impact                        Moderate           Moderate
 Overall assessment            Less than          Less than
                               successful         successful
 Borrower and executing        Less than          Less than
 agency                        satisfactory       satisfactory
 Performance of ADB            Less than          Less than
                               satisfactory       satisfactory
 Quality of PCR                                   Satisfactory    Refer to para. 41.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PACSs = primary agriculture credit
societies, PCR = program completion report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.      Lessons

37.     The PCR presented valuable and important lessons from the implementation of the
program. The results of the program highlight the need for ADB to conduct adequate due
diligence even though the policy framework was largely based on the recommendations of the
high-level Vaidyanathan Committee. Greater focus on data collection should have been made in
the program design in view of the limited data available for DCCBs and PACS. The program
concept should have been piloted first in one or two states, and expanded to other states once
proven successful. Ambitious reform programs should have realistic time frames to allow
sufficient time to comply with tranche release conditions. While the ADB assessment anticipated
much of the possible program problems, additional risk mitigation measures should been made
to include piloting of the program prior to large-scale expansion, active participation of ADB in
NIMC, and the conduct of a midterm program evaluation. Lastly, tranche release conditions that
require statutory changes should be avoided as the legislative process takes time particularly in
getting the approval of the Parliament. The lessons are appropriate and this validation has no
additional lesson to offer.

C.      Recommendations

38.     The program-related recommendations of the PCR are suitable. For banking sector
reforms, ADB should review past policy actions that contradict the purposes of the loan and
highlight these risks at appraisal. In view of the less than successful rating and the
complexities of the CCS that operates over a large geographical area, no further assistance
should be provided by ADB for the rural CCS and focus instead on other initiatives within rural
and inclusive finance.
                                                                                                 11


39.     The general recommendations of the PCR are appropriate. These included (i)
anticipating shortfalls when there is reasonable probability that actual costs will exceed original
estimates; (ii) larger tranches to come toward the end of the program to provide incentives for
program completion; (iii) include systems in the design that can collect ongoing data on
performance and provide adequate monitoring; (iv) provide external accountability and
consider smaller facilities to maximize the efficiency of development resource; (v) maintain
centralized record keeping within ADB departments; (vi) in situations where national
governments convene task forces to assess public policy problem, ADB may better support
the implementation of the task force's recommendation rather than duplicating its work; (vii)
when support is needed for ambitious reforms, ADB may consider piloting smaller facilities
before moving into larger programs; (viii) allow adequate time for implementing ambitious and
complicated reforms; and (ix) for large facilities, ADB should require membership in
implementing committees, or at least as observer if membership is not politically possible.

                    V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation and Utilization

40.      A PPMS operated by NABARD was established to track reform progress. The PPMS
tracked the implementation of the policy matrix and the progress in achieving the indicators
identified in the program framework. This validation notes that the impact indicators should have
been linked more closely with the CCS reforms to include indicators for portfolio quality, capital
adequacy, and financial sustainability.

B.     Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

41.     This validation rates the PCR satisfactory. It is generally well written and provided
various evidences to substantiate the ratings. The lessons were drawn from the findings and
the recommendations were sound. Table 4 aptly summarized the program outcomes and their
status. The presentation of the status of compliance with tranche policy conditions in Appendix
2 was informative. The status of the outputs was clearly presented in Appendix 3 and was
helpful in understanding the extent of achievement of the targets.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

42.    Sources used for this validation were the PCR, report and recommendation of the
President, loan review mission reports, aide-memoire of review missions, and progress reports
on tranche releases.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

43.    No recommendation is presented.
