Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-418
Project Number: 32298
Loan Number: 2346
September 2015




India: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector
Investment Program (Tranche 3)




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB                 ­   Asian Development Bank
              DISCOM              ­   distribution company
              DMF                 ­   design and monitoring framework
              EIRR                ­   economic internal rate of return
              FIRR                ­   financial internal rate of return
              kV                  ­   kilovolt
              MFF                 ­   multitranche financing facility
              MPSEB               ­   Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
              MVA                 ­   megavolt-ampere
              MW                  ­   megawatt
              PCR                 ­   project completion report
              PFR3                ­   Periodic Financing Request No. 3
              RRP                 ­   report and recommendation of the President
              TRANSCO             ­   Madhya Pradesh Power Transmission
                                      Company Limited




                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                           Key Words

adb, asian development bank, distribution system, energy efficiency, energy sector, india,
madhya pradesh, power, project completion report, transmission, validation




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                         PROJECT BASIC DATA
    Project Number:      32298             PCR Circulation Date:    Sept 2014
    Loan Number:         2346              PCR Validation Date:     Sept 2015
    Project Name:        Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program (Tranche 3)
    Country:             India                                       Approved         Actual
                                                                     ($ million)    ($ million)
    Sector:              Energy            Total Project Costs:       197.8           176.1
    ADB Financing:       ADF: 0.0               Loan:                        144.0              141.9
    ($ million)
                                                Borrower:                      18.9              24.2
                         OCR: 144.0             Beneficiaries:                  0.0               0.0
                                                Others:                        34.9              10.0
    Cofinancier:                                Total Cofinancing:              0.0               0.0

    Approval Date:       21 Aug 2007            Effectiveness Date:        21 Nov 2007    24 Dec 2007

    Signing Date:        23 Aug 2007            Closing Date:              31 Dec 2011     16 Sep 2013
    Project Officers:                           Location:                      From:             To:
                         H. Kobayashi           ADB headquarters             Aug 2007         Dec 2009
                         V. Karbar              India Resident Mission       Jan 2009         Feb 2012
                         J. Banerjee            India Resident Mission       Feb 2012         Sep 2013
    Initial Reviewers:   P. Choynowski,         Peer Reviewer:             K. Thukral, Principal
                            Consultant                                        Evaluation Specialist, IED2
                         F. D. De Guzman
                            Senior Evaluation
                            Officer, IED2
    Quality Reviewer:    B. Nguyen, Senior      Director:                  B. Finlayson, IED2
                            Evaluation
                            Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 2; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR = project completion report.



                                    I.     PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Rationale

1.      Madhya Pradesh faced formidable difficulties in providing energy supplies that were
needed to spur poverty reduction and the economic development of the state. According to the
report and recommendation of the President (RRP),1 transmission capacity in Madhya Pradesh
was inadequate as investment in the transmission network did not match increasing demand.
Supply security for portions of the transmission network was significantly less than the condition
where electricity supply could still be maintained in the event of an outage of major equipment.2
As such, the failure of a major network component could lead to severe load shedding. There
was also a bottleneck in electricity delivery in Madhya Pradesh. The distribution system was
characterized by high ratios of low-to-medium voltage circuit length and overloaded power
transformers. It suffered from a severe capacity shortage and was incapable of providing
adequate quality and reliable supply to customers. Safety was compromised in the distribution

1
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
    Financing Facility to India for the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program. Manila.
2
    In technical terms, this is called (n-1) security level.
2


networks due to shoddy installation of equipment and inadequate maintenance practices.
Distribution network losses in many areas were 40%­45%.

2.       The financial position of Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board (MPSEB) was critical
due to inadequate tariffs, non-remunerative investments in rural electrification schemes, delays
in tariff subsidies from the government of Madhya Pradesh, and high commercial and technical
losses in the transmission and distribution networks (RRP, para. 17). To meet cash flow
requirements, MPSEB defaulted on payment obligations to its suppliers and lenders, reduced
capital investments, and pursued less than optimal repair and maintenance practices. Following
the unbundling of MPSEB in 2002, the Government of Madhya Pradesh undertook financial
restructuring of the sector, which included injecting equity and taking over loan arrears and rural
electrification loans. However, shortfalls in sector revenues were expected to continue for the
medium term as a result of high distribution losses. Therefore, targeted loss-reduction
investments were critical to bring the cost of supply in line with average retail tariffs and to
achieve sector profitability and eventual financial sustainability.

3.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB) country strategy and program for India in 2003­
2006 focused on clean energy development in the energy sector, including run-of-the-river
hydropower projects, other forms of renewable energy, rural electrification, and energy efficiency
improvements.3 Subsequent updates to the 2003­2006 country strategy and program outlined
six priorities in the ADB power sector assistance. These are (i) reforming the power sector, (ii)
promoting higher efficiency and low-carbon power sources, (iii) expanding and optimizing
transmission and distribution systems, (iv) strengthening institutions to implement reforms
required by the 2003 Electricity Act, (v) promoting private sector participation, and (vi)
encouraging energy conservation and ensuring environmental and social sustainability.4

B.        Expected Impact

4.      The design and monitoring frameworks (DMFs) of the RRP, the project completion report
(PCR),5 and the Periodic Financing Request No. 3 (PFR3) indicated that the expected impacts of
the investment program in Madhya Pradesh were contributions in (i) sustaining economic growth
and social development, and in (ii) meeting energy demand growth. Performance indicators to
measure achievement of these expected impacts were (i) growth in gross state product of at
least 6% annually during 2007­2012, and (ii) reduction in the energy deficit from 13% in 2007 to
0% in 2012.

C.        Objectives or Expected Outcome

5.        The DMF of the RRP indicated six expected outcomes of the investment program. These
are (i) sustainable and commercially operated power sector companies; (ii) transmission
expansion (improvement in operational efficiency, voltage profile, and power delivery capacity);
(iii) distribution enhancement (reduction in system losses and improved supply quality and
reliability); (iv) strengthened capacity of sector institutions; (v) improved energy efficiency; and
(vi) increased private sector participation. Outcome performance indicators were (i) reduced
dependence of the sector on direct state support from approximately 30% of total investment
funding to 0% by 2012, (ii) elimination of financial losses in the sector by 2011 (from Rs2.70
billion in 2005), (iii) increased transmission capacity from 5,563 megawatts (MW) during 2005­
3
    ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program: India, 2003­2006. Manila.
4
    ADB. 2004. Country Strategy and Program Update (2004­2006): India. Manila; ADB. 2005. Country Strategy and
    Program Update (2005­2007): India. Manila.
5
    ADB. 2014. Completion Report: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program (Tranche 3) in India. Manila.
                                                                                                 3


2006 to 8,170 MW during 2008­2009, (iv) enhanced system availability from 95% during 2005­
2006 to 97.5% during 2008­2009, and (v) reduced technical losses in the transmission system
from 5.2% during 2005­2006 to 4.9% during 2008­2009. Other outcome indicators were (i)
reduced distribution losses from 40%­45% during 2005­2006 to 19% in 2012, (ii) improved
system reliability and substantial reduction in fault restoration time, (iii) reduced customer
complaints about quality of electricity supply, and (iv) enhanced ability of Madhya Pradesh
Energy Department to implement further reforms. Also listed as performance targets were (i)
improved capacity of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission, (ii) improved human
resources and financial management and accounting in all sector companies, (iii) development of
capacity for interstate power trading, (iv) establishment of energy conservation funds to support
small-scale projects promoting energy efficiency, and (v) sustainable increases in private sector
investment in the power sector.

6.     Of the investment program's expected outcomes, only two were associated with PFR3 to
be financed by Tranche 3. These are (i) improvement in operational efficiency, voltage profile,
and power delivery capacity of Madhya Pradesh; and (ii) improvement in the financial position of
Madhya Pradesh Power Transmission Company Limited (TRANSCO). For the first outcome,
transmission capacity was to increase from 5,563 MW in 2005­2006 to 8,170 MW during 2008­
2009, and system availability was to be improved from 95.0% during 2005­2006 to 97.5% during
2008­2009. For the second outcome, TRANSCO's debt service coverage ratio was to be
maintained at 1.2 from 2007 onward, and a self-financing ratio of 20% was to be maintained from
2010 onward.

D.     Outputs

7.       According to PFR3, Tranche 3 of the multitranche financing facility (MFF), which is the
focus of this validation, was to finance the construction of transmission lines to connect 220
kilovolt (kV) and 132 kV substations to the 33 kV distribution substations. This was to comprise a
set of subprojects with the following components: (i) 1,451.5 circuit kilometers (cct-km) of 132 kV
transmission line; (ii) 10 new 132/33 kV substations, each having 40 megavolt-ampere (MVA)
transformer capacity at Badgaon, Bagdi, Berchha, Betma, Bhanegaon, Chhanera, Ghosla,
Kasrawad, Chichli, and Vijaypur; (iii) 10 additional 132/33 kV transformers of 20 MVA each and
three of 40 MVA each at existing substations; (iv) augmentation of six 132/33 kV transformers
from 20 to 40 MVA, and 14 transformers from 40 to 63 MVA at existing substations; and (v)
testing of instruments and maintenance equipment. The outputs on physical infrastructure were
expected to be completed by 2011.

8.      Two other "soft" outputs were envisaged under the project. The first was improvement in
corporate governance that included recruitment of an independent board of directors,
strengthening of audit functions and guidelines, and appointment of internal controllers. The
second output was geared toward strengthening of human resources and was to comprise
appointment of key staff at directorial levels, chartered accountants, and information technology
specialists; and setting-up of management training programs in finance, operations, and
commercial functions. The first "soft" output was expected to be completed by December 2007
and the second on December 2008.

9.     Minor changes in the original project scope involving two additional schemes were results
of cost savings that were generated (para. 12). Scheme 1 was designed to improve the
transmission system's operational efficiency, voltage profile, and delivery capacity to reduce
overloading of the existing 132 kV and 33 kV systems. This scheme was fully commissioned by
4


August 2012. 6 Scheme 2 was aimed at improving the operational reliability of the state's
transmission system in order to be consistent with international benchmarks for system efficiency
while reducing operational risk.7 This was fully completed in March 2013.

E.       Provision of Inputs

10.    The PFR for Tranche 3 was received on 23 July 2007 and was approved by ADB on 21
August 2007. It became effective on 24 December 2007, a slight delay of about a month
compared to the expected effectiveness date of 21 November 2007.The implementation was
expected to be about 4 years and completed by 31 December 2011. The project's major civil
works were completed as planned. However, the loan closing date was extended twice: (i) from
31 December 2011 to 30 June 2012, and (ii) from 30 June 2012 to 31 March 2013--to use loan
savings for two additional schemes (para. 9). The PFR for Tranche 3 was closed on 16
September 2013.

11.     The total cost of the power sector investment program for 2007­2012 was estimated at
$5.34 billion. ADB approved a loan of $620 million from its ordinary capital resources to finance
part of the power sector investment program covering transmission, distribution, capacity
building, and energy efficiency. The financing was to be provided under the MFF modality in
accordance with ADB policy.

12.    The total cost of Tranche 3 projects at appraisal was expected to be $197.8 million. ADB
was to finance $144.0 million. The project was completed at total cost of $176.1 million, with
ADB financing of around $141.9 million. Additional equipment was procured from cost savings.
Savings were primarily attributed to (i) lower than estimated costs due to competitive bidding; (ii)
depreciation of the Indian rupee against the dollar; and (iii) efficient project monitoring and
administration, which reduced interest during construction.

13.    The project was classified as Category B under the ADB environmental categorization
requirements. An initial environmental examination indicated that the proposed works were not
expected to pass through or near any environmentally or ecologically sensitive areas,
archeologically important sites, or protected historical monuments. The works generally
traversed barren land with minimal vegetative cover and agricultural areas (PCR, para. 36).
However, during implementation, a review of the environmental management and monitoring
plan indicated varying levels of compliance with agreed provisions, and in some cases, this was
assessed to be less than adequate. A time-bound corrective action plan was put in place.
Management of environmental safeguards generally improved later, after an external monitoring
agency was engaged (PCR, paras. 37-38).

14.     The project was classified as Category B for involuntary resettlement and Category C for
indigenous peoples impacts. ADB approved short resettlement plans that detailed the
resettlement policy and framework applicable for resettlement planning documentation,

6
  The scope comprised of (i) four additional 220/132 kV, 160 MVA power transformers; (ii) 220 kV current transformers
   (90 units) and potential transformers (18 units) at existing substations; (iii) 132 kV and 33 kV current transformers
   (150 units of 132 kV and 180 units of 33 kV), and potential transformers (60 units of 132 kV and 60 units of 33 kV) at
   existing substations; (iv) 220 kV SF6 circuit breakers (20 units) at existing substations; (v) 132 kV SF6 circuit
   breakers (40 units) at existing substations; and (vi) 33 kV vacuum circuit breakers (300 units) at existing substations.
7
  The scope consisted of (i) 10 additional 132/33 kV, 63 MVA power transformers at 132 kV substations and 220 kV
   substation; (ii) 132 kV current transformers (150 units) and potential transformers (45 units) at existing substations;
   (iii) 132 kV SF6 circuit breakers (90 units) at existing substations; and (iv) 33 kV vacuum circuit breakers (180 units)
   at existing substations.
                                                                                                               5


implementation, monitoring, and reporting. The short resettlement plans reported insignificant
impact on affected persons from the construction of one substation on private land and stringing
of the related transmission lines, which involved no involuntary resettlement.8

15.      The PCR indicated that at appraisal, TRANSCO was assessed to have the requisite
institutional capability to implement the project. Thus, consultant services were not provided.
Accordingly, ADB did not engage a consultant for this project. However, TRANSCO appointed
separate consultants to prepare the environmental and social safeguard reports and formulate a
resettlement plan.

F.        Implementation Arrangements

16.     TRANSCO, the state system's operator, was to be the executing agency for the
transmission component. Three distribution companies (DISCOM-E, DISCOM-C, and DISCOM-
W) were to be the executing agencies for the distribution components in their respective areas. A
coordinating committee comprising the chairman and managing director of the executing
agencies, led by the chairman and managing director of TRANSCO, was to be established to
monitor and coordinate the overall implementation of the investment program. The coordinating
committee was to report to the Energy Department of the Government of Madhya Pradesh. At
the state level, the Energy Department was to monitor the implementation of reform policy and
overall power sector investment. At the central level, the Ministry of Power was to monitor state
sector policy and investment program implementation. All executing agencies were to have
established project management units, headed by a full-time project manager. TRANSCO was to
implement the capacity building component, while the executing agency for energy efficiency
was to be determined once the design was finalized.

17.     Implementation arrangements were as envisaged at appraisal. Overall responsibility for
project implementation was with a project management unit established within TRANSCO.
TRANSCO had the institutional capability to implement the project, hence, no consultant services
were provided. Good project management and resolution of technically complex issues led to the
project's expeditious completion. TRANSCO requested two extensions to the loan closing date.
The first covered the period 31 December 2011 to 30 June 2012 to complete the utilization of
savings for the first additional scheme. The second extension--30 June 2012 to 31 March
2013--was to facilitate the utilization of savings to complete another savings scheme.
TRANSCO appointed consultants to prepare the environmental and social safeguard reports and
to formulate a resettlement plan (para. 14).

18.    All 31 covenants were complied with, except for two with delayed compliance.
Compliance to the self-financing ratio was not met because the revenue was decided by the
state electricity regulator. The PCR indicated that this did not impact project execution as
TRANSCO could provide a balance of 15% from its own funds (PCR, para. 20 and Appendix 9).
The covenant on pension funds was not complied with although the PCR noted that an
arrangement is in process for compliance in the future (PCR, Appendix 9). No covenants were
modified, suspended, or waived during implementation although there was delayed compliance
in several cases.


8
    Owners of the land that was acquired were adequately compensated. This land was generally barren and
    nonproductive. The stringing of transmission lines and erecting of towers did not include land acquisition.
    Compensation for crop damage during works was based on the market value of crops. The cost of trees was based
    on a prescribed government rate.
6


                  II.     EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.     Relevance of Design and Formulation

19.     The PCR rated the project relevant to the objectives of the governments of Madhya
Pradesh and India for the power sector. At appraisal and completion, the ADB sector and country
strategies for the power sector were also focused on removing transmission bottlenecks through
better utilization of existing and planned generating stations. The project was to improve the
efficiency of the transmission system and, thus, enhance system availability and reduce technical
losses. The project's proposed outcome was consistent with the country's development priorities
and to the ADB country and sector strategies. Project design was generally sound. Additional
outputs were implemented with minor changes in scope (para. 9).On these bases, this validation
assesses the project relevant.

B.     Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcome and Outputs

20.      The PCR rated the project effective because the outcome was achieved as defined in the
DMF. Project outcomes and outputs were modified in PFR3 from those in the RRP. In the DMF
of PFR3, it was indicated that project outcomes were (i) an improvement in operational
efficiency, voltage profile, and power capacity of Madhya Pradesh; and (ii) an improvement in
TRANSCO's financial position. The PCR retained the performance indicators pertaining to
transmission aspects, such as increased transmission capacity, enhanced system availability,
and reduced technical losses. However, PFR3 added the following indicators for TRANSCO's
financial position: debt service coverage ratio of 1.2 to be maintained from 2007 onward, and a
self-financing ratio of 20% (3 years moving average capital expenditure) to be maintained from
2010 onward.

21.     The PCR indicated that transmission capacity increased to 10,200 MW, which resulted in
meeting the peak demand of 9,484 MW during 2012­2013. It also indicated that system
availability rose to 99.44% in 2013 from 97.5% during 2008­2009 while technical losses
decreased to 3.3% in 2013 from 5.2% during 2005­2006. All physical outputs in terms of
transmission lines, substations, and transformers; and the institutional and human resource
outputs that were in PFR3 were also achieved. The PCR noted that the debt service coverage
ratio was achieved although efforts are being exerted to comply with the self-financing ratio in the
future (PCR, Appendix 2). Nonetheless, cost savings were realized, which were subsequently
used to finance other subprojects (para. 12). On the whole, this validation assesses the project
effective.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

22.     The PCR rated the project efficient. It indicated that all components were operating
continuously at their rated capacities since the date of commissioning. The economic internal
rate of return (EIRR) was reestimated at 19.28%, higher than the 14.9% calculated at appraisal.
The PCR noted that benefits exceeded levels expected at appraisal because of reductions in
transmission losses to 3.3% in 2013 from 5.23% in 2006 (PCR, para. 31). The project was
completed without significant delays and without cost overruns.

23.    The PCR did not provide an appendix where details of the EIRR calculation in terms of
methodology and assumptions were discussed. However, the South Asia Regional Department
provided spreadsheets where the EIRR was calculated, but the methodology used did not
comply with the ADB methodology for calculating EIRRs. For example, project benefits were
                                                                                                   7


measured in terms of the electricity tariff. The correct approach would have been to value these
in terms of the variable cost of generation. Capital, operating and maintenance, and benefits
were not shadow priced. Also, it was not clear whether interest during construction and
environmental and social costs were accounted for.

24.      Nonetheless, the project's original envisaged scheme was completed without any scale of
delays, except for two lines, which were intended at improving the transmission system's
operational efficiency and easing up the overloading of existing systems (PCR, paras. 16 and
32). Also, the project was completed below the estimated project cost (para. 10). On the whole,
this validation assesses the project efficient.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

25.     The PCR rated the project likely sustainable both technically and financially over the long
term. It indicated that the design of all subprojects and the technology adopted were robust and
appropriate, given the complexities of the power sector. Likewise, the technical specifications of
equipment procured and commissioned meant that the technology was unlikely to become
obsolete over its expected life span. The PCR noted that TRANSCO had in-house capacity to
operate and maintain the subprojects effectively. It also noted that human, institutional, and
financial resources were sufficient to maintain the outcome over the economic lifetime of the
project, and risks were manageable.

26.     The PCR noted that the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) was reevaluated at
15.75%, above TRANSCO's 3.35% weighted average cost of capital, although it did not provide
details of the FIRR calculation, methodology, and assumptions. During the validation process,
the South Asia Regional Department provided spreadsheets where the FIRR was calculated, but
the methodology used did not comply with the ADB methodology for calculating FIRRs. For
example, revenue was estimated as the sum of depreciation, interest payments, and return on
equity. However, an assessment of the financial performance of TRANSCO provided by the
South Asia Regional Department indicated that the self-financing ratio was well above the
covenanted 20%. Given these factors, this validation assesses the project likely sustainable.

E.     Impact

27.       The PCR rated the project's impact significant. It indicated that the project increased the
energy transmission capacity of Madhya Pradesh, which contributed in sustaining its economic
growth, social development, and in meeting its energy demand growth. The PCR noted that the
state-compounded annual growth rate was 8.5% for 2007-2012. This was above the target of
6% gross state product for the same period, although solely attributing this to the project may be
difficult.

28.    The PCR also noted that the energy deficit was reduced since the peak demand of 9,484
MW was met successfully during 2012-2013. Likewise, it indicated that investment in
transmission capacity contributed to reduced leakages of sulfur hexafluoride from transformers.
As such, the project contributed to the general improvement in environmental conditions.
However, it was not possible to quantify these environmental benefits in the absence of data
from TRANSCO (PCR, para. 39). Based on these observations, this validation assesses the
impact significant.
8


                           III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.        Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

29.     The PCR rated the overall performance of the borrower and executing agency
satisfactory. All project components were constructed and commissioned successfully and,
generally, within budget and on time. TRANSCO demonstrated its capacity and capability to
formulate and appraise; arrange counterpart finance; and carry out engineering, procurement,
and construction of a variety of technically complex projects while conforming to approved
specifications and standards to the satisfaction of ADB. This validation concurs with the
satisfactory rating.

B.        Performance of the Asian Development Bank

30.     The PCR rated the overall performance of ADB satisfactory. ADB regularly monitored the
project's progress through reviews and quarterly progress reports. It provided useful advice in
several areas, including procurement and project management. ADB provided timely approvals
that enabled project milestones to be achieved and this contributed to smooth project execution.
ADB, TRANSCO, and officials from the Ministry of Power and Department of Economic Affairs
conducted tripartite meetings, which also facilitated project implementation. This validation
concurs with the satisfactory rating.

                IV.   OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.        Overall Assessment and Ratings

31.     The PCR rated the project successful. The validation has the same rating. No deviation
was seen between the ratings of the PCR and this validation on the evaluation criteria. This
validation finds the PCR ratings consistent with the performance of the project. The project was
implemented as conceived and completed on time. It was completed below the estimated project
cost. Additional works were made possible from project savings. Envisaged outcomes were
generally achieved while all outputs were completed. TRANSCO was also assessed to have the
capacity to operate and maintain the project in the future. At the same time, this validation notes
that the bulk of planned energy generation expansion in Madhya Pradesh will be coal-fired
thermal plants (RRP, para. 9). In the future, ADB may need to take a more cautious approach in
supporting energy projects to contribute to decarbonizing efforts by not--directly or indirectly--
funding coal-power generation, as called for by the Special Adviser to the United Nations
Secretary-General.9

                                               Overall Ratings
     Criteria                                 PCR            IED Review        Reason for Disagreement
                                                                                  and/or Comments
    Relevance                          Relevant           Relevant
    Effectiveness in achieving         Effective          Effective
    outcome and outputs
    Efficiency in achieving outcome    Efficient          Efficient
    and outputs
    Preliminary assessment of          Likely             Likely sustainable
    sustainability                     sustainable
    Overall assessment                 Successful         Successful
9
    http://lnadbg1.adb.org/oer0012p.nsf/0/7D00250AE1F8FC1D48257E990001358B/$file/6Aug-business-mirror-rev.pdf
                                                                                                          9


     Criteria                               PCR              IED Review        Reason for Disagreement
                                                                                  and/or Comments
  Impact                             Significant         Significant
  Borrower and executing agency      Satisfactory        Satisfactory
  Performance of ADB                 Satisfactory        Satisfactory
  Quality of PCR                                         Less than            Refer to para. 35.
                                                         satisfactory
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.        Lessons

32.     The PCR suggested a number of lessons. Four lessons related to environmental
safeguards, seven were on social safeguards, and several others related to project management
practices. In this validation's view, these lessons did not seem to be lessons but were more of
recommendations. Moreover, the basis for these lessons and/or recommendations was not clear
as the PCR did not highlight the related issues. One of the PCR lessons also stated that the
advanced procurement action helped in the timely project execution and should be adopted for
future projects. Since advanced procurement action is a common feature of ADB-financed
projects, this does not seem to be a lesson. The PCR also stated that TRANSCO was of the
view that MFFs were appropriate for managing a large infrastructure projects and helped
TRANSCO to be in a state of project readiness, and contributed to savings on commitment fees
and interest cost. This also does not seem to be a lesson.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Up

33.     The PCR recommended that the project be monitored because the project resulted in
positive socioeconomic impacts in the project area. The PCR had no other recommendations.
This validation has no recommendations to offer based on the content of the PCR.

                       V.      OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.        Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

34.     A project performance management system was covenanted under the loan agreement
to be established within 3 months from the date of effectivity. Indicators and targets in the project
performance management system were to be the ones stipulated in the DMF. The PCR stated
that the covenant for the project performance management system was complied with but it did
not discuss the design, implementation, and utilization of the project performance management
system in the report.

B.        Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

35.     The major shortcoming of the PCR was the lack of background information on the
methodology and assumptions of the EIRR and FIRR calculations. In addition, it did not make an
assessment of the financial performance of TRANSCO. There was also no assessment of the
project performance management system. Likewise, the lessons identified were not supported by
the text of the PCR, and lessons seemed to be recommendations.On these bases, this validation
rates the PCR less than satisfactory.
10


C.     Data Sources for Validation
36.    Data sources included the RRP, PCR, and loan review mission reports.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

37.     The PCR did not recommend that a project performance evaluation be undertaken.
However, it recommended that a benefit monitoring and evaluation study be undertaken after all
benefits and impacts were achieved by all tranches of the MFF after mid-2016 so that
socioeconomic benefits and the lessons learned could be assessed. This validation suggests
that a project performance evaluation be undertaken in 2017 when the MFF is completed.
