Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-326
Project Number: 37066
Loan Number: 2248
October 2014




Multitranche Financing Facility
India: Rural Road Sector II Investment Program
(Project 1)




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB        ­   Asian Development Bank
              CPF        ­   community participation framework
              CSP        ­   country strategy and program
              EIRR       ­   economic internal rate of return
              km         ­   kilometer
              MFF        ­   multitranche financing facility
              MORD       ­   Ministry of Rural Development
              PCR        ­   project completion report
              PIC        ­   project implementation consultant
              PIU        ­   project implementation unit
              PMGSY      ­   Pradhan Mantri Gram Yojana (Prime Minister's Rural
                             Roads Program)
              TSC        ­   technical support consultant


                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                           Key Words

adb, asian development bank, assam, independent evaluation department, india, lessons, mord,
orissa, performance evaluation, pmgsy, project completion report, rural road, west bengal




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                              PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:             37066                 PCR Circulation Date:  Mar 2012
Loan Number:                2248                  PCR Validation Date:   Oct 2014
Project Name:               Rural Road Sector II Investment Program (Project 1)
Country:                    India                                           Approved                           Actual
                                                                            ($ million)                      ($ million)
Sector:                     Transport and ICT     Total Project Costs:        250.2                           233.4

ADB Financing:              ADF:       0.0            Loan:                                 180.0            173.9
($ million)                                           Borrower:                              70.2             59.5
                            OCR: 180.0                Beneficiaries:                          0.0              0.0
                                                      Others:                                 0.0               0.0
Cofinancier:                                          Total Cofinancing:                      0.0               0.0
Approval Date:              31 Jul 2006               Effectiveness Date:             90 days from         18 Oct 2006
                                                                                      loan agreement
Signing Date:               29 Aug 2006               Closing Date:                   31 Dec 2008          30 Jun 2009
Project Officers:                                     Location:                            From              To
                            H. Iwasaki                ADB headquarters                   Aug 2006         Jan 2009
                            O. Tonkonojenkov          ADB headquarters                   Feb 2009         Dec 2009
Validators:                 B. Palacios,              Peer Reviewer:                  P. V. Srinivasan, Evaluation
                              Consultant                                                Specialist, IED2
                            F. D. De Guzman,
                            Senior Evaluation
                              Officer, IED2
Quality Reviewer:           E. Gozali, Principal      Director:                       B. Finlayson, IED2
                              Evaluation
                              Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; ICT = information and communication technology;
IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 1; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2; OCR
= ordinary capital resources; PCR = project completion report.

                                        I.        PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Rationale

1.      India's road network consisted of national highways, a secondary system of state
highways and major district roads, and a tertiary system consisting mainly of rural roads. In the
rural areas, where 70% of India's population lived, many villages relied on earth tracks that were
unsuitable for motorized traffic and unpassable in the rainy season. During project preparation,
about 40% of 850,000 habitations1 did not have all-weather roads. In areas with all-weather road
connections, the road standard was low, maintenance was poor, and many roads needed
rehabilitation. These conditions cut off rural communities from economic centers, thus slowing
growth and development.

2.      The tertiary road in India covered about 2.7 million kilometers (km), most of which were
rural roads. A typical rural road network consisted of zilla parishad roads, gram panchayat roads,




1
    A habitation is a distinct cluster of population with houses, occupying an area, having a local name. In the rural
    areas, a village may include more than one habitation.
2


and community roads. 2 Under India's Constitution, the panchayati raj institutions were to
manage the rural roads. However, most states retained these rural roads under their respective
jurisdiction and responsibility.

3.       The Prime Minister's Rural Roads Program (PMGSY) was launched in 2000 to address
the lack of rural road connectivity. To fund the PMGSY, an estimated Rs1,320 billion or about
$30 billion was required. Fifty percent of special excise duty on high-speed diesel was identified
as a source of funding. However, this was estimated to be only about Rs24 billion annually or
$0.5 billion, which was not sufficient. The government sought funding assistance from external
agencies such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB). In 2003, ADB approved the Rural Roads
Sector 1 Project3 to improve about 1,000 km of PMGSY roads in the states of Chhattisgarh and
Madhya Pradesh.

4.     The government requested ADB for a multitranche financing facility (MFF) of $750 million
over a 5-year period. ADB approved the MFF on 31 July 20064 to finance the first tranche of the
MFF for the states of Assam, Orissa, and West Bengal. The MFF, under each subsequent
tranche or subproject, was to cover about one-third of the annual financing required for the
planned investment program. It was an appropriate instrument for long-term cofinancing of a
government program involving multiple state agencies since it allowed for predictable financing
sources and a more flexible financing arrangement.

B.        Expected Impact

5.      The envisaged impact of the MFF and the first tranche was to help reduce poverty and
deprivation, and support the economic growth of rural communities connected by the road
investment program. About 3­4 years after completion of the subproject, poverty rates in the
areas connected by the project roads were expected to decrease by 5%. Social indicators in
rural areas served by the investment program roads, such as maternal and infant deaths, safe
delivery, immunization rates, post-primary dropout, and primary school teacher attendance,
were expected to improve by 10%.

C.        Objectives or Expected Outcome

6.      The expected outcome for the MFF, including the first tranche, was improved
connectivity of rural communities to markets, district headquarters, and other centers of
economic activity via the road investment program. Outcome targets were all-weather roads for
habitations with a population of 1,000 and more, and better access to markets and health and
education facilities, to be measured by lesser disruption of access to these facilities (from 25% of
the year to less than 15 days a year). Another performance indicator was diversified income
opportunities in rural areas to be measured in the number of people obtaining work outside the
village and changes in cropping pattern and agricultural-produce marketing.




2
    A panchayat is an assembly of the village elders, directly elected by the people of the village. Gram panchayats
    refer to those at the village level, intermediate panchayats are those at the block level, and the zilla panchayats
    are at the district level. They are collectively called the panchayati raj institutions.
3
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the
    Rural Roads Sector I Project. Manila.
4
     ADB. 2005. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
    Financing Facility to India for the Rural Roads Sector II Investment Program. Manila.
                                                                                                           3


D.        Outputs

7.      The MFF was designed with two major components. First, the road connectivity
component focused on building and upgrading rural roads to all-weather standard. This was to
be implemented in batches, generally coinciding with the PMGSY annual project approval and
fund allocation cycle. The first MFF tranche or subproject (which is being validated) was to cover
3,144 km. The whole MFF was to cover about 30,000 km and connect about 19,000 habitations.
The remaining subprojects or tranches were to be implemented in the subsequent three annual
batches of future MFF-financed projects.

8.     The second component was for capacity building to assist local agencies in
implementing the subproject. Technical support in the form of consultant services in road safety
and impact monitoring, among others, was to be provided. Another intended output was greater
community participation, putting in place a better community consultation process, which would
be evidenced by the community's higher satisfaction of the process.

E.        Provision of Inputs

9.      ADB was to finance civil works of the planned 3,200 km of rural roads, and provide 12
person-month inputs of technical support consultants (TSC) to each participating state under the
capacity-building component. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at $250.2 million,
with a foreign currency exchange cost of $194.2 million and a local currency cost equivalent of
$56.0 million. Of the $180 million ADB loan, $179.6 million was to fund the road connectivity
component and $0.4 million for the capacity-building component. Civil works were expected to
be completed by the end of 2007. At completion, ADB financed $173.7 million of the civil works,
$0.2 million for the capacity-building component while $6.1 million was canceled.

10.      The project was completed at a cost of $233.4 million, 6.7% lower than the appraisal cost
of $250.2 million. The lower cost was attributed to the shorter road length completed. Some work
packages were either moved to later tranches of the MFF or funded by the government later on.
Despite the lower overall cost, the unit cost of road construction was actually higher because of
engineering revisions and escalation of material prices. Civil works commenced one quarter late
for the three states and completion took 2 years longer than scheduled. The monsoon rains and
peace and order problems in a few project areas exacerbated implementation bottlenecks. The
government's internal process delayed the mobilization of the TSCs by 15 months. The
government was to pass on loan proceeds in local currency to the Ministry of Rural Development
(MORD). MORD, in turn, was to pass on the proceeds to the governments of the participating
states on a grant basis. The government was to shoulder the foreign exchange risk on the loans.

11.     The TSCs were made up of environment specialists, social development experts, and
road safety experts. They provided technical support to the project implementation units (PIUs)
in road safety, and trained contractors on social and environment safeguard requirements. The
TSCs also conducted an impact and monitoring survey and a traffic survey. At completion, the
TSCs provided 92.8 person-months of services. The project completion report (PCR)5 rated their
performance highly satisfactory.




5
    ADB. 2012. Completion Report: Rural Roads Sector II Investment Program (Project 1) in India. Manila.
4


12.    The project's environmental impact was assessed as category B in accordance with
ADB's Environmental Assessment Guidelines (2003).6 An environment code of practice checklist
and an initial environmental examination indicated that the rural roads would not generate any
adverse environmental impact. Also, no affected persons were relocated because of the minor
scale of land acquired for shoulder adjustment and drainage construction (PCR, Appendix 7,
page 27, Status of Compliance on Loan Covenants item 12).

13.    A total of 392 civil works contracts were awarded. The PCR indicated that, in general, the
contractors' performance with respect to deployment of personnel, supervision, checking quality
of work, and field inspections, was considered satisfactory.

F.        Implementation Arrangements

14.     As proposed at appraisal, the executing agencies responsible for supervising and
executing the project were the MORD at the central level and the governments of Assam,
Orissa, and West Bengal at the state level. The National Rural Roads Development Agency was
to provide technical and management support. A coordination committee chaired by the MORD
joint secretary was to be set up within 3 months of loan effectiveness. The committee was to
monitor the use of loan funds and overall project implementation.

15.     The implementing agencies were to be the state rural road development agencies in the
three states. Each state was to establish a project implementation committee chaired by the
executive officer of the state rural road development agency. The district PIUs of the
implementing agencies were to perform the technical work. During implementation, the National
Rural Roads Development Agency engaged a TSC to support PIUs. The implementation
arrangements were carried out as planned. The necessary counterpart staff was made available
and the coordination committees at the central and state levels were established under PMGSY
guidelines.

16.     Of the 44 covenants in the loan agreement, 2 covenants were not complied with because
project implementation consultants (PICs) were not engaged as anticipated. Implementing
agencies were to engage PICs who were experts in social development and environmental
management to help implement the provisions of the community participation framework and the
environmental assessment and review framework. They were to (i) prepare additional
subprojects, (ii) supervise civil works, and (iii) support social and environmental safeguard and
road safety. This noncompliance with the engagement of the PICs did not create any major
problem. The PIUs were able to carry out the tasks using their own resources.

17.     For environmental safeguards, an environmental specialist visited the project states
during implementation. Likewise, the checklists for the environment code of practice were
completed for all roads. Environment mitigation measures have been incorporated in the project
design. The PCR indicated that an ADB mission conducting a detailed review of environmental
safeguards did not find adverse environmental impact. On land acquisition, the PCR reported
that communities and/or households agreed to voluntarily contribute land for the road
construction; this was confirmed by verbal and written records and verified by gram panchayats
(village or small town governments). Landowners and non-titled people were consulted on site

6
    Projects under category B are judged to have some adverse environmental impacts, but of lesser degree and/or
    significance than those for category A projects. An initial environmental examination (IEE) is required to determine
    whether significant environmental impacts warranting an environmental impact assessment (EIA) are likely. If an
    EIA is not needed, the IEE is regarded as the final environmental assessment report.
                                                                                                          5


selection. Grievance redress mechanisms were in place in villages, and proper attempts were
made at implementing community participation frameworks.7 The implementing agency ensured
that voluntary land donations and/or transfers were transparent, properly documented, and
avoided any kind of coercion.

                      II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.         Relevance of Design and Formulation

18.      The PCR rated the project highly relevant, noting that it was consistent with the
government's Tenth Five-Year Plan 2002­2007 and ADB's country strategy and program (CSP)
for India. The project supported the PMGSY, the government's program to address the lack of
rural road connectivity. The project was also in line with the poverty reduction programs of ADB
and the government. The project was implemented in three states that had a higher poverty
incidence than the national rate. Agriculture and rural development was a key sector in ADB's
CSP 2003­2006 for India. The CSP recognized that rural development was important to
mainstream poverty reduction. To complement the government's Tenth Five-Year Plan, ADB
assistance focused on promoting equitable growth by supporting, among others, rural
infrastructure in states with high poverty incidence.

19.     This validation finds the MFF modality appropriate. The government established the
national rural roads program, which covered a large number of subprojects to be implemented
by several state agencies with differing absorption capacity, skill levels, and financial
preparedness. The MFF approach allowed for greater flexibility in financing and implementation
arrangements and enabled the central and state governments to focus on rural development
policies.

20.      This validation, however, noted that the implementation of the MFF tranche 1 did not
progress as expediently as envisaged. The PCR (paras. 14­16 and 42­46) enumerated various
implementation challenges arising from risks, which should have been known from past ADB
projects in the sector, especially under the PMGSY--including design issues such as (i) the
need for more time to complete each subproject on average, (ii) delays caused by the required
relocation of electricity poles, (iii) the need for an allowance to cover escalation of material prices
and prevent underfunding of contracts, and (iv) limited availability of good contractors. As a
result, the PCR, in Appendix 1, suggested that the whole MFF covers only 13,198 km instead of
about 30,000 km originally envisaged at appraisal. Given the prospect of a more conservative
MFF coverage and design issues, this validation rates subproject 1 relevant instead of highly
relevant.

B.         Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcomes and Outputs

21.     The PCR rated the project highly effective. A total of 2,927.13 km of all-weather rural
roads were constructed and upgraded (941.86 km in Assam, 1,199.35 km in Orissa, and 785.92
km in West Bengal) under the project, benefiting 1,503 habitations (527 in Assam, 276 in Orissa,
and 700 in West Bengal). This fell a bit short of the targeted outputs of 3,144 km envisaged for
construction and 1,769 habitations connected. However, the PCR8 indicated that the number of
beneficiaries was 40% more than the original estimate because larger habitations were
connected and the original estimates were inaccurate.

7
    PCR, Appendix 7, page 27, Status of Compliance on Loan Covenants item 13.
8
    PCR, para. 7.
6



22.     The design and monitoring framework recorded an achievement of another outcome
metric: improved access to markets, and no disruption (zero days per year) to health and
education facilities. A higher percentage of inhabitants employed outside their households (1%
higher) indicated that income opportunities were diversified. Over the 6-month period, the
number of days of employment per year increased by 10 days.

23.     Aside from the 7% shortfall in road length, two other output metrics pertaining to road
quality were achieved. The result of the fourth output goal, which was to improve community
consultation--to be measured by satisfaction of affected communities--was not clearly
measured. The PCR reported that the community participation framework was introduced to all
affected communities. On the whole, this validation rates the project effective.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

24.     The PCR rated the project efficient. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was
reestimated at 21.4% for the entire project. The appraisal EIRR was 18% and the higher-than-
expected traffic volume resulted in a higher EIRR at completion. However, this validation notes
that 10% was added to vehicle operating costs and time cost savings to reflect other benefits
such as socioeconomic development in the project area, poverty reduction, reduced accident
cost, and savings in maintenance costs for the without-project case. This is arbitrary and needs
careful justification.

25.     Monsoon rains and peace and order problems in a few project areas delayed project
implementation (para. 10). For the civil works component, the actual completion date was about
18 months later than scheduled at appraisal (PCR, para. 16). For the capacity-building
component, the PCR indicated that the TSC was mobilized in April 2007 instead of January
2006 as envisaged at appraisal, and completed service on 31 March 2009. Notwithstanding
these, the project's economic benefits appear to be of sufficient magnitude. Thus, this validation
rates the project efficient.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

26.     The PCR rated the project likely sustainable in view of the PMGSY's continuous
implementation with the assistance of development partners. Contractors were to maintain the
roads built under the PMGSY for 5 years after construction and, after this 5-year liability period,
state rural road development agencies were to be responsible for operation and maintenance.
The PCR noted that project roads were well maintained and the funds and capacity for road
maintenance were generally sufficient. The PCR highlighted certain risks of possible funding
gaps in operation and maintenance--between the end of the 5-year maintenance period by
contractors and continued funding from routine budgets. There is also sustainability risk from
road damages caused by the higher-than-expected traffic volume. Under the ongoing PMGSY
program, attention needs to be paid to these risks. Overall, this validation rates the project likely
sustainable.

E.     Impact

27.      The PCR did not rate the project's impact. No adverse environmental impact was
reported as mitigation measures were put in place and adequate drainage measures were
incorporated in project design. The roads also improved many aspects of socioeconomic
activities in the rural area.
                                                                                                    7


28.    The design and monitoring framework indicators for impact (para. 5) showed some
improvements in school completion rates for grades 5 to 12. These were below the 10%
expected improvement although a positive change in all levels ranging from 2% to 4% was
noted. The PCR also reported a 2% increase in hospital visits, which it attributed to better
accessibility.

29.     The TSC conducted in 2009 a socioeconomic impact survey to assess between May
2008 and January 2009 the project's impact on road users and inhabitants living along the road.
An ADB mission validated the results in May 2011. Socioeconomic indicators of project villages
showed positive changes and while these changes could not be attributed to the project alone,
the project was a major factor. The after-project conditions showed that project villages were
connected by public transportation, high school enrollment was higher, there were new private
schools, land value was higher, access to finance was better, agricultural output was higher, and
security improved. Health services were also more accessible, contributing to improved neonatal
and maternal health. Ambulatory care was also reported to be quick and dependable. This
validation rates the project impact significant.

                      III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

30.     The PCR rated the performance of the borrower highly satisfactory. Counterpart funds
and support were provided in a timely manner. The executing agency complied with specific
project implementation covenants especially on timely provision of sufficient support and funds
from the central government. The central and the state coordinating committees were set up as
agreed and the project was implemented according to PMGSY guidelines. All financial, and
performance monitoring and progress reports were submitted as required. This validation rates
borrower performance highly satisfactory.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

31.     The PCR rated ADB's overall performance highly satisfactory. ADB fielded 3 specific
consultation missions, 10 review missions, and 2 PCR missions. The PCR noted that ADB
conducted regular procurement and disbursement audits and provided substantial advice during
the different stages of project implementation. This validation rates ADB's performance highly
satisfactory.

         IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Overall Assessment and Ratings

32.     Overall, this validation rates the project successful, the same rating given by the PCR.
This validation gives lower ratings for relevance and effectiveness. This validation rates the
project relevant. The project was consistent with the country and sector strategies, including
ADB country and sector assistance strategies. However, weaknesses were noted in project
design such as insufficient attention to design alternatives. This validation rates the project
effective, lower than the PCR's rating of highly effective. The PCR did not discuss the
effectiveness of the capacity-building component. It appears that the capacity of road agencies
remain unchanged. This validation rates the project efficient and likely sustainable (see table).
8


                                                Overall Ratings
    Criteria                        PCR             IED Review        Reason for Disagreement and/or
                                                                                   Comments
    Relevance                 Highly relevant     Relevant         There is concern of a mismatch
                                                                   between the scale of interventions
                                                                   proposed at appraisal (funding,
                                                                   technical solution, risk mitigation) for
                                                                   the MFF and outputs realized (para.
                                                                   20).
    Effectiveness in          Highly effective    Effective        Outcomes were achieved but the scale
    achieving project                                              of output (road coverage) was lesser
    outcome and outputs                                            than expected. The extent of citizen
                                                                   participation is not fully known (paras.
                                                                   21­23).
    Efficiency in achieving   Efficient           Efficient
    outcome and outputs
    Preliminary assessment    Likely              Likely
    of sustainability         sustainable         sustainable
    Overall Assessment        Successful          Successful
    Borrower and executing    Highly              Highly
    agency                    satisfactory        satisfactory
    Performance of ADB        Highly              Highly
                              satisfactory        satisfactory
    Impact                    Not rated           Significant
    Quality of PCR                                Satisfactory     Refer to para. 36.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, MFF = multitranche financing facility,
PCR = project completion report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.        Lessons

33.     The PCR drew out five valuable lessons. First, a longer implementation period of 15­18
months is more realistic than the stipulated 12 months. Second, the methodology for traffic
forecasts should be strengthened, taking into account the previous under forecasting of traffic
volume. Third, the capacity of the construction industry should be increased substantially to
address constraints in construction and maintenance. Fourth, utility relocation and preparation to
address these needs should be done during the early stages of the project. Fifth, there should
be adequate consideration for price escalations. This validation agrees with the lessons and
finds them appropriate.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Up

34.    This validation agrees with the following PCR recommendations: (i) baseline surveys
should be carried out before or at the start of project implementation; (ii) capacity building for
maintenance and state-based research and training on rural roads and road network
management at the central level should be emphasized. This validation offers no additional
recommendation.
                                                                                                   9


                    V.     OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

35.     As covenanted, monitoring of the socioeconomic impact, including baseline and follow-
up surveys, was carried out and reports were submitted to ADB. Independent consultants and
auditors also conducted project performance audits annually; and audited financial reports were
submitted to ADB. Implementing agencies submitted monthly progress reports regularly. There
was no discussion of a project benefit monitoring system. The design and monitoring framework
was generally satisfactory although some areas could have been strengthened by providing
more specific and measurable impact and outcome indicators and performance targets.

B.     Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

36.     This validation rates the PCR quality satisfactory. The PCR generally followed the PCR
guidelines under Project Administration Instructions 6.07. However, the discussion on the
project's relevance and effectiveness is rather limited and did not give adequate evidence to
support the highly relevant and highly effective ratings. The PCR offered sufficient information
and a clear perspective on compliance with loan conditions. It also gave useful lessons and
recommendations for future interventions. In quantifying economic benefits, the PCR added a
10% extra benefit to account for other socioeconomic benefits. While reasonable in amount,
these benefits need to be better specified. Also, the PCR could have provided more information
on the project's capacity-building achievement.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

37.    Data sources for this validation included the project's report and recommendation of the
President, the PCR, the report of the PCR mission, and the Country Strategy and Program 2003­
2006 for India.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

38.     The PCR recommended a project performance evaluation. This validation is of the view
that a project performance evaluation is not necessary. Instead, a project performance
evaluation report for the whole MFF would be more useful.
