Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-348
Project Number: 40655
Loan Numbers: 2404 and 2509
November 2014




India: India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility




Independent Evaluation Department
                                         ABBREVIATIONS

      ADB                  ­       Asian Development Bank
      DFI                  ­       development finance institution
      DMF                  ­       design and monitoring framework
      ESSF                 ­       environmental and social safeguard framework
      IIFCL                ­       India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd.
      IIPFF                ­       India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility
      MFF                  ­       multitranche financing facility
      MOF                  ­       Ministry of Finance
      PCR                  ­       project completion report
      PPP                  ­       public­private partnership
      RRP                  ­       report and recommendation of the President
      TA                   ­       technical assistance


                                                NOTE

                               In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                            Key Words

asian development bank, adb, country assistance program evaluation, development finance
institution, india, india infrastructure finance company ltd, india infrastructure project financing
facility, project completion report, private sector participation, public­private partnership, report
and recommendation of the president, technical assistance




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                            PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:          40655                    PCR Circulation Date:           Nov 2012
Loan Numbers:            2404 and 2509            PCR Validation Date:            Nov 2014
Project Name:            India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility
Country:                 India                                                      Approved            Actual
                                                                                    ($ million)       ($ million)
Sector:                  Multisector                Total Project Costs:              500.00             500.00
ADB Financing:           ADF:      0.00             Loan:                              500.00             500.00
($ million)
                                                    Borrower:                             0.00              0.00
                         OCR: 500.00                Beneficiaries:                        0.00              0.00
                                                    Others:                               0.00              0.00
Cofinancier:                                        Total Cofinancing:                    0.00              0.00
Approval Date:                                      Effectiveness Date:
      IIPFF                      14 Dec 2007                 2404                 3 Mar 2008        14 Apr 2008
      2404                       20 Dec 2007                 2509                 26 Feb 2009       20 Mar 2009
      2509                       24 Feb 2009
Signing Date:                                       Closing Date:
      2404                        3 Mar 2008                 2404                 30 Oct 2009      15 Jan 2010
      2509                       26 Feb 2009                 2509                 30 Nov 2011 26 Aug 2011
Project Officer:                                    Location:                         From:             To:
                         C. Kim                     ADB headquarters              Feb 2009         Nov 2011
Validators:              R. Limjoco, Consultant     Peer Reviewer:                L. Hauck, Senior Evaluation
                         F. D. De Guzman,                                            Specialist, IED2
                            Senior
                            Evaluation Officer,
                            IED2
Quality                  B. Nguyen, Senior          Director:                     B. Finlayson, IED2
Reviewer:                   Evaluation
                            Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 2; IIPFF = India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility; OCR = ordinary capital resources; PCR = project
completion report.

                                       I.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Rationale

1.      The India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility (IIPFF) was designed to directly
support the government's infrastructure development agenda that was anchored on increasing
private sector participation in infrastructure via public­private partnerships (PPPs).1 This was
to be undertaken by the provision of much-needed long-term funds for infrastructure financing
through the India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. (IIFCL). Insufficient and poor quality of
infrastructure had constricted India's growth potential in the recent past. Hence, the
Government of India decided to address this shortcoming under the country's 11th five-year
plan. The country had an underdeveloped, long-term debt market and long-term sources of
finance were considered to be critical in pursuing its infrastructure agenda. Consequently, the

1
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Multitranche
    Financing Facility to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited for the India Infrastructure Project Financing
    Facility. Manila.
2


IIFCL was set up to promote PPP projects and help raise long-term finance for infrastructure
through an ADB-supported multitranche financing facility (MFF).

B.         Expected Impact

2.       The expected impact of the IIPFF was catalyzing an investment of $2.5 billion­$3.5
billion from the private sector to finance PPP projects. If successfully implemented, this facility
was to result in a convergence of investors and yield additional investments, including those
from the World Bank, Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), and KfW as indicated in
the report and recommendation of the President (RRP). The impact indicators were expected to
be accomplished during the Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007­2012. These indicators were (i)
reduction in peak and average energy deficit, (ii) achievement of target seaport capacity of 1,300
million tons per annum, (iii) widening of national highways in line with the National Highways
Development Project, (iv) achievement of national urban transport policy goals, and (v)
increased private sector investment in infrastructure by 30% of overall infrastructure investment.

C.         Objectives or Expected Outcomes

3.      The project's expected outcomes were (i) increased private sector participation in
infrastructure development through PPPs, (ii) contained and reduced fiscal deficit through
private sector participation in infrastructure, (iii) improved lending terms of IIFCL for
infrastructure subprojects, (iv) improved IIFCL capacity through relevant technical assistance
(TA) support to ensure that ADB funds were used for subprojects that conformed to
environmental and social safeguard framework (ESSF), and (v) improved resource
management and project risk assessment capabilities in IIFCL.

4.       Targeted outcome indicators for the respective expected outcomes were (i) contribution
in achieving the targeted 9% gross domestic product growth during 11th five-year plan;
(ii) contribution in achieving the fiscal deficit target of 3% gross domestic product in line with
the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act of 2003 by 31 March 2009;
(iii) reduction in average borrowing costs for IIFCL and improvement in availability of finance
for infrastructure, including increased duration of financing provided by IIFCL for subprojects
during the 11th five-year plan; (iv) IIFCL staff are able to understand the ESSF and are using it
to assess proposed subprojects during FY2009­FY2010, including year-to-year improvement
in the number of assessed subprojects complying with ESSF between FY2008 and FY2011,
and development of risk management system; and (v) reduction in duration gap between asset
and liability portfolio of IIFCL between FY2008 and FY2011, including enhanced processes,
systems, and staff capacity for subproject risk assessment and improvements in asset profile,
liquidity indicators, and value at risk indicators between FY2008 and FY2011. The
development of risk management system for IIFCL was included in the design and monitoring
framework (DMF) of the project completion report (PCR).2

D.         Outputs

5.      The following outputs were envisaged in the DMF of the RRP: (i) high-quality
infrastructure assets created in various subsectors across the country; (ii) availability of long-
term funding to IIFCL and improved ability of IIFCL to provide long-term financing to
subprojects; (iii) international credit rating attained by IIFCL and periodically updated;


2
    ADB. 2012. Completion Report: India Infrastructure Project Financing Facility. Manila.
                                                                                                  3


(iv) improved financial policies, staff capacity, and risk management systems of IIFCL; and (v)
development and implementation of ESSF.

E.     Provision of Inputs

6.       Supported by a guarantee from the Government of India, an MFF of $500 million was
approved, along with a $500,000 TA support on grant basis. ADB review missions and periodic
tripartite meetings in the country--comprising the central government, executing or
implementing agency, and ADB--were to coordinate the project implementation. The MFF was
to be released in two tranches. The first tranche for $300 million was fully committed and
disbursed and the loan was closed in January 2010, about 2 months later than the planned date
of October 2009. The second tranche of $200 million was fully committed and disbursed in
August 2010, about 3 months earlier than the November 2010 expected date. One PCR was
prepared for both tranches (footnote 2), which is the subject of this validation. The PCR argued
that MFFs dealing with financial intermediaries are better handled through an overall risk
assessment and suggested the revision of relevant operational manual guidelines. However, as
the PCR discussed the facility as a whole, one does not get any insight into the progress and
dynamics of implementation under each tranche separately.

7.    It needs to be noted that the contribution of other ongoing ADB TA projects in India in
providing support for the mainstreaming of PPP projects has been catalytic. These TA projects
have helped establish PPP cells in selected states and central line ministries and provided
capacity-building support for PPP project preparation and appraisal skills, building a PPP
database, and refining the PPP policy and regulatory framework.

8.     ADB provided national consultants for 24 person-months in support of capacity building.
Special provision was made to implement environmental and social safeguards for all projects
under the project. A common, harmonized ESSF was developed in consultation with
development partners and IIFCL. Toward this end, an environmental and social safeguards
management unit was established in February 2010. The PCR noted that both ADB and IIFCL
staff visited all subproject sites to ensure compliance with the ADB safeguard requirements.

F.     Implementation Arrangements

9.     IIFCL was the borrower and executing agency for the IIPFF. Its board of directors was
to be responsible for laying down policies and providing strategic direction. A project
management unit was established within IIFCL to identify, screen, and select subprojects in
consultation with the consortium of lenders. The project management unit was to ensure
compliance with national and state policies and the ESSF, and monitor the day-to-day
implementation of the IIPFF.

10.      The PCR noted that the implementation arrangements for IIPFF were conducted in
such a manner that they fulfilled the requirements. The subprojects and subborrowers had
been selected in accordance with the scheme and agreed criteria of ADB, and followed the
ADB Procurement Guidelines as amended from time to time. The subprojects had undergone
comprehensive environmental and social safeguard due diligence. The necessary ESSF was
prepared and activities were compliant with all applicable ADB environmental and social
safeguard policies and requirements. Finally, the subprojects had complied with financial
management eligibility criteria, including the need to ensure that legal agreements include
appropriate provisions for subprojects accounting, statutory audit, and submission of certified
utilization certificates before each disbursement and report. So far, IIFCL had relied on the
4


control exercised by the lead bank, however, internal controls and audits at the subproject
level were being factored into IIFCL's monitoring and review mechanisms. Similarly, an
integrated risk management system was being developed for IIFCL.

11. There were no adverse environmental and resettlement, safeguards, governance, or
fiduciary concerns that were identified. In fact, IIPFF helped to expand the coverage of ESSF to
PPPs and private sector infrastructure in India.

                      II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

12.     The PCR rated the project highly relevant mainly on the strength of the consistency in
the strategy and programs of ADB and the Government of India for infrastructure. It argued
that the project was consistent with the country strategies and programs of ADB and the
government. Infrastructure is a core area of operation under the ADB Strategy 2020. India's
11th five-year plan also identified infrastructure development in both urban and rural areas as
a key priority. The emphasis on infrastructure development and greater use of PPPs was a
recurring theme during stakeholders' consultations for developing the India Country
Partnership Strategy (2007­2012).3 The PCR noted that despite reforms by the government,
the long-term debt market in India had remained relatively underdeveloped. Hence, demand
for long-term loans for infrastructure was expected to continue until such time that the
domestic market would be able to provide these resources. In this context, IIPFF served to
continue promoting reforms through TA projects and policy dialogue with the government.
These initiatives were expected to help promote innovative solutions for long-term local
currency markets through sustainable financial intermediary products. The PCR, however, did
not elaborate on the design and formulation of the MFF. What were envisaged to be achieved
under each of the tranches remains to be seen. In its absence, one does not know for sure if
the IIFCL has emerged in the best manner under the circumstances.

13.       For example, an important concern in designing the IIPFF could have been the value
addition when providing loans using local financial institutions as conduits. Otherwise, its
impact could be limited to the simple provision of funds. While IIFCL could be instrumental in
filling the financing gap in the short term, it could be more fruitful if it can be used to leverage
reforms in the infrastructure and capital market sectors. Similarly, IIFCL could securitize its
infrastructure investment portfolio and develop a secondary market in these securities by
acting as primary dealer in these securities. The lack of a secondary market in long-term debt
securities was identified in the RRP as a major constraint to the development of long-term debt
market. Could IIFCL have leveraged more funds and investments into infrastructure through
this facility? Some of these issues, which were at the heart of design, could have been dealt
with more explicitly in the PCR.

14.      The RRP mentioned the reforms being undertaken in the infrastructure sector to
promote PPPs. However, there was not much analysis in the PCR about the overall
constraints for developing an enabling environment for private sector participation in India and
how the government had been addressing these,4 especially those related to the inherent risks
in infrastructure investments through PPPs.


3
    See http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/projdocs/2007/37748-REG-DPTA.pdf
4
    The last Private Sector Assessment in India made by ADB was in 2003.
                                                                                                    5


15.     On the IIFCL as the vehicle of choice, it must be observed that the failure of
development finance institutions (DFIs) in the past had been due to a number of factors, such
as directed credits, subsidized or below market interest rates, and political or external
interference. Despite historical experience, these risk factors and their prevention, especially
the latter, did not appear to have been covered in the IIPFF design. Although self-regulated,
IIFCL continues to be run and directed by the government, its principal owner, through the
Ministry of Finance (MOF). There have been moves to place it under the Reserve Bank of
India's--the central bank--supervision as a financial intermediary. It is not clear how this
aspect was dealt with upon approval or during the transition to tranche 2, and in subsequent
operations related to IIFCL.

16.     In the absence of adequate details, it seems that ADB principally relied on the
government's guarantee when it provided the loan facility to IIFCL. It is apparent from the
RRP, PCR, and related technical assistance completion report, that in the beginning, IIFCL
lacked the requisite capacity to undertake project and credit risk assessment and packaged
loans, and largely depended on the lead bank or consortium leader's own assessment and
financial packaging. IIFCL also lacked the capacity to implement safeguards, which was not
addressed in the original project design even when this was known to the project team as
noted in the technical assistance completion report. No background information on the
expertise and know-how of IIFCL management and officers was provided during the
preparation of IIPFF.

17.      The organizational chart of IIFCL (RRP, Appendix 5, Figure A5) indicated that the
organization was not geared for long-term project management and development, which is
critical for managing infrastructure projects in the long run. It only had a legal and recovery
department but no unit for project supervision. This critical aspect of long-term project
financing also appears to have been relegated to the lead bank, despite the fact that IIFCL
would be holding the long end of the maturity structure.

18.     Despite the cited limitations and missing details in the project design and formulation,
this validation, nonetheless, rates the project relevant in the context of India and ADB country
strategy.

B.     Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcomes and Outputs

19.     The PCR assessed the MFF highly effective. The five outcomes envisioned for the
IIPFF were achieved. These are (i) increased private sector participation in infrastructure
development through PPPs, (ii) containing and reducing fiscal deficit through private sector
participation in infrastructure, (iii) improved lending terms of IIFCL for infrastructure
subprojects, (iv) improved capacity in IIFCL to ensure that ADB funds are used for subprojects
that conform to ESSF through relevant TA support, and (v) improved resource management
and project risk assessment capabilities in IIFCL. The PCR cited that IIFCL is now able to
undertake an independent credit risk assessment of subprojects with the development of an
internal credit rating and migration model. However, a number of the measures for defining the
project outcome were broad macroeconomic indicators (PCR, Appendix 1). Considering the
size of the IIPFF relative to the overall economic activity in India (about $2 trillion economy),
the contribution of the facility, however, was to be miniscule. Likewise, no progress was
documented in regard to improved lending terms, although funds have been made available.

20.    Nonetheless, there were some significant achievements. For example, the availability
of long-term financing to IIFCL and improved ability of IIFCL to provide long-term financing;
6


obtaining an international credit rating for IIFCL; improved financial policies, staff capacity, and
risk management systems; and the implementation of ESSF were all in line with achieving the
intended outcomes that have direct linkage with the IIPFF. Aided by a TA project support that
focused on addressing the weaknesses and deficiencies in the operation of IIFCL, the
achievement of the desired outcomes may be considered as delivering the targeted
outcomes.5

21.     While the IIPFF had been quite successful in disbursing the tranche loans, and the
project was able to leverage $5.5 billion through 30 projects, it is still premature to determine
the actual performance of supported subprojects, being too early in the life of these projects.
The IIPFF has been used mainly to finance roads and airports, perhaps due to the long
gestation period of these subprojects that more suitably matched the ADB loan maturity. The
PCR rated the project highly effective mainly due to the IIPFF achievements. However, a
number of macroeconomic indicators are difficult to measure against the intended outcomes of
IIPFF and the success of the subprojects is too early to ascertain. Thus, this validation rates
the project effective.

C.        Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outcome and Outputs

22.     The PCR rated this factor highly efficient. The IIPFF was disbursed in full ahead of
schedule with one extension of loan closing date for Loan 2404. On the downside, IIFCL was
clearly not prepared to undertake infrastructure financing at the outset, and extensive support
and resources had to be spent to address these deficiencies. As pointed out in the PCR,
during initial implementation of the IIPFF, there were delays in the approvals and
disbursement of the subprojects due to lack of capacity within IIFCL on safeguard
assessments. TA 7030 had to be extended (from the original closing of June 2009 to a later
date of September 2011) to accommodate capacity building for safeguard compliance and to
mobilize an information technology procurement needed for the risk management system.
ADB had to conduct workshops and seminars on safeguards, the ESSF, and procurement. In
addition, the government and IIFCL raised some concern about the length of the ADB
approval process.

23.      The policies and operating conditions of IIFCL were to be governed by the Scheme for
Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects through a special purpose vehicle as approved by the
government and administered by the MOF. The scheme defined eligibility criteria for
subproject selection, appraisal and monitoring by the lead bank, mode of funding, and
specified PPPs that were to be selected based on transparent and open competitive biddings.
The targeted outputs were generally implemented. However, the extent to which the outcomes
would be attained can only be measured after the subprojects started yielding benefits. IIFCL
is profitable and has obtained a BBB-/stable international credit rating and an AAA domestic
rating. This validation rates the project efficient.

D.        Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

24.    The PCR rated the project likely sustainable. Given the scarcity of long-term financing
and the continuing need for infrastructure in India due to a burgeoning population, the role of
IIFCL is likely to remain critical. With continuing government support, IIFCL has by now
secured a niche in the domestic financial markets. Nonetheless, there are underlying risks that
could derail its operation. These include the (i) risk of external or political interference, (ii) weak
5
    An overseas subsidiary has been established to support international transactions for IIFCL; likewise, a domestic
    subsidiary has been instituted to handle project management within the country.
                                                                                                       7


regulation, (iii) lack of autonomy, (iv) poor project supervision that could lead to project
failures, (v) apparent lack of capacity on the part of IIFCL to rehabilitate infrastructure projects
that may get into difficulties, (vi) and market risks. Finally, the success of this intervention
actually hinges on the development of the domestic, long-term debt market with the eventual
takeover of the role and functions of IIFCL by the private sector. While that seems to be a long
way off, what is presently clear is that this MFF was followed by a second MFF and
preparations are now afoot for the third MFF. Although somewhat in a narrow sense, this
points out to the successful performance of IIFCL and to the country's progress in utilizing
PPPs for financing infrastructure. Based on these observations, this validation concurs with
the PCR rating of likely sustainable.

E.     Impact

25.     The PCR did not rate impact. The impact would mainly be in terms of the 30 funded
subprojects of roads and airports financed under the IIPFF, and their contribution to the
economy of India. Since 28 of these projects were in the road sector, and the remaining two
were the principal airports of Mumbai and Delhi, the impact performance indicators on energy,
seaport, and private investment in infrastructure under the DMF were not considered relevant
in the PCR.

26.     A noteworthy aspect is the catalytic effect of IIPFF, not so much in terms of the
subprojects that were financed but more on the support of ADB to the government's initiative
to promote IIFCL and the PPPs in India. This institutional development is a positive feature
and is capable of (i) raising more funds from other international and national financiers, (ii)
attracting private sector to invest in infrastructure, (iii) promoting transparency and overall good
governance in the infrastructure sector, and (iv) helping to set the strategic direction in the
country. Thus, a more concrete impact of ADB assistance lies in a strengthened IIFCL, which
can carry out its tasks in infrastructure financing, particularly in promoting the PPP modality
and institutionalizing ESSF. ADB has helped to establish a vehicle through which future
assistance for the infrastructure sector of India can be channeled. IIFCL has emerged as a
useful vehicle for continuing dialogue with the government on the development of
infrastructure and on the mechanisms for financing infrastructure.

27.     This validation considers the impact of the IIPFF significant as substantial assistance is
indeed being channeled through IIFCL, proving its worth by developing innovative products for
infrastructure financing, hedging risks in PPPs and private infrastructure, and promoting
reforms in the domestic capital market. To some extent, IIFCL has already introduced new
lending schemes. It has increased its infrastructure portfolio with 229 subprojects sanctioned
as of 31 March 2012, comprising roads, power, and airports scattered throughout the 24 states
of India.

                       III.    OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

28.     IIFCL has made substantial strides in developing its internal capacity and funding PPPs
in India. It has increased its staff from 12 in 2007 to 56 at the time of the PCR preparation. It
can now undertake independent credit risk assessments, it has developed the ESSF and set
up an environmental and social safeguard management unit, and is now conducting due
diligence on financed subprojects. IIFCL has generally complied with ADB reporting
requirements and has conducted an audit of the safeguard plans of all ADB-funded
8


subprojects that were reviewed and endorsed by ADB. This was the first time ADB conducted
a safeguard audit of a financial sector-based project. The PCR did not rate borrower
performance. This validation rates the borrower and executing agency's performance
satisfactory.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

29.     Despite some limitation in the initial project design and formulation, ADB was able to
take corrective action to ensure full disbursement of the IIPFF. However, the MOF and
executing agency raised concerns on the 4-month ADB approval process for subprojects. A
number of missions were undertaken for loan review, midterm review, and PCR preparation,
including a safeguard review mission. It should be noted that all subprojects were subject to
prior review and approval by ADB, especially on safeguards compliance, which kept ADB staff
engaged in the implementation of the IIPFF. Although the PCR described the performance of
ADB in some detail, it did not provide an overall rating. This validation assesses the
performance of ADB satisfactory.

          IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Overall Assessment and Ratings

30.      The project was rated by the PCR highly successful based on the full disbursement of
the credit facility and its supposed catalytic effect. IIFCL was set up by the government to fill in a
critical gap in long-term funding mechanism for infrastructure. IIFCL has done well but still has to
prove itself as a viable infrastructure financing institution. Its role in originating and generating
infrastructure projects is unclear as the lead banks were at the forefront of developing or
originating the projects and bringing them to financial closure. The ADB TA support helped in
mainstreaming PPPs especially at the state level, although it would have been more convincing
if the PCR had elaborated on the progress of the PPPs in India. The risks inherent in
government-owned and controlled institutions need to be addressed early. This validation
considers the intervention successful, having exceeded its immediate and limited objective of
leveraging larger private sector resources than the IIPFF target.

31.     The PCR assessed the project to be consistent with the government's and ADB
country strategies and programs. The PCR rated the project highly relevant, highly effective,
highly efficient, and likely sustainable. However, there were some shortcomings in the design
and formulation of the project. Being a wholly government-owned and controlled institution,
IIFCL risks following the historical experience of DFI-type operations, hence, this issue needs
to be addressed. In addition, broad-based reforms that deepen infrastructure financing need to
be pursued. This will sustain the enabling environment for private sector participation. The
lending terms of IIFCL, as the PCR pointed out, remains dependent upon the lead bank of the
consortium, which does its own risk assessment and pricing. This validation rates the project
relevant, effective, efficient, and likely sustainable, with an overall performance rating of
successful.
                                                                                                              9


                                                 Overall Ratings
  Criteria                          PCR              IED Review             Reason for Disagreement
                                                                                and/or Comments
 Relevance                    Highly relevant      Relevant         While consistent with the government
                                                                    and ADB strategy and program, there
                                                                    were deficiencies in the design and
                                                                    formulation of IIFCL, and gaps in
                                                                    identifying risks and constraints of PPPs,
                                                                    PSP, and in the capacity of IIFCL
                                                                    (paras. 12­18)
 Effectiveness in             Highly effective     Effective        A number of macroeconomic indicators
 achieving project                                                  are difficult to measure relative to
 outcome and outputs                                                IIPFF's intended outcomes and the
                                                                    relative success of the subprojects
                                                                    financed is too early to ascertain (paras.
                                                                    19­21).
 Efficiency in achieving      Highly efficient     Efficient        While the IIPFF was disbursed in full,
 outcome and outputs                                                the lack of preparedness of IIFCL meant
                                                                    delays and added costs. There were
                                                                    also concerns about the ADB approval
                                                                    process (paras. 22­23).
 Preliminary assessment       Likely               Likely
 of sustainability            sustainable          sustainable
 Overall assessment           Highly               Successful
                              successful
 Borrower and executing       Not rated            Satisfactory     Refer to para. 28.
 agency
 Performance of ADB           Not rated            Satisfactory     Refer to para. 29.
 Impact                       Not rated            Significant      Refer to para. 27.
 Quality of PCR                                    Less than        The PCR is less than satisfactory. Two
                                                   satisfactory     PCRs should have been prepared for
                                                                    the two tranches. Also, the PCR did not
                                                                    rate the performance of the borrower
                                                                    and ADB. Although it provided a clear
                                                                    picture of IIFCL and provided useful
                                                                    lessons and recommendations, it dwelt
                                                                    less on the policy environment and
                                                                    progress of reforms, and on PPPs and
                                                                    PSP (para. 37).
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CAPE = country assistance program evaluation, IED = Independent Evaluation
Department, IIFCL = India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd., PCR = project completion report, PPP = public­
private partnership, PSP = private sector participation.
Note: From May 2012, IED views the PCR rating terminology of "partly" or "less" as equivalent to "less than" and
uses this terminology for its own rating categories to improve clarity.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.      Lessons

32.     The PCR cited a number of lessons on future ADB intervention. These include (i)
reducing the ADB approval process for subprojects from the current 4 months by improving
internal coordination and streamlining internal procedures; (ii) strengthening innovative product
development to tailor fit these to the needs of the Indian market; (iii) continuing emphasis and
dialogue on environmental and social safeguards to improve appreciation of these factors when
implementing infrastructure projects; and (iv) ensuring that impacts are realistic and are clearly
10


linked with the effects of the ADB intervention, and that performance indicators are aligned and
clearly reflective of the targeted impact following the ADB Guidelines for Preparing a DMF
(2007). More attention should be given to this aspect during the review and processing of the
loan prior to the ADB Board's consideration.

33.       Finally, when lending to financial institutions similar to DFIs, especially government-
owned institutions, special attention should be placed on the risks inherent in this type of set up
so that the government concerned is alerted to the risks. The Government of India had been
particularly receptive to this. Also for start-up institutions, a vision statement, strategy, and policy
paper would be useful to establish a road map for defining its role, and a diagnostic assessment
for its institutional development to better understand its needs moving forward. It would also be
useful at the beginning of the process to explore what value additions could be incorporated in
the design and formulation of the intervention, particularly those that can advance reforms.

C.        Recommendations for Follow-Up

34.     ADB should continue to monitor the development and maturation of IIFCL as a
financial intermediary engaged in infrastructure, particularly if it intends to use IIFCL in future
interventions, and to ensure the health and success of subprojects it will finance. ADB should
continue dialogue with the government on the governance structure of IIFCL and its inherent
risks. Management should be made as independent as possible, free from external
interference in its decision making. Special considerations accorded to IIFCL at this time
should be removed as quickly as permissible. IIFCL should be placed under the Reserve Bank
of India's regulation and supervision, like any other financial intermediary in India, and follow
clear prudential regulations suitable for its type of operations. Government guarantees
extended to IIFCL should be charged at market rates or such guarantees should be made
available as well to other financial market institutions in India. Special treatments that create
moral hazard for IIFCL should be avoided.

35.    ADB should continue to monitor reforms that address constraints in PPP development
and private sector participation while continuing to be engaged in the various infrastructure
sectors that include those at the state level; and reforms in capital market concerning
contractual savings institutions; insurance, pension, and provident funds; and other long-term
sources of investments such as mutual funds. ADB could assist in developing financing (e. g.,
through securitization) and hedging products and mechanisms for infrastructure finance.

                          V.       OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.         Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

36.    Many performance benchmarks did not apply. A progress report on the status and
development of the various infrastructure sectors was not available.

B.         Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

37.     The PCR quality is less than satisfactory. There should have been two separate PCRs
for the two tranches.6 The combined PCR ended up blurring the progression, and precluded
the proper evaluation of developments as these unfolded during implementation. The PCR
pointed out that financial intermediation MFFs should not have tranche-based PCRs but
consolidated overall into a single PCR due to the holistic nature of the risks addressed under a
6
    ADB. 2014. Multitranche Financing Facility. Operations Manual D14/BP. Manila. para. 38.
                                                                                              11


facility (PCR, para. 62). Without discussing the merits of the argument, this validation wonders
whether presenting this as a fait accompli, as was done under this single PCR, was the right
procedure to draw the attention of the management against an approved operations manual.
This point should have been cleared with the management immediately after the first tranche
was completed. In addition, the PCR did not rate the borrower and ADB performance.
Otherwise, the PCR presented a clear picture of IIFCL operations for the facility as a whole. It
dwelt less on the overall infrastructure sectors of India and their progress, and on PPPs that
were discussed more extensively in the RRP. It was able to cull useful lessons and
recommendations even if it appeared overzealous in its ratings.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

38.   This validation relied mainly on the PCR, RRP, PCR review, Country Assistance
Program Evaluation (2007), India's Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007­2012), and ADB Strategy
2020.

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

39.    In India, a number of MFFs are being implemented and some are in the ADB pipeline.
A project performance evaluation report of this completed MFF facility--one of the first such
types--should be undertaken at the earliest time to draw appropriate lessons for MFFs as a
modality. It is expected that useful lessons for India can be drawn and be utilized as well in
other countries where the MFF modality is being used.
