Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-299
Project Number: 23241
Loan Number: 1556 and 1557
December 2013




India: Mumbai and Chennai Ports Project




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

                   ADB       -   Asian Development Bank
                   CHPT      -   Chennai Port Trust
                   CPS       ­   Country Partnership Strategy
                   EIRR      -   economic internal rate of return
                   FIRR      -   financial internal rate of return
                   MBPT      -   Mumbai Port Trust
                   MOST      -   Ministry of Surface Transport
                   MOT       -   marine oil terminal
                   PCR       -   project completion report
                   PIO       -   Project Implementation Office
                   PSP       -   private sector participation
                   TA        -   technical assistance
                   TEU       -   twenty-foot equivalent unit


                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



                                           Key Words

adb, asian development bank, chennai, container-handling equipment, demurrage, independent
evaluation department, india, mumbai, ports, port operation, project completion report, sea
transport, shipping costs, technical assistance, validation



The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                       PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:        23241             PCR Circulation Date:            Nov 2011
Loan Numbers:          1556 and 1557     PCR Validation Date:             Dec 2013
Project Name:          Mumbai and Chennai Ports Project
Country:               India                                               Approved           Actual
                                                                           ($ million)      ($ million)
Sector:                Transport and ICT      Total Project Costs:           245.00           235.58
ADB Financing:         ADF: 0.00              Loan:                          113.00            47.93
($ million)                                                      1556         97.80            43.42
                                                                 1557         15.20             4.51
                                              Borrower:                        0.00             0.00

                       OCR:                   Beneficiaries:                    0.00            0.00
                          97.80 (1556)        Others:
                          15.20 (1557)             MPBT                       55.30           73.76
                                                   CHPT                       39.90           17.34
                                                    Private sector            36.80           96.55
Cofinancier:                                  Total Cofinancing:               0.00            0.00
Approval Date:         29 Sep 1997            Effectiveness Date:
                                                   Mumbai Port (1556)     24 Dec 1998       6 Jan 1999
                                                   Chennai Port (1557)    24 Dec 1998      23 Feb 1999
Signing Date:          25 Sep 1998            Closing Date:
                                                   Mumbai Port (1556)     30 Sep 2003       1 Jun 2001
                                                   Chennai Port (1557)    30 Mar 2003      11 Sep 2002
Project Officers:                             Location:                      From:              To:
                       U. Witulski            ADB headquarters             Dec 1998          Nov 1999
                       M. Mizutani            ADB headquarters             Dec 2000          May 2001
                       P. Dutt                ADB headquarters              Jun 2001         Nov 2001
                       P. Pattison            INRM                         Dec 2001          May 2002
                       T. Kandiah             INRM                          Jun 2002         Aug 2002
                       A. Motwani             INRM                         Sep 2002          Dec 2002
Validator:             J. Supangco,           Peer Reviewer:              F. D. De Guzman,
                          Consultant                                         Evaluation Officer, IED2
Quality Reviewers:     C. Kim, Principal      Director:                   H. Hettige, IED2
                          Evaluation
                          Specialist, IED2
                       R. Vasudevan
                          Evaluation
                          Specialist, IED1
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; CHPT = Chennai Port Trust; ICT = information
and communication technology; IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 1; IED2 = Independent
Evaluation Department, Division 2; INRM = India Resident Mission; MPBT = Mumbai Port Trust; OCR = ordinary
capital resources; PCR = project completion report.

                                  I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.      Rationale

1.      In the early 1990s, considerable progress was made in India in loosening up
government regulations, especially in the area of foreign trade where export-driven growth was
emphasized. Many restrictions on private companies were lifted and new areas were opened
to private capital. Even with these changes, India remained one of the world's most tightly
regulated major economies as powerful vested interests--including private firms benefiting
2


from protectionism, labor unions, and much of the bureaucracy--opposed liberalization. There
was considerable concern that liberalization would reinforce class and regional economic
disparities.

2.      The expected growth in foreign trade would require adequate transport infrastructure,
including ports, to cope with the forecast growth in demand. Combined with the increased
prevalence of containerized cargoes, the port infrastructure, which is old and lacks appropriate
cargo-handling equipment and technical skills to operate modern and efficient facilities, would
require modernization, new investments, and improvements in productivity. As the government
could not provide adequate budget support for port investments, it considered alternative
means of increasing capacity, such as build-operate-transfer, for developing new port facilities
or managing ports to improve performance.

3.      At Mumbai port, the submarine pipelines of the marine oil terminal (MOT) were more
than 40 years old, had passed their safe economic life, and could have failed at any time with
disastrous economic and environmental consequences. With the constrained throughput, MOT
was operating at a level that resulted in long and costly vessel waiting times for ships at
anchorage. Vessel average waiting time at berth had increased slightly from 2.4 days in 1989
to 2.6 days in 1997, but waiting time at anchorage during the same period had increase
substantially from 0.7 to 2.1 days. Further congestion would lead to vessel diversion to other
ports. Demurrage on import product tankers in MOT rose between Rs87 per ton in fiscal year
(FY) 1993 to Rs92 per ton in 1994, while those in other ports decreased. Thus, modernization
of the facility was required as a matter of urgency.1

4.      At Chennai Port, which is the gateway for container traffic on India's east coast, the
Asian Development Bank (ADB) had provided financial support to create the country's first
modern container handling facility. 2 Both container and general cargo berths required
structural improvements and the container yard needed to be expanded as the government
expected containerized traffic to triple to 64 million tons by FY2002. Productivity at many ports
in India was low compared to international standards, such as the already best-equipped port
of Chennai with about 12 twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) per vessel hour compared with
30 TEUs in Colombo, 40 TEUs in Bangkok, and over 60 TEUs in Singapore. To augment
capacity at India's ports, the government needed to (i) intensify utilization of existing
infrastructure by improving operation and management; (ii) expand facilities to handle at least
50% of general cargo in containers; (iii) modernize and rehabilitate the existing port facilities
and use modern technology to improve the efficiency of operations; (iv) improve the
productivity of labor and equipment; and (v) obtain alternative financing sources for port
development, such as private sector participation (PSP) in selected port activities.

B.      Expected Impact

5.     The expected impact of the project was improved economic growth in the hinterland
areas of Mumbai and Chennai ports through reduced total sea transport costs. Another
envisaged impact was increased capacity and enhanced port productivity for both ports to help
lower the cost of transporting imported commodities and decrease shipping costs for exports.
Envisaged impact indicators were reduced total sea transport costs in the hinterland of Mumbai
and Chennai ports and increased port capacity and traffic.
1
  ADB.1997. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loans to the Board of
  Trustees of Mumbai Port Trust and Chennai Port Trust and Technical Assistance Grant to India for the Mumbai and
  Chennai Ports Project. Manila.
2
  ADB. 1996. Project Performance Audit Report on the Ports Development Project in India. Manila.
                                                                                                                  3


C.        Objectives or Expected Outcomes

6.      The project outcome statements indicated in the project frameworks of the report and
recommendation of the President (footnote 1), also reproduced in the project completion report
(PCR),3 referred to project outputs such as submerged oil pipelines replaced and oil jetties
modernized in Mumbai port; and container terminal expanded and operated by PSP, including
rehabilitation and upgrading of the inner harbor in Chennai Port. Thus, this validation adjusted
the existing outcome statements, based on the information provided in Appendix 10 of the
PCR and recent data (para. 19).

7.       For Mumbai Port, the recommended expected outcomes were increased ship calls and
savings in ship waiting time at anchorage and added berth through faster unloading of oil
cargo with the increased capacity and utilization of the new oil pipelines and modernized oil
jetties. The savings were to be passed on to shippers through the removal of demurrage on
import product tankers (para. 3) and lower costs of oil products. In addition, environmental
risks would be significantly reduced by the modern facilities. Fire and explosion hazards were
to be reduced significantly, ecological damage avoided, and livelihood of fisher folks improved.

8.      For Chennai Port, the recommended expected outcomes were likewise similar. 4
Additionally, with PSP providing container handling equipment and terminal operation, it was
expected that container handling productivity would improve significantly to levels achieved in
other international ports such as Colombo and Bangkok. Dredging at Inner Harbor was to
improve safety in vessel operations, contribute to the decrease in waiting time at anchorage,
and allow bigger vessels to call at the port. For either ports, no targets were given in the
project framework on the reduction in ship waiting time at anchorage and berth, and
improvement in container handling productivity.
D.        Components and Outputs

9.       For the Mumbai Port project, the outputs envisaged at appraisal included the
(i) replacement of seven submarine pipelines with five new lines between Pir Pau and Butcher
Island; (ii) upgrading of three oil berths, including repair of damaged structures and
modernization of firefighting, safety, and transfer facilities; and (iii) replacement of loading arms
and support and the onshore service pipeline system. At completion, the following were
achieved: (i) modernization of the MOT-Jawahar Deep berths 1, 2, and 3 and their associated
facilities; (ii) replacement of the outdated submarine pipelines between the berths and Pir Pav
manifold; and (iii) construction of an onshore pipeline connecting Pir Pav manifold with the
marketing and storage terminals located at Sewere and Vadala (footnote 3).

10.      For the Chennai Port project, outputs envisaged at appraisal included the (i) extension of
the container berth, expansion of the container yard, and upgrading of existing berths;
(ii) provision for cargo-handling equipment;5 (iii) rehabilitation of existing berths and dredging at
Inner Harbor; and (iv) provision of safety equipment. At completion, the following were achieved:
(i) extension of the existing berth by 285 meters, and (ii) modernization of all other support
facilities and related container-handling equipment. The private sector concessionaire also


3
    ADB. 2011. Completion Report: Mumbai and Chennai Ports Project in India. Manila.
4
    The difference was for the Chennai Port, higher capacity of the container terminal was used instead of increased
    capacity and utilization of the new oil pipelines and modernized oil jetties.
5
    To operate the container terminal, cargo handling equipment was to be provided separately by a private sector
    party. It was to be selected by the Chennai Port Trust (CHPT) using competitive bidding procedures.
4


developed other associated facilities and equipment and made further investments to
accommodate increased traffic (footnote 3).

E.        Provision of Inputs

11.     The project cost was estimated at $245.0 million with $150.5 million (61%) in foreign
exchange cost (including $13.5 million for interest during construction) and $94.5 million (39%)
in local currency cost. ADB provided two loans to the two ports totaling $113 million. The loans
were guaranteed by the Government of India. The cost for the Mumbai Port project was
estimated at Rs5.4 billion ($153.1 million equivalent). The loan amount was $97.8 million and
the Mumbai Port Trust (MBPT) was to finance the remaining $55.3 million. The cost for the
Chennai Port project was estimated at Rs3.2 billion ($91.9 million equivalent). The loan amount
was $15.2 million. A private sector party, to be selected by CHPT, was to finance the foreign
exchange cost of $28 million and local currency cost of $8.8 million equivalent for the cargo-
handling equipment, with CHPT financing the remaining $39.9 million.

12.     Of the completion cost of $235.58 million, $96.55 million was funded by the private
sector, $73.76 million by MBPT, $17.34 million by CHPT, and $47.93 million by ADB. At an
advanced stage of implementation, MBPT and CHPT decided to close the loan and undertook
the completion of the project with their own funds. The undisbursed loan amount was canceled
and the disbursed amount prepaid. The PCR pointed out that the cancellation and prepayment
were triggered by the reduction of interest rates in domestic financial markets, exchange rate
movements, and improved financial positions of MBPT and CHPT (footnote 3).

F.        Implementation Arrangements

13.     The implementation arrangements were as envisaged at appraisal. The borrowers--
MBPT and CHPT--were also the executing agencies responsible for the respective loans. As
required under the loan, the Project Implementation Office (PIO) for the Mumbai Ports project
was established on 1 July 1997 and was headed by a deputy chief engineer. The PIO for the
Chennai Port project was established with the redeployment of existing staff and was headed
by a chief engineer and project director. There were two sets of loan covenants under the
project. The government and the executing agencies generally complied with the respective
loan covenants even after the loan cancellation and prepayment in 2001 (Mumbai) and 2002
(Chennai).6

G.        Related Technical Assistance

14.     An advisory TA was processed with the project to operationalize the government's port
policy reform initiatives pertaining to the enhancement of port commercialization and
introduction of corporatization policy, issuance of policies and guidelines for PSP, and
implementation of cost-based tariffs in major ports by establishing the Tariff Authority for Major
Ports (footnote 1). The executing agency for the TA component was the Ministry of Surface
Transport (MOST). The MBPT, CHPT, the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, and the Tariff Authority
for Major Ports were the implementing agencies. Consultants were fielded in September 1998
and the TA component was completed in September 2001. The TA completion report was
circulated in September 2001. The completion report assessed that the TA component was
successfully implemented, within budget, and without any major problems. The TA component
achieved its objectives and was rated generally successful (PCR, Appendix 8).

6
    These dates are based on PCR basic data regarding "cancellation on closure."
                                                                                                                 5


                      II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.        Relevance of Design and Formulation

15.     The PCR rated the project highly relevant based on its consistency with the
government's overall development objectives. It noted that the upgraded components at the
two ports were the logical next step to complement the facilities created by an earlier ADB
support,7 averted the risk of environmental damage to the harbor from a possible failure of the
old submarine pipelines in Mumbai Port, and helped turn Chennai Port into a clean cargo port
since the coal and hazardous cargo was moved to the Ennore Port, about 20 kilometers north
of Chennai. The government and the port trusts advanced the commercialization of ports and
enhancement of PSP, which were the government's major policy initiatives in development,
capacity augmentation, and operation of ports.

16.      This validation notes that the government's development strategy, as set out in the
Eighth Five Year Plan covering 1992 to 1997, included, among others, (i) encouraging high
levels of capacity utilization to raise productivity and cost efficiency, (ii) attracting private
initiative by reducing the government's regulatory controls, and (iii) reforming the public
enterprise sector. The growing infrastructure constraints in India underscored the need to
attract PSP in infrastructure development. In the ports subsector, the policy and regulatory
framework was evolving to privatize or lease selected port operations. Furthermore, there was
a need to increase autonomy of the major port trusts to promote and establish companies or
joint ventures and grant them greater administrative and financial autonomy to manage their
operations with the objective of eventually corporatizing them.

17.      Under the country operational strategy for India published in 19968 and consistent with
the ADB's development strategy and policy reforms and priorities in the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework, the overall strategic emphasis was to provide support to, among others,
promoting competition and private sector development. The ports subsector had great
potential to develop projects with closer cooperation and risk sharing between the private and
public sector. The emphasis of ADB was to support (i) policy reforms to improve the operations
and efficiency of ports and their capacity to involve the private sector, (ii) the private sector to
develop new port facilities; (iii) privatization and commercialization of most of the existing
facilities of ports; and (iv) rehabilitation, modernization, and upgrading of the existing ports to
improve their productivity and utilization.
18.     This validation notes that the project design was well prepared. However, the traffic
forecast during appraisal proved inaccurate.9 For the MOST, the increased capacity of the new
submerged pipelines was not utilized as the proposed refinery expansion project--the source
of the expected growth in crude oil shipments--was cancelled. In Chennai Port, the increase
in container traffic was significantly higher than forecast. The terminal concessionaire had to
construct additional facilities to accommodate the increased container throughput. This could
have been caused by a number of factors, such as the higher containerization rate, or the shift


7
     ADB.1996. Project Performance Audit Report on the Ports Development Project. Manila; ADB. 2001. Project
    Performance Audit Report on the Second Ports Project. Manila; and ADB. 1987. Report and Recommendation of
    the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the Ports Development Project. Manila.
8
    ADB. 1996. Country Operational Strategy Study India. Manila.
9
    IED had also noted "overly optimistic" traffic forecasts in 2001 in the Project Performance Audit Report on the
    Second Ports Project (Loan 1016-IND). A more recent review of ports in India is available in Independent
    Evaluation Department. 2007. Transport Sector in India--Focusing on Results. Manila: ADB (Appendix 2).
6


from general to container cargo, or higher import growth. On the whole, this validation rates
the project relevant.10

B.      Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcomes

19.     The PCR rated the project effective. The project achieved its primary objective of
rehabilitating and reconstructing port facilities by modernizing outdated liquid cargo-handling
systems and eliminating the possibility of failure of the oil pipelines at Mumbai Port, and
expanding the existing port facilities to increase cargo-handling capacity for containers and
other general cargo at Chennai Port.

20.      To determine whether the project was effective in achieving outcomes, the validation
utilized PCR data and collected recent data on ship calls and cargo throughputs at both Mumbai
and Chennai ports to measure traffic growth. For the Chennai Port project, the container port
was privatized in 2001 and the concessionaire took over and commenced operations in the
same year. At appraisal in FY1997, the port had handled 256,500 TEUs and had reached 1.15
million TEUs in 2011.The terminal entered the one-million TEU club in 2007. This validation
estimates a container traffic growth rate of 11.3% per annum from FY1997 to FY2011, higher
than the 9% estimated at appraisal. This validation estimates a 6.85% annual growth rate in
break bulk traffic from FY1997 to FY2011, which is within the 5%­9% per annum assumed at
appraisal. In terms of ship waiting time at anchorage, this declined substantially from 1.8 days in
FY1997 to 1.07 hours by FY2011.11

21.    For the Mumbai Port project, the MOT handled imported crude for the refineries, the
coastal movement of crude for the Oil and Natural Gas Commission, and the export of products
from the refineries and import of products for marketing in the hinterland by the refining
companies. The refining capacity expansion that was projected at appraisal did not materialize
and as a consequence the traffic mix has changed more toward products rather than crude.
While crude oil throughput declined from FY1997 to 2011, other products throughput increased
by 1.8% per annum, which is lower than the 2.8% per annum estimated at appraisal. In terms of
ship waiting time at anchorage, this declined from 2.1 days in FY1997 to 0.48 days by FY2011.
For average time spent at berth, this declined from 2.6 days in FY1997 to 1.48 days by
FY2011.12 Based on the cargo traffic volume handled and the decline in average time spent at
berth and at anchorage, this validation rates the project effective in achieving project outcomes.

C.      Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outputs and Outcomes

22.     The PCR rated the project efficient. It observed that the project generated its intended
benefits of (i) cost savings through reduction in vessel turnaround time inclusive of ship waiting
and service times, and (ii) avoidance of diversion to other facilities. Handling costs at these
ports have also been reduced. For the Mumbai Port project, the imminent danger of oil spills
caused by 40-year-old pipelines was reduced.

23.     For the Mumbai Port project, the economic and financial reevaluations were carried out
at the time of PCR preparation. The recomputed economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was
15.1%, lower than the appraisal estimate of 18%.
24.      For the Chennai Port project, economic reevaluation was carried out for the Inner
Harbor and for the container terminal. As envisaged at appraisal, CHPT awarded the
10
   The concerned regional department expressed the view to maintain the highly relevant rating in the PCR.
11
   www.dpworldchennai.com
12
   www.mumbaiport.gov.in
                                                                                                    7


concession to the private sector in 2001 for providing container-handling equipment and for
the operation of the container terminal. The EIRR for the container terminal was computed at
22.3% compared with the appraisal estimate of 19.8%.

25.     The EIRR for the Inner Harbor was recomputed at 22.3% compared with the appraisal
estimate of 13.8%. This validation finds the methodology used at appraisal and by the PCR to
be valid. Based on the above findings, this validation rates the project efficient, the same as
the PCR.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

26.    The PCR rated the project's sustainability likely. While it noted that the government and
the port trusts still needed to address adequate port infrastructure and connectivity, high cost,
labor inefficiencies, and obsolete equipment to be at par with international standards,
expansion projects were already either being planned or implemented. The financial
performance of the ports had improved and the government had undertaken policy initiatives
for PSP in port development and operations.

27.     This validation notes that the Chennai Port concessionaire had significantly improved
cargo-handling productivity resulting in shorter vessel turnaround time and increased container
movements. Increased container traffic growth necessitated additional investments from the
concessionaire to increase port capacity. The higher financial performance as reflected in the
recomputed financial internal rate of return (32% versus 16%) at PCR supports the view that
the port is generating sufficient financial returns to ensure sustainability.

28.     For Mumbai Port, this validation notes that while crude oil traffic had declined below
forecast, growth in the import of products such as petroleum, oil, and lubricants and other
products have increased, albeit slowly. With the new pipelines and accessories and state-of-
the-art safety equipment, the project objective of mitigating environmental disaster has been
attained. The lower recomputed financial internal rate of return of 5% from the appraisal
estimate of 8% still shows that the port is financially capable to maintain and operate the
pipelines. Based on the above discussions, this validation also considers the project likely to
be sustainable.

E.     Impact

29.    The PCR did not rate the impact of the project. The appraisal document and PCR did not
provide data on the expected socioeconomic impact of the project. On environmental impact,
the project did not require an environmental impact assessment since it was intended to
introduce environmental improvements at Mumbai and Chennai ports. The replacement of the
submarine oil pipelines at Mumbai Port had prevented potential leakages. Through
modernization of the oil jetties and loading and unloading facilities, accidents from oil tankers
and ships carrying and unloading hazardous and toxic chemicals were avoided resulting in
improved operating conditions at the port (footnote 3). Given the time lag in the preparation of
the PCR, the likely sustainability of the project is already actualized.

30.    At Chennai Port, the project, together with the coal ports project, helped shift coal cargo
to Ennore Port and transformed Chennai Port into a clean port. The coal cargo at Chennai Port
used to substantially pollute air in the city of Chennai. The project's positive environmental
impacts far outweigh the negative impacts, if any.
8


31.     This validation considers that the improved port productivity at both Mumbai and
Chennai would have resulted in lower shipping costs, removal of demurrage, enhanced
competitiveness of India's exports, and lower prices of commodities. At appraisal, it was agreed
that MBPT and CHPT would monitor, to the extent possible, other tangible benefits directly or
indirectly attributable to the project, such as employment creation within the port hinterland, new
ancillary industries attracted to the port area or its hinterlands, and environmental benefits
arising from pollution-reducing operations at the port. No information on these was provided in
the PCR. Based on the above factors, this validation rates the impact of the project significant.

                       III.   OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

32.    The PCR did not rate the performance of MBPT, CHPT, the borrowers, and executing
agencies for the project. The PCR observed that the PIOs were set up as per appraisal in a
timely manner. Procurement activities were, however, delayed resulting in delayed award of
contracts. The executing agencies complied with the loan covenants during project
implementation. Cooperation of the officials and staff from MOST, the executing agency for the
TA component, contributed to its successful implementation.

33.   Based on the assessment of the performances of MBPT and CHPT in the
implementation of their project components, this validation rates their performance satisfactory.

B.     Performance of the Asian Development Bank

34.      The PCR rated the performance of ADB satisfactory. The PCR noted that ADB
administered and supervised the project from ADB headquarters, but subsequently transferred
this to the ADB India Resident Mission. ADB conducted an inception mission and three review
missions before the loans were cancelled. The Mumbai Port project was canceled first, and
prepaid before the project's transfer to the resident mission. Although loans were cancelled and
the disbursed amounts prepaid by the borrowers, the PCR maintained that this was purely the
decision of the two port trusts based on financial realities and had not been due to any issues
with ADB. This validation rates ADB performance satisfactory, the same as the PCR rating.

C.     Others

35.     There were no resettlement and rights-of-way issues identified. The project was
implemented within the two existing ports' operating areas or boundaries. Thus, no land
acquisition and resettlement issues were involved.

         IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Overall Assessment and Ratings

36.     Both the PCR and this validation rate the project successful. On relevance, PCR had
rated the project highly relevant but did not give sufficiently convincing reasons for the rating.
The project was consistent with the then prevailing medium-term plan of India and that of ADB
country strategy. However, although the project design was well prepared, traffic forecast
proved highly inaccurate (para. 18). Hence, this validation rates the project relevant.
                                                                                                                9


37.      Validation assesses the project effective due to the higher than expected traffic growth
in Chennai project and the lower than expected traffic growth in Mumbai project plus better
than expected waiting time at anchorage The projects are assessed efficient given the
reasonable EIRRs. Sustainability is likely based on the financial performance and policy
initiatives undertaken. A comparison of the ratings given at PCR and at validation is
summarized in the table below.

                                               Overall Ratings

  Criteria                               PCR              IED Review            Reason for Disagreement
                                                                                     and/or Comments
 Relevance                        Highly relevant     Relevant              Demand forecasts for the two
                                                                            ports were not accurate (para. 18).
                                                                            Traffic forecasts should have been
                                                                            undertaken with more rigor,
                                                                            especially for Mumbai.
 Effectiveness in achieving       Effective           Effective
 outcome
 Efficiency in achieving          Efficient           Efficient
 outcome and outputs
 Preliminary assessment of        Likely to be        Likely to be
 sustainability                   sustainable         sustainable
 Overall assessment               Successful          Successful
 Borrower and executing           Not rated           Satisfactory          Refer to paras. 32­33.
 agency
 Performance of ADB               Satisfactory        Satisfactory

 Impact                          Not rated            Significant           The improved port productivity
                                                                            would have resulted in lower
                                                                            shipping costs, removal of
                                                                            demurrage, enhanced
                                                                            competitiveness of India's exports,
                                                                            and lower prices of commodities
                                                                            (para. 31).
 Quality of PCR                                       Less than             The PCR was done 9 years after
                                                      satisfactory          completion. There were significant
                                                                            data deficiencies including port
                                                                            statistics that could have
                                                                            strengthened the conclusions
                                                                            reached at PCR. A number of
                                                                            sections were omitted in the PCR,
                                                                            i.e., lessons, recommendations for
                                                                            follow-up, monitoring and
                                                                            evaluation design, and
                                                                            recommendation on IED follow-up
                                                                            (para. 42).
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report.
Note: From May 2012, IED views the PCR's rating terminology of "partly" or "less" as equivalent to "less than" and
uses this terminology for its own rating categories to improve clarity.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.
10


B.     Lessons

38.     Given the time lag between project completion and PCR preparation, the usefulness of
lessons obtained from the project's implementation would be limited. For example, delays in
procurement during project implementation were traced to the confusion in applying the
government's or ADB procurement rules. This had already been remedied in subsequent ADB
projects by training the executing agency and PIO staff on ADB procurement procedures.

39.      The cancellation and prepayment of the project loans by the executing agencies were
premature and abruptly cut ADB participation in the project and in the ports subsector. This
explained the delay in the preparation of the PCR and the lack of data after project completion
on socio-economic impacts, among other things. Also, ADB incurred upfront costs, such as
feasibility study preparation, deployment of project review missions, and related activities for the
project.

C.      Recommendations for Follow-Up

40.     The loans had been prepaid and there would be no motivation for the port trusts, for
example, to conduct a follow-up study on the socioeconomic impacts of the project. The PCR
did not indicate if there were project performance monitoring systems operating in these ports.
There were no recommendations made in the PCR.

                     V.     OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

41.     The project outcomes were actually outputs and no targets had been established for the
performance indicators. For example, increase in cargo throughputs due to the project were not
given in the framework, although forecast traffic growth was given in the economic and financial
analysis.

B.     Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

42.     Typically, PCRs are undertaken 12 to 24 months after completion of the project, but this
PCR was completed in November 2011, which was 7 and 9 year delay after completion of the
Mumbai and Chennai Port projects respectively (para. 39). Due to their favorable financial
positions (para. 12), MBPT and CHPT requested and ADB agreed to cancel the undisbursed
amounts of their loans (footnote 3). Both loans were prepaid by the two port trusts.
Subsequent to loan cancellation and loan prepayment, CHPT and MBPT completed the
project utilizing their financial resources. There was a misunderstanding regarding the need to
prepare a PCR for a prepaid project and it took a few years to realize that a PCR was needed.
Given the elapsed time between project completion and PCR preparation, data may not have
been available to provide reliable and accurate information on port traffic, productivity, and
impacts. The PCR discussion on impact was limited only on environmental impacts. There was
no discussion on the project's socioeconomic impact or no data was provided to allow this
validation to rate the project's overall impact. The ratings on some criteria given by the PCR
were not properly supported by evidence. A number of PCR sections were omitted. These
were the lessons and recommendations, including follow-up, monitoring and evaluation, and
                                                                                                          11


timing of the project performance evaluation report. This validation finds the PCR quality less
than satisfactory.13

C.         Data Sources for Validation

43.    The data sources used for this validation included the project's report and
recommendation of the President, PCR, back-to-office reports, ADB Country Operational
Strategy Study: India, India CPS 2009­2012 of ADB, ADB Country Strategy and Program,
2003­2006 for India, and PCRs of previous port projects in India.

D.         Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

44.    IED follow-up is not necessary given that project loans were cancelled and prepaid,
and there is only limited information in the PCR.




13
     The concerned regional department expressed the view for a satisfactory rating of the PCR quality.
