Validation Report



Reference Number: PVR-307
Project Number: 36320
Loan Number: 2018
May 2014




India: Rural Roads Sector I Project




Independent Evaluation Department
                                          ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB           -     Asian Development Bank
              CGRRDA        -     Chhattisgarh Rural Roads Development Agency
              EIRR          -     economic internal rate of return
              IRI           -     international roughness index
              km            -     kilometer
              MORD          -     Ministry of Rural Development
              MPRRDA        -     Madhya Pradesh Rural Roads Development
                                  Agency
              PCR           -     project completion report
              PIC           -     project implementation consultant
              PIU           -     project implementation unit
              PMC           -     project management consultant
              PMGSY         -     Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (Prime
                                  Minister's Rural Roads Program)
              VOC           -     vehicle operating cost


                                                 NOTE

                                In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                             Key Words

 adb, asian development bank, independent evaluation department, highway network, india,
 lessons, performance evaluation, project completion report, roads, road maintenance, rural
 roads, transport, vehicle operating cost


The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of IED management, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, IED does not intend to make any judgments as to
the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                           PROJECT BASIC DATA
Project Number:            36320                PCR Circulation Date:           Dec 2011
Loan Number:               2018                 PCR Validation Date:            May 2014
Project Name:              Rural Roads Sector I Project
Country:                   India                                                  Approved             Actual
                                                                                  ($ million)        ($ million)
Sector:                    Transport and ICT       Total Project Costs:             571.00            510.70
ADB Financing:             ADF:    0.00            Loan:                            400.00            366.40
($ million)
                                                   Borrower:                        171.00           144.30
                           OCR: 400.00             Beneficiaries:                     0.00             0.00
                                                   Others:                            0.00             0.00
Cofinancier:                                       Total Cofinancing:                 0.00             0.00
Approval Date:             20 Nov 2003             Effectiveness Date:           90 days from     25 Jan 2005
                                                                                 date of loan
                                                                                  agreement
Signing Date:              25 Nov 2004             Closing Date:                 30 Jun 2008       30 Jun 2009
Project Officers:                                  Location:                        From:              To:
                           T. Duncan               ADB headquarters                Nov 2003          Jul 2004
                           H. Iwasaki              ADB headquarters                Aug 2004          Jul 2005
                           M. Alam                 ADB headquarters                Aug 2005          Jan 2006
                           H. Iwasaki              ADB headquarters                Feb 2006          Mar 2007
                           T. Nishimura            ADB headquarters                Apr 2007          Dec 2009
Validators:                J. Supangco,            Peer Reviewer:               M. Gatti, Principal Evaluation
                              Consultant                                           Specialist, IED2
                           F. D. De Guzman,
                              Evaluation
                              Officer, IED2
Quality Reviewers:         R. Vasudevan,           Director:                    B. Finlayson, IED2
                              Evaluation
                              Specialist, IED1
                           B. Nguyen, Senior
                              Evaluation
                              Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ADF = Asian Development Fund; ICT = information and communication technology;
IED1 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 1; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2; OCR
= ordinary capital resources; PCR = project completion report.

                                      I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Rationale

1.       At the time of project appraisal, India's highway network consisted of 58,112 kilometers
(km) of national highways, 64,200 km of state highways and major district roads, and 2.7 million
km of rural roads. Major district roads comprised 19% of the network and carried about 40% of
traffic. Rural roads linked rural communities with the highway network. They represented 80% of
the network and carried 20% of traffic.1 In the road sector, freight increased by 12% per year
and passenger traffic by 8%. This led to congestion, road deterioration, and high cost of
transport. Service quality and capacity were compromised. The deterioration of road
infrastructure led to the need for reconstruction at higher costs, thus straining available funds.
1
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to India for the
    Rural Roads Sector I Project. Manila.
2


2.     While the determinants of poverty vary between states, there was a strong link between
lack of road connectivity and poverty. 2 Conversely, there was a strong link between
improvement in road connectivity and poverty reduction. This meant that road connectivity
especially in rural areas was a prime catalyst to poverty reduction as recent studies had shown
that public expenditure on rural roads in India had greater poverty reduction impact than
expenditure on agricultural research, irrigation, power, education, health, soil and water
conservation, and existing antipoverty programs.3

3.      The states of Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh were among the most needy in rural
road connectivity. About three-quarters of the population lived in rural areas with less than half
of all habitations with more than 500 persons having all-weather road connection. The total
number of unconnected habitations 4 identified for new connectivity investments under the
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY, also the Prime Minister's Rural Roads Program)
was 15,608 in Chhattisgarh and 9,502 in Madhya Pradesh, which is equivalent to 15% of the
national total.5

B.        Expected Impact

4.      The intended project impacts were to reduce poverty and support economic growth in
the rural areas of Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. The identified performance indicators to
measure achievement of project impacts were (i) reduced rural poverty rate, (ii) improved social
indicators in rural areas, (iii) increased incomes for farmers, (iv) increased employment
opportunities, and (v) increased rural enterprise development. This validation notes that no
baseline data, targeted improvement of impact performance indicators, and time of achieving
these impacts were given. The project had the potential to impact 5.2 million rural villagers. The
project completion report (PCR) estimated the population that benefited from the subprojects at
11 million.6

C.        Objectives or Expected Outcome

5.       The expected project outcomes to be achieved by 2007 were (i) rural villages provided
with all-weather road connectivity and associated vehicle operating costs (VOC) reduced,
(ii) sustainable asset management systems established for rural roads, and (iii) the risk of road
accidents on rural roads mitigated. The performance indicator targets to be achieved by 2007
were (i) about 1,900 rural habitations with over 500 persons provided with all-weather road
connectivity in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh; (ii) average VOC on project rural roads
reduced by about 50% for cars and jeeps, and 40% for buses and trucks; (iii) bus fares reduced,
on average, by 10% and freight rates by 20% on project roads within 2 years of completion;
(iv) reduction in average international roughness index (IRI) for PMGSY roads in Chhattisgarh
and Madhya Pradesh from 16 IRI to 4 IRI after improvement; (v) road maintenance budgeting
and planning systems introduced for the maintenance of PMGSY roads by 2006; (vi) annual
financial allocation for maintaining rural roads increased by 2007/2008 to $20 million in
2
    For example, the three states with the highest proportion of poor people in their populations (Bihar, Madhya
    Pradesh, and Orissa) are also among the most disadvantaged in terms of road connectivity, based on the Planning
    Commission estimates.
3
    Fan, S., P. Hazell, and S. Thorat. 2000. Government Spending, Growth and Poverty in Rural India. American
    Journal of Agricultural Economics. 82 (4).
4
    A habitation is the unit used by PMGSY. A habitation is a cluster of population, living in an area, the location of
    which does not change over time. It is not a `revenue village` or a `panchayat'.
5
    Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched on 25 December 2000 as a fully funded, centrally
    sponsored scheme to provide all-weather road connectivity in the rural areas of the country.
6
    ADB. 2011. Completion Report: Rural Roads Sector I Project in India. Manila.
                                                                                                          3


Chhattisgarh and $8 million in Madhya Pradesh; (vii) road safety audits carried out for all
PMGSY roads at design stage by the end of 2005; (viii) reduced vehicle accident rate; and
(ix) road safety campaigns completed in about 3,600 villages by 2007.

D.         Components and Outputs

6.     The project consisted of road connectivity, asset management, and capacity building
components. The road connectivity component was to construct about 11,000 km of rural
roads, 5,500 km each in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. Only 1,000 km of sample
subprojects were subjected to detailed preparation under a previous ADB technical
assistance (TA) project.7 Subsequently, 10,000 km of additional subprojects were to be
implemented, comprising about 3,300 km per batch.

7.      The asset management and capacity building component was to assist Chhattisgarh
and Madhya Pradesh establish procedures, financing arrangements, and institutional capacity
to ensure sustainability of road assets created under the PMGSY. The state governments and
the Zilla Panchayats 8 were to be assisted in establishing road maintenance budgeting,
planning and management systems, developing standard performance-based contracts for
road maintenance, supporting capacity building, and providing on-the-job training. The project
was envisaged to enable the state governments and the Zilla Panchayats to serve as strategic
managers of their PMGSY rural road networks (footnote1).

E.        Provision of Inputs

8.      At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at $571.0 million equivalent
inclusive of taxes, duties, interest, and other charges on the loan during construction. The
foreign exchange cost was estimated at $269.1 million (47%), while the local currency cost
(including taxes and duties) was estimated at $301.9 million equivalent (53%). A loan of $400.0
million from ADB ordinary capital resources (OCR) was to help finance the foreign exchange
cost--excluding the front-end fee, interest, and other charges on the loan during construction--
and $170.6 million of the local currency cost. The government was to finance the foreign
exchange costs, comprising the front-end fee, interest, and other charges on the loan during
construction, and the local currency costs of $131.3 million (footnote 1).

9.      The project cost at completion was $510.7 million or about $60 million (11%) lower than
appraisal estimate. The actual civil works cost was $459.4 million, compared to $487.1 million at
appraisal (6% lower), even though civil works unit cost per km increased by 12% due to
engineering changes and increases in the price of construction materials. The decrease in cost
was due to reduction of scope and currency fluctuation. The cost for consulting services was
reduced from $3.7 million to $1.5 million for the project management consultant (PMC) and from
$26.4 million to $15.8 million for the project implementation consultant (PIC), due to reduction in
scope. At completion, $366.4 million of the ADB loan was disbursed, which was 71.8% of total
project costs, including 92.3% of the foreign exchange cost and 53.1% of the local cost
(footnote 6).




7
    ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to India for the Economic Studies for the Rural Roads Sector Development
    Project . Manila (TA 3914-IND).
8
    A panchayat is a body of directly elected people responsible for development of activities in an area.
4


F.      Implementation Arrangements

10.     The executing agency for the project was the Ministry of Rural Development (MORD) at
the central level and the state governments at the state level. The MORD was responsible for
overall project supervision and execution, while the state governments, through their rural
development departments, were responsible for project execution. The MORD joint secretary
chaired the project coordination committee. The committee monitored the use of loan funds and
overall implementation performance. The state-level standing committees as set up under
PMGSY guidelines assisted in overseeing and monitoring the timely completion of the project.

11.     At the state level, the implementing agency for the project was the Chhattisgarh Rural
Roads Development Agency (CGRRDA) and the Madhya Pradesh Rural Roads Development
Agency (MPRRDA). To monitor project performance and use of funds and to ensure
coordination among the key agencies involved, the state governments established state-level
project implementation committees. A PMC was contracted with the major responsibility of
assisting the implementing agency at the central level, while six PICs were contracted to
support the states in preparing subprojects, supervise and monitor quality control of civil works,
support the implementation of the land acquisition plan, mitigate social impacts, and implement
the environmental management plan. Two nongovernment organizations were contracted to
monitor and verify land acquisition for the project. At completion, only a minimal amount of land,
for shoulder adjustment and drainage construction, were acquired and there was no need for
any relocation due to minor road realignments.

12.     Of the 48 loan covenants, 39 were complied with, 5 were being complied with, and 4
were partially complied with. Five of the sector-related covenants being complied with referred
to commitments after project completion, such as road maintenance, contracting, and funding
for road maintenance.

                    II.      EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE AND RATINGS

A.      Relevance of Design and Formulation

13.     The PCR rated the project highly relevant, providing only a brief but inadequate
discussion on how the rating was determined. This validation determines that India's Tenth
Five Year Plan, 2002­2007 gave high priority not only to the improvement of the national
highway network, 9 but also to rural road connectivity. It targeted enhanced rural road
accessibility to be achieved by linking up villages with all-weather roads. The main objective
for the road sector under this plan was balanced development of the total network,
including road widening, improvement in ride quality and strengthening, road safety
measures, and providing wayside amenities. The objective of 100% rural connectivity with
all-weather roads was a national planning priority and PMGSY target.

14.    The balanced development of the road network was also an objective under the
Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007­2012.10 In particular, 100% rural connectivity with all-weather
roads to habitations with populations of over 1,000 (500-plus in hilly and/or tribal areas)
remained a priority objective under the Bharat Nirman Programme that aimed to upgrade

9
   Planning Commission, Government of India. 2002. Tenth Five Year Plan, 2002­2007. Volume I: Dimensions and
   Strategies. New Delhi.
10
    Planning Commission, Government of India. 2008. Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007­2012. Volume III: Agriculture,
   Rural Development, Industry, Services, and Physical Infrastructure. New Delhi.
                                                                                                           5


various rural infrastructures. The government retained its focus on the proper upkeep and
maintenance of the road network and on attaining higher maintenance standards for the
optimum utilization of network capacity and preserving road assets created, among others.

15.     The project was consistent with the PMGSY objective of providing good all-weather
road connections to habitations with a population of 1,000 or more by 2003 and to all
habitations with a population of 500 or more by 2007. The state governments of Chhattisgarh
and Madhya Pradesh attached high priority to PMGSY, as reflected in their favorable
performance during the first 2 years of PMGSY compared to other states (footnote 1).

16.      The ADB Country Strategy and Program (CSP) 2003­2006 for India pointed to the
importance of infrastructure in poverty reduction,11 through both its indirect impact on growth
leading to increased incomes and employment, and its direct contributions to incomes and
employment and reducing human poverty by improving access to social services.12 The CSP
identified the need for infrastructure projects that will incorporate institutional reforms to
improve sustainability, particularly by establishing sound approaches to maintenance. The
project incorporated each of the main thrusts of the CSP. Based on the above, this validation
rates the project relevant.

B.      Effectiveness in Achieving Project Outcome

17.    The PCR rated the project highly effective in achieving its intended outcomes (para. 5).
At completion, 3,207 habitations were connected, of which 1,551 were in Madhya Pradesh and
1,656 were in Chhattisgarh. This was despite the shorter length of rural roads constructed
compared to the target. The project constructed 9,574.7 km of rural roads less than the 11,000
km targeted. Approximately 11 million people were said to have benefitted from the subprojects,
as against the 5 million identified at appraisal (footnote 6). Compared to the 1,900 habitations
targeted at appraisal, the project exceeded the target by 1,307 habitations, but failed to meet the
number of km targeted to be constructed by 14.9% or 1,425.3 km (footnote 6).

18.      At appraisal, traffic volumes in 2003 for Batch 1 project roads averaged about 100
vehicles per day with about 50:50 split between motorized and nonmotorized vehicles. Overall
traffic growth rate was estimated at 7.0% for 2003­2010 and 6.3% for 2010­2024 (footnote 1).
During implementation, traffic surveys for the baseline (2005­2006) and for the periods 2006­
2007 and 2007­2008 were conducted. The surveys were taken on 73 project roads and 25
control roads and collected traffic count, average travel speeds, and freight characteristic data
for motorized and nonmotorized vehicles. In 2011, the PCR mission conducted a traffic survey,
which showed vehicle traffic increasing by 41% per annum for Madhya Pradesh and 26% per
annum for Chhattisgarh. The PCR was not clear whether the subproject roads in the traffic
surveys during implementation period and PCR mission were the same, but these covered
fewer roads than at appraisal. 13 This validation notes that the subproject roads for which
forecasts were prepared at appraisal may not be the same as those in the succeeding
surveys, as the PCR was silent on the subprojects comprising the surveys. Given these and
the small sample size, survey results could not be compared or used to draw conclusions on
traffic growth.



11
   ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program: India, 2003­2006. Manila.
12
   ADB. 2002. Impact of Rural Roads on Poverty Reduction: A Case Study-Based Analysis. Manila.
13
   At appraisal, the total number of roads covered was 131, but at PCR preparation, the total number of roads
   surveyed was only 73 or 55% of the number of roads at appraisal, excluding the so-called control roads.
6


19.     From the surveys, the PCR noted that the estimated average vehicle speed on the
sample subproject roads was 40­60 km per hour, which was 50% higher than the control
roads' average speed of 20­30 km per hour. This validation observes that vehicle speed on
the sample subproject roads should have been compared with baseline values at PCR or
appraisal for consistency. The comparison of subproject road findings with the control group
roads was flawed since improvements were introduced in the control group's areas. The PCR
noted that bus fares had decreased, but it did not describe how the estimate was computed
and the sample size used. No data on freight rates was given. From the consultant`s report
and PCR mission`s observation, the rehabilitated subproject roads were considered of good
quality with an IRI of 14, which corresponds to a rough, unpaved road with very slow speeds.
This validation notes this as just a typographical error. The estimated IRI at appraisal of the
subproject roads was 16, while at completion, the IRI was 4.

20.     The PCR findings on the reduction in VOC savings, average vehicle speed, and
passenger and freight rates could not be validated since no data was provided to confirm the
findings. This validation notes that even the description of the quality of project roads
constructed was inconsistent. The PMC and PICs conducted only sample road safety audits.
While the PMC developed a road safety guide and campaign materials, no outcome was
presented to prove utilization as the required road safety campaigns were not conducted.

21.     This validation notes that the socioeconomic impact assessment was based on a small
sample of Batch I projects only, including a control group, comprising 45 habitations in the two
states. The sample size represented 16% of the total habitations connected under Batch I, but
only 1.4% of the total number of habitations connected under the entire project (Batches I­IV).
Since the completion dates of the projects varied between late 2006 and late 2008, the
socioeconomic impacts realized also varied between villages. Self-estimating, the method
used to generate responses from survey respondents, was difficult for informants, leading to
potential biases. In the final survey, some of the control habitations were already either
connected or the roads had been improved, which made comparison with project roads lead to
erroneous measures of project outcomes and impacts.

22.    While road safety audits were required for all PMGSY roads at the design stage, the
PMC and PICs conducted only sample road safety audits. The PMC developed a road safety
guide and campaign materials, but none on the required road safety campaigns. Based on this
assessment, this validation rates the project effective.

C.     Efficiency of Resource Use in Achieving Outputs and Outcomes

23.      The PCR did not rate the efficiency of the project. The PCR reevaluated the project's
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) using the same methodology as at appraisal with the
cost and benefit stream from 2009­2027, but utilizing updated data collected from the surveys
(PCR, Appendix 10). However, it was not clear what data was used in the reevaluation. The
reevaluation compared project economic costs and benefits, with and without the project. The
economic benefits primarily considered VOC savings and passenger time cost savings. The
recalculated EIRRs of the subproject roads were 30.8% for the project as a whole, 28.6% for
the Madhya Pradesh and 32.5% for the Chhattisgarh subproject roads. This validation notes
that if the recalculated EIRRs were based on only 73 project roads, then, these could not be
compared with appraisal estimates. If, on the other hand, the recalculation was based on all
subproject roads, a comprehensive discussion on how benefits were computed for each or all
subproject roads was needed. The EIRR estimate at appraisal was 26.6% for 131 project
roads, 24.3% for 77 Madhya Pradesh project roads, and 29.0% for 54 Chhattisgarh project
                                                                                                      7


roads. It is not possible to reliably conclude that the higher EIRRs at PCR were due to higher
actual traffic than estimated at appraisal, since information on the exact number of road
projects used in the calculation and whether these were different from that at appraisal were
not provided.

24.     This validation notes that the project had design weaknesses, such as having layers of
executing agencies at the national and state levels, a national coordination committee
comprising leaders from relevant agencies to monitor the use of the loan and overall
implementation, and similar committees at the state level to monitor timely implementation of
the project. At the central level, the implementing agency was the National Rural Roads
Development Agency and at the state level, MPRRDA and CGRRDA. The PMC was recruited
to assist the implementing agency at the central level, but which could not implement all its
required tasks. Six PICs were recruited. Two nongovernment organizations were recruited to
monitor and verify land acquisition for the project. All of the above made project
implementation complex and required reporting to many levels of government.

25.      The project incurred significant delays from the original schedule due to (i) delay in the
preparation of bidding documents, (ii) slow selection and preparation of subprojects, and
(iii) inadequate response of contractors. In addition, the performances of the contractors for
civil works were mixed in both states. About 10% of the contractors could not complete the
work despite extensions, resulting in some contracts being terminated or dropped from the
packages financed by ADB, and some works being reallocated to other contractors.
Unfavorable weather conditions and flooding also affected performance. Based on the
findings, this validation rates the project less than efficient.

D.     Preliminary Assessment of Sustainability

26.      No rating on project sustainability was given in the PCR. The PCR noted that to ensure
sustainability of subproject roads, the civil works contracts contained provisions requiring the
contractors to provide maintenance of subproject roads up to five years after completion and
acceptance. The State Rural Roads Development Agency in both states were responsible for
road maintenance after the five-year liability period, which, under the loan covenant, were to be
assigned to the Zilla Panchayats and provide to them the state financing for PMGSY roads,
drawing on the standard performance-based contracts developed (footnote 1). However, the
road maintenance capability of the Zilla Panchayats was considered technically inadequate.
With the budget provided by the state governments, the State Rural Roads Development
Agency`s regional project implementation units (PIUs) employed contractors to conduct routine
and periodic maintenance of all PMGSY and project roads under five-year road contracts. The
PIUs were responsible for monitoring road conditions and developing maintenance plans, with
the Zilla Panchayats participating in maintenance planning and prioritizing maintenance
activities. This validation notes that there was no discussion on how the capacities of the Zilla
Panchayats were evaluated.

27.     Routine and periodic maintenance resources had been put in place to keep the project
roads in good condition, wherein implementing agencies allocated sufficient budget for
maintenance by the state governments. The PCR did not provide further information to
validate these findings. Based on the design and monitoring framework (DMF) prepared at
PCR, there was no mention that the design and introduction of rural roads maintenance
management system in state headquarters and Zilla Panchayats, together with training
programs and capacity building work, were achieved. In fact, the PCR itself mentioned that the
Zilla Panchayats were not considered capable of maintaining the completed roads.
8



28.     The state governments were committed to provide the annual financing required for
sustainable maintenance, with the government of Chhattisgarh providing annual funds to
maintain the PMGSY rural roads network, from Indian rupees (Rs)96.00 million ($2.1 million
equivalent) in 2006/2007 to Rs956.00 million ($20.6 million equivalent) in 2010/2011.
Meanwhile, the government of Madhya Pradesh is also providing annual budget allocations and
earmarking income from Mandi Cess to maintain its PMGSY roads, from about Rs80.00 million
($1.7 million equivalent) in 2006/2007 to about Rs1.02 billion ($22.0 million equivalent) in
2012/2013 (footnote 1). The actual funding allocated by the state governments was not given in
the PCR and whether funding commitments were being provided. This validation rates the
project likely to be sustainable.

E.      Impact

29.     The PCR did not rate the project's impact. Only 73 out of 167 Batch I project roads
were surveyed for traffic count and transport data (para. 23). A habitation that is scheduled to
be connected and with a higher level of socioeconomic activity was selected as the sample
habitation to be surveyed for the socioeconomic baseline and impact. From the two states, 45
habitations were surveyed, which seem insufficient to draw conclusions on the project's
socioeconomic impact (para. 21).
30.       In general, the PCR concluded that the presence of all-weather roads had directly or
indirectly contributed to improvements in (i) connectivity, (ii) transport, (iii) access to
government services, (iv) livelihood, (v) commercial activities, (vi) education, (vii) health,
(viii) land value, (ix) building materials, (x) social interactions, and (xi) gender empowerment.
Overall, the aggregate impact contributed to poverty alleviation in rural communities in Madhya
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh (footnote 6).
31.    With the improved connectivity, negative impacts observed included increase in
mining activities in certain areas of Chhattisgarh, rural inhabitants seeking job opportunities
outside of the community, and in cases where households donated land for the project,
temporary loss in agricultural production during project implementation even if compensation
had been paid.
32.     Aside from those given above, no major adverse environmental impacts were observed
as the project followed existing road and/or track alignments and did not pass through or were
in the vicinity of any environmentally sensitive areas. This validation rates the project's impact
significant.

                       III.   OTHER PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTS

A.     Performance of the Borrower and Executing Agency

33.    The PCR noted that the executing agency and implementing agencies performed
creditably and rated their performance highly satisfactory. The implementation arrangements
were well established and ensured efficient and timely management of project implementation.
The government provided the required counterpart funds and all necessary support. During
implementation, the executing agency provided close and regular monitoring and coordination
of the construction progress and quality control of the project. With assistance from the
consultants, the executing agency prepared the required periodic project progress reports.
Chartered accountants audited the project`s financial accounts and statements and reports were
submitted to ADB as required. An ADB Disbursement Mission recommended improvement in
                                                                                                         9


the monitoring of payments and consistency in accounting records and ledgers.14 The executing
agency and implementing agencies facilitated the ADB review missions as required.

34.     Contrary to the commitment for Zilla Panchayats to assume responsibility for the
maintenance of the PMGSY rural roads, the CGRRDA and MPRRDA undertook the contracting
for the second 5-year maintenance of the subproject roads. No reason for this deviation by the
executing agency was given. This validation rates the performance of the borrower and
executing agency satisfactory.

B.        Performance of the Asian Development Bank

35.     The ADB overall performance was rated highly satisfactory by the PCR. The project was
administered and supervised from ADB headquarters. During implementation, ADB conducted
regular reviews to resolve project implementation issues, fielding 10 review missions and
regular procurement and disbursement audits, provided advice on incorporating additional items
related to road safety, and helped improve the revised terms of reference of the PMC to include
tasks for road safety and road maintenance manual preparation. ADB provided regular reviews
on compliance with the project`s social and environmental safeguards.

36.      While ADB conducted review missions, an efficient and functional project monitoring and
management system was needed for project implementation. The number and different sizes of
the subprojects required more review missions than was fielded. While the back-to-office-
reports (BTORs) of the different missions had responded to project implementation issues,
these seemed insufficient. ADB approved 11,101.2 km of subproject roads, but the PCR
reported only 9,574.7 km as having been constructed. However, $33.6 million was undisbursed
of which $20.4 million was for Madhya Pradesh civil works. There were frequent changes in
ADB officers-in-charge of the project--four project officers over 2 years--which imply some loss
of institutional knowledge and experience on the project. This validation rates ADB performance
satisfactory.


C.        Others

37.     The PCR noted that during project formulation, social assessment and a survey of
sample households were conducted to ensure that the width of the existing roads would be
sufficient to accommodate a right-of-way of 7.5 meters. A land acquisition plan was prepared for
the sample and subsequent subprojects. The project, wherever required, benefited extensively
from voluntary land contribution by affected households. In very few cases, revenue land was
provided to affected persons as replacement land through an extensive legal procedure, with
support from the PIU.

             IV.     OVERALL ASSESSMENT, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.        Overall Assessment and Ratings

38.    This validation rates the four major criteria, while the PCR rated only two (see table). In
terms of relevance, the PCR rating was highly relevant although it did not provide adequate
discussion on how the rating was made. This validation's rating of relevant seems more

14
     ADB. 2007. Loan No. 2018: Rural Road Sector I Project, Aide Memoire of Disbursement Missions to Madhya
     Pradesh and Chattisgarh. Manila.
10


appropriate, given the design weaknesses that were noted. In terms of effectiveness, the PCR
gave a highly effective rating, but this had been based solely on the final number of habitations
that were connected by the subprojects. This validation's rating of effective recognizes that the
project achieved or partially achieved most of its outcome and output targets. While discussions
on efficiency and sustainability were provided in the PCR, no rating was given. Overall, the PCR
rated the project successful, which could not be reasonably explained without providing a rating
for efficiency and sustainability. Aggregating its ratings on the different criteria, this validation
rates the project successful.

                                             Overall Ratings
  Criteria                      PCR            IED Review              Reason for Disagreement
                                                                           and/or Comments
 Relevance                 Highly relevant    Relevant       The PCR had a very brief discussion on the
                                                             project's relevance, which did not support
                                                             the rating given. The project design was
                                                             weak due to the layers of executing and
                                                             implementing agencies and the creation of
                                                             coordinating committees that comprised
                                                             various agencies.
 Effectiveness in          Highly             Effective      The project failed to complete the targeted
 achieving outcome         effective                         number of road length. The PMC developed
                                                             a road safety guide and campaign materials,
                                                             but did not deliver on the required road
                                                             safety campaigns in the target rural villages
                                                             (paras. 17­22).
 Efficiency in achieving   No rating          Less than      The PCR did not explicitly rate the project's
 outcome and outputs                          efficient      efficiency. It focused more on the
                                                             recomputed EIRR, although it was not clear
                                                             on the number of subprojects on which the
                                                             recomputation was based. There were
                                                             specific outputs that were not achieved as
                                                             targeted (paras. 23­25).
 Preliminary assessment    No rating          Likely to be   Funds and capacity for road maintenance
 of sustainability                            sustainable    were generally sufficient (para. 28).
 Overall assessment        Successful         Successful
 Borrower and executing    Highly             Satisfactory   While counterpart funds were provided on
 agency                    satisfactory                      time, implementation issues were not
                                                             adequately addressed. These refer to the
                                                             failure of the PICs to field the agreed
                                                             number of technical staff and delay in PMCs'
                                                             mobilization of replacements to their original
                                                             proposed staff complement (paras. 33­34).
 Performance of ADB        Highly             Satisfactory   ADB approved over 11,000 km of subproject
                           satisfactory                      roads but only 9,574 km were actually
                                                             constructed. While the baseline and update
                                                             surveys were conducted, other elements of
                                                             the PPMS seemed to have been overlooked
                                                             (para. 36).
 Impact                    No rating          Significant    The PCR did not rate the impact of the
                                                             project. Given the number of habitations
                                                             covered and km of rural roads constructed,
                                                             the impact of the project is considered
                                                             significant in Chhattisgarh and Madhya
                                                                                                              11


  Criteria                          PCR          IED Review               Reason for Disagreement
                                                                              and/or Comments
                                                                 Pradesh (paras. 29­32).
 Quality of PCR                                  Less than       The PCR did not follow the recommended
                                                 satisfactory    report format nor provided detailed
                                                                 discussions and data to support ratings
                                                                 given (para. 44).
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, PCR = project completion report, PIC
= project implementation consultant, PMC = project management consultant, PPMS = project performance monitoring
system.
Note: From May 2012, IED views the PCR's rating terminology of "partly" or "less" as equivalent to "less than" and
uses this terminology for its own rating categories to improve clarity.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

B.      Lessons

39.     The PCR identified the following four lessons from the project: (i) the limited availability
and capacity of contractors, (ii) the length of time for preparing consultancy terms of reference
and actual implementation was quite long, (iii) the increase in prices of materials, and (iv) the
project employed the same standard documentation requirements for safeguards for large or
small-scale projects. All of these can be considered normal project implementation issues.

40.     Implementing a project with a large number of road subprojects together, with a capacity
building component, would strain implementing agency staff resources and divide their attention
among components. The capacity building component should have preceded the loan through a
technical assistance grant.

C.       Recommendations for Follow-Up

41.    The borrower, MORD, and the state governments must ensure that the required
maintenance program including financial resources for the subproject roads are implemented
and provided as stated in the loan covenant. These require follow-up by ADB.

                       V.       OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.      Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

42.    The project's DMF was well prepared. Considering the large number of subprojects to be
covered, this posed a challenge to monitor and evaluate all subprojects. The PCR failed to
recognize that ADB needs to closely assess project sustainability by regularly monitoring the
maintenance of subproject roads and reminding the government of the adequate funding
required for maintenance.

B.      Comments on Project Completion Report Quality

43.      The PCR quality was less than satisfactory. The data and analyses were inadequate and
could not support the ratings and evaluation presented. The PCR focused repetitively on the
accomplishments of the project as to the completion of subproject roads, but overlooked other
project areas, which are important subcomponents. For example, the implementation of the
required road safety campaigns was not mentioned in the PCR, giving the impression that these
were not implemented. While road safety audits were required to be carried out for all PMGSY
roads at design stage, the PCR mentioned only that safety and environmental protection
facilities have been installed in some roads and sample safety audits undertaken. The PCR
12


failed to rate two major project performance criteria on efficiency and sustainability, yet was able
to rate the project successful. There was inadequate explanation on the data used for
recomputing the EIRR. No rating was given on impacts. The PCR did not provide sufficient
evidence to determine project sustainability--a critical information needed for validation and
subsequent review during the conduct of the project performance evaluation report (PPER).

C.     Data Sources for Validation

44.    Data sources for this validation included the project's report and recommendation of the
President (RRP), PCR, BTORs of the various ADB missions to India, PMGSY documents,
Tenth Five Year Plan (2002­2007), Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007­2012), ADB CSP 2003­
2006 for India, and ADB India Country Partnership Strategy (2009­2012).

D.     Recommendation for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

45.    An independent evaluation of the project performance may not be necessary.
