                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                   Operations Evaluation Department




             SECTOR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM EVALUATION


                                          FOR


                             INDIA ENERGY SECTOR




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response and the Board of
Directors' Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) Chair's summary of a discussion of the
report by DEC.
Evaluation Study


Reference Number: SAP: IND 2007-17
Sector Assistance Program Evaluation
August 2007




Energy Sector in India ­ Building on Success for
More Results




Operations Evaluation Department
              CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

     Currency Unit      ­    Indian rupee/s (Re/Rs)
          Re 1.00       =    $0.022
            $1.00       =    Rs45.4387



                     ABBREVIATIONS

ADB      --     Asian Development Bank
AERC     --     Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission
ASEB     --     Assam State Electricity Board
BEE      --     Bureau of Energy Efficiency
CBM      --     coal bed methane
CDM      --     clean development mechanism
CERC     --     Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
CIDA     --     Canadian International Development Agency
CPS      --     country partnership strategy
DFID     --     Department for International Development
EA       --     executing agency
EIRR     --     economic internal rate of return
ESCO     --     electricity supply company
FIRR     --     financial internal rate of return
GDP      --     gross domestic product
GEB      --     Gujarat Electricity Board
GERC     --     Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission
ICRA     --     Investment Information and Credit Rating Agency
INRM     --     India Resident Mission
IPP      --     independent power producer
IREDA    --     Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency
JBIC     --     Japan Bank for International Cooperation
LNG      --     liquefied natural gas
MFF      --     multitranche financing facility
MMSCMD   --     million metric standard cubic meter per day
MPERC    --     Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission
MPSEB    --     Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
MW       --     megawatt
NHPC     --     National Hydroelectric Power Corporation
NTPC     --     National Thermal Power Corporation
OED      --     Operations Evaluation Department
OEM      --     operations evaluation mission
PCG      --     partial credit guarantee
PCR      --     project completion report
PFC      --     Power Finance Corporation Limited
PPAR     --     project-program performance audit report
PSOD     --     Private Sector Operations Department
PTC      --     Power Trading Corporation
R&M      --     renovation and modernization
RE       --     renewable energy
RSDD     --     Regional and Sustainable Development Department
                                                                                                  3


           SAPE            --      sector assistance program evaluation
           SARD            --      South Asia Regional Department
           SMEC            --      Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation
           TA              --      technical assistance
           TOU             --      time-of-use
           USAID           --      United States Agency for International Development



                                            NOTE

In this report, "$" refers to US dollars. FY refers to financial year from 1 April to 31 March.


                                            Keywords

 asian development bank, distribution, energy, energy efficiency, generation, power sector,
 india, performance evaluation, sector strategy, sector governance, transmission,
 regulation, development impact.



Director General                     B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department
Director                             R. B. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2

Team Leader                          R. Schenck, Evaluation Specialist
                                     Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
Team Members                         B. Palacios, Senior Evaluation Officer
                                     Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
                                     I. Garganta, Operations Evaluation Assistant
                                     Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

                                     Operations Evaluation Department, SE - 008
                                                  CONTENTS

                                                                                                        PAGE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                            iii
I.          INTRODUCTION                                                                                      1
            A.   Background                                                                                   1
            B.   Objectives and Scope                                                                         1
            C.   Evaluation Methodology                                                                       1
II.         THE POWER SECTOR AND ADB'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM                                                    2
            A.   Macroeconomic Context                                                                       2
            B.   The Indian Power Sector                                                                     2
            C.   External Assistance to the Power Sector                                                    14
III.        PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AND OPERATION                                                            15
            A.   Generation Sector                                                                          15
            B.   Transmission Sector                                                                        16
            C.   Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy                                                     18
            D.   Power Sector Development Programs                                                          19
IV.         EVALUATION OF ADB ASSISTANCE                                                                    27
            A.   Bottom Up Assessment of ADB Assistance                                                     27
            B.   Top Down Evaluation                                                                        32
            C.   Assessment of ADB Performance                                                              36
            D.   Overall Evaluation                                                                         37
V.          CONCLUSIONS, KEY LESSONS, ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                            37
            A.   Conclusions                                                                                37
            B.   Main Lessons Identified                                                                    37
            C.   Assessment of the Main Issues Facing the Power Sector                                      38
VI.         STRATEGIC IMPLICATIONS FOR THE INDIA POWER SECTOR                                               41
VII.        RECOMMENDATIONS: FUTURE ASSISTANCE PRIORITIES                                                   48




       The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding conflict
       of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report. David Parish
       and Jindra Samson were the consultants. To the knowledge of the management of OED, there were
       no conflicts of interests of the persons preparing, reviewing or approving this report.
APPENDIXES

1.    Loans and Technical Assistance Grants to India's Energy Sector   49
2.    Sector Assistance Program Evaluation Study Methodology           52
3.    India's Energy Policy and Program Development Milestones         53
4.    Customer Survey                                                  59
5.    Development Coordination Matrix for the Energy Sector in India   62
6.    Operation Evaluation Mission Case Studies                        63
7.    Accounting Issues                                                79
8.    Potential for Corruption in the Energy Sector                    83
9.    Project Performance Ratings                                      89
10.   Fuel Supply Issues                                               92




Attachments: Management Response
             DEC Chair Summary
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction

         This sector assistance program evaluation (SAPE) report presents an independent
evaluation of Asian Development Bank (ADB) assistance to the energy sector in India. It
identifies lessons and areas where the Government of India, ADB, the private sector, and other
stakeholders can work together more effectively to achieve the ultimate goals of providing
electricity at an affordable cost and developing an efficient and financially viable power sector. It
is also designed to provide an input to the India country assistance program evaluation and to
the formulation of a new country partnership strategy and business plan.

Country Context

        India is one of the fastest growing developing economies, having expanded by about 6%
per annum in the 1990s and by some 8% in recent years. The share of agriculture has declined
substantially in the past decade while that of manufacturing increased with an average growth
rate of 6.3% per annum in the sector during the same period. India's fast-paced economic
growth and its rapid rate of industrialization and urbanization have fueled energy demand so
that in 2003 it ranked sixth worldwide in primary energy consumption. The overall energy
intensity of the economy has declined over the years. This has been made possible by the
gradual substitution of primary noncommercial energy sources by the more efficient commercial
energy sources.

Sector Issues

        The growth of the electricity sector has been largely supported by the central and state
governments' capital resources (up to 25% of annual budgets). The centralized electricity supply
policy and a regional and national transmission grid policy have resulted in large electricity
plants and five regional grids. India is largely self-reliant on Government-owned fuel supplies,
making use of the available hydropower and coal resources. Some years ago, India began a
major energy policy reform effort to make electricity more affordable to the less affluent sectors
of the population, particularly farmers, through very large cross-subsidy schemes. These
schemes, however, have not been financially sustainable. State electricity boards were unable
to increase supplies, and they defaulted on payments as revenues failed to meet operating
costs. Subsequently, the central government initiated a series of reforms culminating in the
2003 Electricity Act which sought to restructure the entire electricity industry.

        The impacts of the electricity reforms to date have increased competitiveness and led to
a demonstration effect among the states' electricity sectors and their regulators, adding
momentum to the central government's impetus for reform. The positive outcomes have isolated
national anti-reform movements. The effects of reforms are incremental, rather than "big bang,"
and follow an Indian development model rather than one imposed by outside assistance
agencies. The reforms are gradually shifting the financial risks from the consumer to the
management of the electricity sector. The least effective changes have been in the areas of
human resource development and in attaining the desired quality of governance in the
distribution sector (particularly with regard to management and accounting practices).

       Reform initiatives, however, have been insufficient to keep pace with the country's
economic growth and energy needs. India's current power sector has insufficient generation
capacity, lacks optimal utilization of generation resources, transmission between regions is
iv


limited, distribution facilities are aging and increasingly unreliable, losses in transmission and
distribution and the effects of theft cause large financial losses for the system, the pace of rural
electrification is slow, and there is widespread inefficient use of electricity. India's need for
power is growing rapidly, with consumption having increased by about 64% over the last 10
years. Nevertheless, electricity is still inaccessible to the majority of households. While over
80% of villages are already electrified, only 56% of total households have access to electricity
and in rural areas only 33% of households have access.

ADB Assistance

        Since ADB's power sector operations in India began in 1986 there have been 24 public
sector loans for 21 projects with a total value of $4.6 billion (29% of the total public sector
lending to India). This has been supported by an additional $337 million of loans through ADB's
private sector operations. There has been a consistent focus on transmission and distribution
lending and more recently on power sector restructuring. ADB public sector lending has exited
from generation and hydrocarbons, consistent with the changes in ADB's energy policy
directions, while private sector operations are now taking a larger role in financing generation.
These loans were supported by 50 technical assistance (TA) projects, valued at $23.5 million. A
further $1.9 billion in public sector loans are in ADB's funding pipeline.

Project Implementation and Operation ­ Main Findings

          ADB provided program assistance to three state electricity boards: Assam, Gujarat, and
Madhya Pradesh. The overall conclusion from this study is that ADB program assistance, to
date, has generally been successful as a result of targeting state electricity sectors that were
thoroughly committed to change. This includes the state governments of Assam, Gujarat, and
Madhya Pradesh, their respective state electricity boards, the nonexecutive employees of the
state electricity boards, and the independent state-appointed regulators. In all three state
electricity boards evaluated, unbundling has been achieved and new separate corporate entities
with "clean" balance sheets have been established as a result of restructuring. The restructuring
included partial state assumption of liabilities, more transparent subsidies, renegotiation of
power purchase agreements, rationalization of state-owned generation to promote merit order
dispatch, and changed organizational structures and cultures that were re-focused on service
delivery. Each of the state electricity boards has maintained a shell organization to service
liabilities that were not directly related to the assets of the unbundled corporations and serve as
a single buyer for the distribution companies. The unbundled generation and transmission
organizations are assessed as having a good probability for sustaining independent operations
and becoming self-funding. All states indicated that ADB assistance was catalytic in providing
the impetus to implementing the reform process.

        The transformation process for unbundling the distribution companies is well developed
but has not been completed. The distribution companies do not, as yet, have complete
independence from the parent shell company and still rely on the shell company for some of
their strategic functions. The study findings suggest that more assistance may be required to
maintain the momentum created by the program loans to develop the distribution companies
into independent organizations with best-practice governance and risk management policies
and procedures that would enable them to become self-sustaining. ADB should consider
providing some additional assistance in human resource development and developing
information technology systems that support planning and governance. In Assam, there is a
concern that the split into three distribution companies may not have been optimal; concerns
that the required future staff expertise and numbers, together with unbalanced customer mixes,
                                                                                                 v


may lead to at least one distribution company's being unsustainable. The study found conflicting
information regarding this issue that both supports and contradicts the concerns, To date, the
reform outcomes are rated as "successful." However, sustainability depends on ongoing
commitment and funding.

        ADB project loans to state electricity boards have resulted in both increased capacity to
serve additional load and, more importantly, greater reliability of service delivery. A significant
portion of the loans were used to upgrade systems that had suffered from a lack of expansion
and inadequate operations and maintenance. Maintenance has shifted from being primarily
reactive to preventive, and this has resulted in better quality of supply. Metering has been widely
implemented at all levels in the service delivery chain, and this is enabling widespread detection
and reduction of nontechnical losses. ADB requirements for bidding and awarding contracts
were implemented by the state electricity boards. This caused some delays due to ADB
processes and one state electricity board's lack of experience, but loan savings were also
realized. For instance, resultant savings by Madhya Pradesh amounting to $54 million were
reallocated to other projects with the assistance of the India Resident Mission. Overall, the state
electricity boards' procurement expertise was enhanced by the experience and the executing
agencies expressed satisfaction with the consulting services. The exception noted by all three
state electricity boards has been for human resource consulting, which they rated as partially
satisfactory. The projects in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are rated "successful." As the Assam
project is approximately 12 months behind schedule, it is not appropriate to evaluate the
outcome at this time. However, preliminary indications point to a successful outcome.

        ADB has provided technical assistance to the regulators in Assam and in Gujarat. The
outcome from this support was successful and is sustainable. The state regulators have
developed a high degree of independence and are proactively regulating the state electricity
boards' generation, transmission, and distribution sectors, with increased performance-based
regulation replacing normative, cost-based regulation. The regulators have, for instance,
targeted improvements in supply and service levels while mandating reductions in nontechnical
losses. Furthermore, the regulators are actively promoting consumer participation in the reform
and regulatory processes. The regulators are gradually becoming financially independent by
generating their own revenues, and they are actively participating as a group at the national
level to develop their expertise. The study considers that the state regulators have performed a
major role in the successful reform and unbundling of the state electricity boards, but they also
require some further assistance. A key requirement for future development may be to facilitate
further national and international exchange of knowledge and software for regulatory personnel.
In particular, regulatory personnel do not have the human or software resources to evaluate
system least-cost planning and thus lack a critical resource to contain industry costs. The study
also found the technical assistance provided to the regulators to have been successful.

        Loans to Power Grid were timed to extend and upgrade the grid, connect new supply to
the grid, facilitate interregional transfer of power to optimize costs and grid operations, and to
gain efficiencies in service delivery at a time of national shortages. The resultant increased
system capability was still insufficient to meet overall demand, and interregional transmission
suffers from bottlenecks. Without the added capacity, however, shortages would have been
greater, and hence the loan was highly relevant to the sector. The company expertise in
operations and management is highly rated. Continued financial support will be required for
Power Grid to develop its interregional transmission capacity from 9,500 megawatts (MW) to
over 30,000 MW by 2012.
vi


        ADB's assistance has focused largely on the weakest links in the provision of electricity,
which are the state electricity boards. They suffered the most from policies that were designed
to improve the livelihoods of the poor and to strengthen the agricultural sector to make India
self-sufficient in food. This is still the weakest part of the sector, and ADB signaled its continuing
relevance when it approved loans to Uttaranchal in 2006 and a loan to further strengthen
Madhya Pradesh in 2007. The study concludes that the policy shift adopted by ADB in 1996 has
resulted in a direct positive and sustainable impact:
        (i)      Financial restructuring together with tariff restructuring, as well as lower costs,
                 have reduced the need for subsidies. This means fewer funds are required for
                 the power sector, leaving more available for social sectors.
        (ii)     The increased quality of supply has improved the reliability of supply. This is a
                 major attraction to industries that are heavily reliant on secure fuel supplies (such
                 as the information technology industry) and will impact more highly on the
                 developed states.
        (iii)    The demonstration effects of renewable energy projects have made some of this
                 sector self-sustaining.
        (iv)     The concurrent development of regulators' expertise and independence,
                 transparency, and consumer advocacy is removing political interference and
                 providing a balance between the needs of consumers and industry. This has led
                 to consumer involvement and a shift across many of the states to a service focus
                 from a supply focus.

The major issues facing the Indian power sector are fourfold:
      (i)     New investments in the energy sector will depend on the commercial viability of
              the distribution sector to guarantee the power purchase agreements or prudential
              requirements. This will necessitate a widespread increase in the quality of
              governance and maintaining the pace of reform.
      (ii)    Funding for the power sector, and particularly the distribution sector, will depend
              upon reforms and to make this sector self-funding. The generation and
              transmission sectors are likely to become self-funding, but, because the
              capability of India's financial sector to provide the necessary funds is still limited,
              external assistance will still be required.
      (iii)   The availability of secure, reliable, and well-managed sources of fuel supplies to
              the generation sector and other energy intensive industries is threatened by
              shortages and will need to be developed in tandem with the industry expansion.
      (iv)    Managing the environmental impacts of the electricity sector is increasing in
              importance, as the system is expanding and the primary fuel source is coal.

        The demonstration effects of the restructuring process in the states where ADB and the
World Bank have provided assistance is likely to lead to an increased viability in the distribution
sector and thus to greater capability to fund new generation requirements. Additionally, the
transmission needs can be met through adequate expansion funded by international assistance,
commercial lending, and revenues from the restructured states. Revenues that were previously
used to fund inefficient distribution utilities can gradually be used for other purposes as the level
of technical and nontechnical losses are reduced and as energy efficiency measures are more
widely implemented.
                                                                                                 vii


Overall Performance Assessment

        The overall assessment rating on the performance of ADB assistance to the energy
sector in India is "successful," which reflects satisfactory performance. This was based on both
a top-down assessment of strategic positioning, contribution to development results, and ADB
performance and bottom-up assessments of lending and nonlending projects.

        Over time, ADB has responded to the changing needs of the sector. The sector
assistance program was aligned with the development goals outlined in the Government's
development plans. It was consistent with ADB's energy policy and country strategies. While the
overall power sector has made significant improvements in supply and sector governance,
ADB's assistance at the state level, where it has participated, has been highly effective. The
combined efforts of ADB and the World Bank and their common focus on sector restructuring
have influenced the Government to undertake the major reforms implemented under the 2003
Electricity Act.

        ADB has contributed significant additionality that supported the successful outcomes of
projects. This included (i) attracting private sector participation in recent years; (ii) developing
environmental evaluation capacity; (iii) efficient processing of variations due to savings assisted
with bid approval and awards; and (iv) providing advice on technical issues. Furthermore, ADB
provided timely and effective TA support which supported institutional strengthening appropriate
to the design, the operations, and the development of the projects.

        The bottom-up assessment looked at 19 completed public sector loans, of which 17
were rated "successful" and 2 "partly successful" based on the five core criteria of relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact. All the 4 private sector operations projects
independently evaluated were rated "successful." The assessment examined 18 TA projects, 16
of which were rated "successful" while the remaining 2 were "partly successful".

Conclusions

        With the passage of the 2003 Electricity Act, the emphasis in India is on increased
competition, open access to transmission and distribution networks, merit order purchase,
power trading, and time-bound restructuring of state electricity boards. This established an
enabling environment for reforms in the sector. ADB loans and TA have been within the
guidelines of ADB policy, have targeted the sectors outlined in the country strategies and
programs for India, and have supported the reforms proposed in the 2003 Act. ADB assistance
to the state electricity boards was generally relevant, efficient, and effective. This was a direct
result of ADB's good understanding of the capabilities and desire of the sector to undergo the
changes that were agreed during the loan processing.

        Tranche releases of policy loans and related covenants have been well supported by the
state electricity boards and have contributed to the major outcomes being achieved. The depth
and length of ADB policy dialogue and client interaction is evident from the length of time in loan
preparation and from client responses. This was instrumental in matching client capabilities and
inputs with ADB assistance.

       Overall, the outcomes of the project and program loans and supporting TA have been
successful, and, with continued support to the state electricity boards, the intended long-term
development impacts are likely to be achieved.
viii


Main Lessons Identified

        The main lessons identified from the evaluation are (i) ADB's approach to lending at
state level has worked well and should be used as a model for future assistance, (ii) sustained
technical assistance is needed to support the reform programs at state level, and (iii)
corporatization is providing benefits similar to those normally attributed to privatization.

Implications for Future Assistance Program

       India has to manage three conflicting goals in its energy sector: (i) meeting security of
fuel and energy supplies, (ii) increasing the efficiency of supply and financial operations, and (iii)
minimizing the environmental effects of the increased supply needs. India's continuing shortage
of energy supplies (both for fuels and generation capacity) threaten its economic and social
development goals. The energy sectors' viability needs to be improved through better
governance and operational efficiency. There is also a need to minimize the environmental
impacts of increased generation growth that is needed to meet the growing energy demand.
These conflicts are illustrated in Figure 1 below.



                           Figure 1: Conflicts in the Energy Sector
                                        trade-offs between
                     The energy sector: trade-
                     three important but potentially conflicting goals
                                 Market stability
                                 and robustness           Competition


                                 Security                      Efficiency
                            Geopolitical        Electricity
                                                                    Monopoly
                            instability           Sector
                                                                    regulation

                                              Environment



                                 Nature             Climate        Air
                               Conservation         Change      pollution


                     Source: Adapted from 2005 NorskHydro Presentation.

        The weakest links in attaining these goals are at the state level, where there are major
deficiencies in operational and technical efficiencies and continuing financial losses. As this
sector provides the primary revenues for system expansion, restructuring the state electricity
sector to be self-sustaining should be the highest priority for assistance. In parallel, general
electricity system expansion and in transmission and in generation should be addressed to
balance supply and demand, as their viability will be assured with reliable revenues from the
restructured state sector. Concurrently, environmental concerns must be integrated through (i)
state system upgrades that reduce losses from the overloaded systems, (ii) rehabilitation of
existing older generation plant, (iii) greater emphasis on energy efficiency and (iv) a strategic
environmental focus on the development of the system. Supporting these efforts, there should
                                                                                                             ix


be a continued emphasis to improve the operational efficiency of the state electricity sector
through improved governance and the development of independent regulation.

Key Recommendations

Based on the evaluation findings, the following recommendations are put forward for
consideration in future ADB assistance to the energy sector in India. They are designed to
provide broad guidance but not to be overly prescriptive.

 Recommendations                                              Department              Implementation
                                                              Responsible
  1. Subject to the Government's agreement, continue          SARD                    As part of the India
     and expand the current focus on state electricity                                CPS and its
     sector restructuring and system expansion to                                     implementation
     balance supply and demand.
  2. Integrate into, and increase energy efficiency and       SARD, RSDD              As part of the India
     renewable energy initiatives in, lending programs                                CPS and its
     at both central and state levels.                                                implementation

  3. Tailor products and services to meet clients'            SARD, RSDD,             As part of the India
     evolving needs.                                          PSOD, INRM              CPS and its
                                                                                      implementation
  4. Increase the number and volume of nonsovereign           SARD, PSOD,             As part of the India
     transactions   to  expand    generation   and            INRM                    CPS and its
     transmission.                                                                    implementation
CPS = country partnership strategy, INRM = India Resident Mission, PSOD = Private Sector Operations Department,
RSDD = Regional and Sustainable Development Department, SARD = South Asia Regional Department.




                                                                    Bruce Murray
                                                                    Director General
                                                                    Operations Evaluation Department
                                             I.    INTRODUCTION

A.        Background

1.      This sector assistance program evaluation (SAPE) report presents an independent
evaluation of the performance of Asian Development Bank (ADB) assistance to the energy
sector in India. It identifies lessons and areas where the Government of India, ADB, the private
sector, and other stakeholders can work together more effectively to achieve the ultimate goal of
providing electricity at an affordable cost while developing an efficient and financially viable
power sector. It is also designed to provide an input to the India country assistance program
evaluation and to formulating a new country partnership strategy and business plan.

B.        Objectives and Scope

2.      The objective of the SAPE was to provide a comprehensive and independent
assessment of ADB's assistance to the Indian energy sector, including its impact on the sector's
development, which is important to the country's economic development and poverty reduction
programs. The evaluation, which focused particularly on the 1996­2006 period, took into
account (i) the power sector (generation, transmission, and distribution), (ii) the legislation and
regulation of the power sector, and (iii) the sector's fuel requirements. The SAPE was designed
to address three sets of interrelated issues:
        (i)     How, and to what extent, did ADB contribute to the major development objectives
                of the energy sector as stated in its country strategies and programs for India for
                the evaluation period? How well were ADB's programs aligned with the national
                priorities and coordinated with the assistance provided by other development
                partners? Were these programs delivered consistently?
        (ii)    Was ADB assistance (lending and nonlending) effective in achieving the desired
                development objectives of the sector? Were these objectives achieved efficiently
                and are they sustainable?
        (iii)   What were the likely long-term development outcome and impact of ADB
                assistance? Did it improve the sector's capacity to contribute to economic growth,
                poverty reduction, and the country's overall sustainable development?

3.      ADB's public and private lending support has been extensive, covering the hydrocarbon
sector, generation, transmission, distribution, power sector development, and renewable energy.
The lending has been supported by technical assistance (TA) grants. The SAPE evaluated the
performance of loans, investments, and TA (Appendix 1).

C.        Evaluation Methodology

4.    The SAPE has carried out both top-down (strategic) and bottom-up (project level)
assessments following broadly the applicable ADB guidelines.1 It also considered the influence
of ADB corporate level processes and their successive steps.2

5.    The SAPE was carried out through a combination of field studies in India, interviews,
and desk review of evaluation reports. The field studies were focused on a sample of lending
and nonlending projects

1
    ADB. 2005. Guidelines for the Preparation of Country Assistance Program Evaluation Reports. Manila.
2
    A more detailed outline of the study methodology is presented in Appendix 2.
2


          (i)           ensuring coverage of a broad mixture of projects that covered generation,
                        transmission, and distribution;
          (ii)          identifying projects that illustrated ADB's involvement in India's power sector
                        reform program; and
          (iii)         incorporating desk studies of previous OED energy sector evaluations in India.

                  II.       THE POWER SECTOR AND ADB'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

A.        Macroeconomic Context

6.      India's gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average rate of 5.4% in the 1980s, 6%
in the 1990s, and at about an 8% rate in recent years. The three major economic concerns for
the nation are inflation, very large trade deficits, and a need to build infrastructure to facilitate
economic growth. The Tenth Five Year Plan (2002­2006) identified infrastructure investment
needs of $156 billion, of which 40% is for power. But at the same time the Government faces a
fiscal deficit of 4­5% of GDP and hence must seek a range of funding sources for investment.
As the power sector has losses about equal to 1.5% of GDP, however, the industry has to
improve performance in order to achieve commercial viability and justify this investment.

7.     While agriculture's share of GDP has declined substantially in the past decade, that of
manufacturing has increased slowly but consistently (growing at an average 6.3% per annum)
during the same period. As in other economies, and regardless of the stage of development,
energy consumption and economic growth are positively correlated. India's fast-paced overall
economic growth and the rapid rate of industrialization and urbanization have fueled energy
demand so that in 2003 it ranked sixth worldwide in primary energy consumption.3 The overall
energy intensity of the economy has declined over the past 10 years. This has been made
possible by the gradual substitution of primary noncommercial 4 energy sources (mainly
combustible renewable energy and waste) by the more efficient commercial energy sources.5

B.        The Indian Power Sector

          1.            Overview

8.     Firewood and cow dung provide an overwhelming 81% of the energy available to Indian
households. India currently scores poorly on the Energy Development Index6 in comparison to
other developing nations. This underdeveloped form of energy consumption poses a burden on
women and children, who not only are burdened with the resource collection but also suffer from
diseases related to its usage.

9.     India's energy mix includes a high share of noncommercial fuels, and electricity
consumption is a meager 9%. The high reliance on petroleum fuels in meeting the country's
energy requirements reflects a paucity of developed alternatives, including liquefied natural gas
(LNG) and coal-fired generation. Figure 1, below, indicates high energy vulnerability due to
dependence (measured by energy intensity of GDP at purchasing power parity and currency


3
    The top five consumers were Germany, Japan, People's Republic of China, Russia, and United States.
4
    Primary noncommercial energy sources include fuel wood, dung, and crop residues.
5
    Sources of primary commercial energy include brown and black coal, crude oil, natural gas, hydropower, nuclear
    power, and wind power.
6
    Developed by the International Energy Agency, it measures the transition to modern fuels usage and degree of
    maturity in energy use.
                                                                                                                                 3


exchange rates) and vulnerability (measured through energy import costs as a percentage of
total exports).


                                                                Figure 1: India's Energy Vulnerability
                                                30%
                                                                                                              India, 39
                                                25%
               Energy Imports as % of Exports




                                                20%                                                 High Risk: Vulnerable and
                                                              USA, 246                                    Dependant

                                                15%
                                                    Japan, 112
                                                             France, 46
                                                   Germany, 59
                                                10%                                                          PRC, 52
                                                               Brazil, 11
                                                5%
                                                          UK, 30      Canada, 23
                                                      Competitive: Low Dependence and
                                                0%             Vulnerability
                                                      0         0.2        0.4      0.6     0.8                  1         1.2
                                                                           Energy Intensity
                                                  Bubble size indicates 2003 oil import bill in $

                   Source: International Energy Agency. 2003.



10.    There has been a fundamental shift in India's energy policy from energy's traditional role
as a developmental input to that of a consumer-driven, tradable commodity. The effects of this
change in policy direction are now seen in the financial viability of the central and state power
sectors, increased availability and quality of supply, and the recognition of consumer choice.

11.     Growth of the electricity sector has been supported largely by central government and
state capital resources (up to 25% of annual budgets). The centralized electricity supply policy
and a regional and national transmission grid policy have resulted in large electricity plants and
five regional grids. India also has relied heavily on Government-owned fuel supplies for the
power sector in order to utilize the available hydropower and coal resources. The country has
adopted a major policy effort to make electricity more affordable to the less affluent sections of
the population, and in particular farmers, through very large cross-subsidy schemes.

12.     These initiatives, however, have been insufficient to keep pace with the country's
economic growth and energy needs. India's power sector is characterized by (i) insufficient
generation capacity, (ii) less than optimal utilization of generation resources, (iii) very limited
transmission between regions, (iv) aging and increasingly unreliable distribution facilities, (v)
losses in transmission and distribution and the effects of theft causing large financial losses to
the system, (vi) a slow pace of rural electrification, and (vii) widespread inefficient use of
electricity. India is the seventh largest electricity generating country in the world and accounts
for about 3.5% of the world's total annual electricity generation. Its need for power is growing
rapidly, with consumption increasing by some 64% over the last 10 years. Forecast electricity
4


output growth is 10% annually to support a GDP growth rate of 7% to 8%. This is higher than in
the last decade, as the energy intensive manufacturing sector is expected to increase its share
of GDP. Electricity is still inaccessible, however, to the majority of households. While over 80%
of villages are already electrified only 56% of total households have access to electricity, and in
the rural areas only 33% of households have access to electricity.7

           2.       Legislation and Regulation

13.      Control and operation of the Indian power sector was until recently highly fragmented,
without a clear road map, and driven by social and political goals with little regard to long-term
economic impacts. Electric power is a concurrent policy matter between central and state
governments.8 The Ministry of Power is the policy setting authority for the sector. It is assisted
by the Central Electricity Authority, which advises central and state governments and
undertakes planning and project appraisal. The central government is also a major investor in
the power sector and accounts for about 34% of generation capacity. 9 It operates the
interregional transmission grid and is responsible for developing and funding such other
initiatives as national power regulation, electricity trading, funding renewable energy, energy
efficiency, and rural electrification. Private generation accounts for about 13% of supply, and all
other generation (53%) as well as transmission and distribution is supplied at the state level.

14.     National power regulation is the responsibility of the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC), which was set up in 1998. It regulates tariffs for Government-owned
entities, regulates power activities that cross state borders, promotes a competitive industry,
frames tariff guidelines, and advises the Government on tariff policy. The Appellate Tribunal for
Electricity deals with appeals against decisions of the CERC and state electricity regulators.

15.     The most important recent legislative milestones in the power sector include the 1998
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission Act and the 2003 Electricity Act. The origins of
current policy can be traced back to 1991, when independent power producers (IPPs) and
private generation were permitted. Some investors entered the market but, with insolvent state
electricity boards as the prospective counterparties in transactions, investor enthusiasm was
limited. In 1996, Orissa became the first state to attempt a major sector restructuring with
unbundling and privatization. The policy was, at best, a partial success. Also in 1996, the central
government formulated a Common Minimum Program with states, including a minimum
agricultural tariff benchmarked at half the cost of supply, encouraging private participation,
planning 100% metering, and setting up regulatory commissions. In 2001, the Energy
Conservation Act was passed to promote energy efficiency and demand-side management. In
7
    Ministry of Power. 2007.
8
    This is outlined in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.
9
    The central government owns a number of operating entities in the power sector. The principal ones are: National
    Thermal Power Corporation Limited (NTPC), National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC), Nuclear Power
    Corporation, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, Rural Electrification Corporation, Power Finance Corporation
    (PFC) and PTC. NTPC, set up in 1975, is the biggest thermal utility in India and the largest global client of the
    World Bank. It has 20 coal- and gas-fired plants with total capacity of 27,904 MW as of June 2007. It is state
    controlled but since 2004 the Government has sold 10.5% of the company through two public offers. NHPC, set up
    in 1975, is the country's main hydroelectric power generator. It has nine plants and capacity of 2,475 MW. Nuclear
    Power Corporation is the nuclear utility, operating 15 units with 4,410 MW capacity at six locations. Power Grid, set
    up in 1989, is the central transmission utility. Rural Electrification Corporation, set up in 1969, finances rural power
    projects. PFC, set up in 1986, provides finance for projects undertaken by state power utilities. It raises finance in
    the market. PTC, formerly the Power Trading Corporation, was set up in 1999, by NTPC, NHPC, Power Grid and
    PFC, to trade power and to enter into long-term power purchase agreements. It was fully state owned until 2003
    but now has a majority of private shareholders, of which the largest is Tata Power. It is also buying power from
    captive generators and from projects in Bhutan and Nepal.
                                                                                                              5


2003, a major new Electricity Act was passed. This is a significant step in the national reform
process. It aims to introduce competition to the power sector, provide power for all, and create
an enabling framework for the accelerated and more efficient development of the power sector.
The provisions of the Act include the introduction of a National Electricity Policy, extension of
rural electrification, open access in transmission, phased open access in distribution, mandatory
establishment of state electricity regulatory commissions, license-free generation and
distribution, power trading, mandatory metering for all consumers, and stringent antitheft
measures. The Government envisions providing power for all by 2012. This ambitious plan aims
to provide electricity sufficient to facilitate 8% annual economic growth, improve reliability and
quality, ensure commercial viability for the industry, achieve cost-effectiveness in supply, and
provide all households with electricity.

16.      While the broad thrust of policy is toward a more commercial power sector, the central
government recognized the importance of social issues. In the past, many states had provided
free power to agricultural consumers and have subsidized domestic supplies through high tariffs
on industrial and commercial consumers. Centrally enabled policy now mandates metering and
charging for all consumption, including for agricultural activities, along with reducing cross-
subsidies to no more than 20%. The new policy enables state governments to give explicit
subsidies to particular classes of consumers and provides for a minimum lifeline tariff for small
power users, currently set at 30 kilowatt-hours per month. The Rhajev Gandhi program for rural
electrification has a stated policy of connecting all households to a supply by 2012. The 2001
census indicated that only 56% of households had electricity (33% in rural areas and 82% in
urban areas). In the 10 poorest states, only 10­20% of households have electricity.10 While the
objective of universal access by 2012 may therefore prove difficult to achieve in practice, it is
indicative of the Government's commitment to bring power to every Indian household. Appendix
3 contains a more comprehensive overview and legislative milestones, as well as comments on
ADB's assistance.

                   a.       Regulation of the Power Sector

17.        There are two levels of regulation, at the central and state levels.
           (i)    The CERC regulates tariffs for central government-owned generators and other
                  generators not owned by the Government and supplying the states and
                  interregional transmission. It also coordinates with other regulatory commissions,
                  such as that for the environment, to develop complementary regulations for the
                  power sector.
           (ii)   State regulators oversee compliance with the 2003 Electricity Act as it affects the
                  operations of the power utilities in each state. The study observations note that
                  the level of regulation varies from light-handed in Assam to heavy-handed in
                  Madhya Pradesh. This difference may be attributable to the level of perceived
                  compliance by the regulators to the 2003 Act by the different states and, to some
                  extent, by the perceived authority and knowledge of the regulator.

18.    The central and state regulators exchange information on a regular basis and formal
meetings provide venues for the interchange of ideas. This exchange also adds to the
demonstration effect of the changes made by regulators and the links between their regulations
and state responses to their regulations.


10
      International Publications and Information Services. 2006. Overview of Power Sector in India 2005 (revised
     edition).
6


19.     The level of the regulators' independence is notable: operational revenues are being
collected from the utilities, not the states, and considerable effort is being expended to publicly
communicate responsibilities and independence. For instance, the CERC and the three state
regulators visited during the study ensured that official communications (involving state or
central governments and their agencies) to and from their commissions were made public
through their official websites. The study also observed that consumer participation in the
regulatory process was being mentored by the regulators and that the regulators were taking
into account both supply- and demand-side concerns.

20.     State and central regulators are increasingly taking a performance-based approach for
setting rates, although the major revenues portion is still established on a cost-plus basis. At
present, in the cost-plus structure, CERC generation regulations provide for recovery of full fixed
charges at 80% availability and incentive payment above 85% availability, subject to actual
dispatch. Normative financing has been set at 70:30 debt to equity, and regulated assets are
allowed a 14% return on their equity. State regulators are also using a normative approach to
setting costs, and they set agreed targets with the distribution sector for loss reductions,
collection efficiencies, and merit order dispatch of state-owned generation assets.

                    b.        State Electricity Boards

21.     Until the 1980s the state electricity boards were financially viable and were providing
satisfactory service levels to their customers, but a rapid deterioration in performance occurred
thereafter due to
        (i)     poor governance in combination with excessive state government interference;
        (ii)    rapid increases in subsidies to consumers; and
        (iii)   poor efficiency of capital due to high technical and nontechnical losses, as well
                as growing attempts to increase self-reliance11 on power sources.

22.      The aforementioned brought a self-fueling financial crisis: low collections led to a lack of
funding for system maintenance and improvements, which further exacerbated technical
inefficiencies and losses and eventually led to payment defaults for fuel and electricity supplied
by the central government, and that subsequently exacerbated supply shortages. Furthermore,
the loss of financial credibility prevented the state electricity boards from sourcing much needed
additional generation capacity, further increasing the gap between supply and demand. The
Planning Commission reports that new private sector generation capacity between 1992 and
1997 amounted to 1,430 MW against a target of 2,810 MW. During FY1998­FY2002, it was
5,061 MW against a target of 17,588 MW. Most private IPPs have failed and most foreign
investors have left India. Enron's Dabhol project in Maharashtra State failed due to high tariffs,
which put serious financial constraints on the state electricity board. As a result, payment
defaults occurred, which have resulted in that plant being closed down. Both state and central
governments have failed to honor payment guarantees. Orissa was the first state to privatize
distribution, but the major investor, AES Corporation, has abandoned the project as it was
unable to obtain support and cooperation to reduce system losses and financial support from
the Government to cover shortfalls in the interim phase.

23.    The breakdown in energy consumption by consumer category for the year ended 31
March 2004 is shown in Table 2. The combined domestic and agricultural consumption
accounts for nearly 50% of the total, and the subsidies to these two consumer groups have
been the primary cause of the state electricity boards' revenue shortfalls.

11
     This fragments central planning and leads to less than optimal solutions.
                                                                                                                     7


                        Table 1: Electricity Consumption by Consumer Category

                        Consumer Category                   Consumption              Percentage
                                                          (gigawatt-hours)
                        Domestic                                 89,736                      25
                        Commercial                               28,201                       8
                        Industrial                              124,573                      35
                        Traction                                   9,210                      3
                        Agriculture                              87,089                      24
                        Others                                   22,128                       6
                                Total                           360,937                     100
                       Sources: International Publications and Information Services. 2006. Overview of
                                Power Sector in India 2005 (revised edition).

24.     A scheme of settlement was organized by the Government in 2001 This led to the write-
off of some debt and the securitization of other amounts. Subsequently, state electricity boards
have kept current on new power purchases under a letter of credit scheme. This created a new
climate of financial discipline in the power sector.12

25.     There are 29 state-level power sectors in India, of which 24 have constituted state
electricity regulatory commissions13 and three states have unbundled and or corporatized their
electricity boards. However, the progress varies across states. In the most advanced states,
responsibility is now divided between a regulator, a generation company, a transmission
company, and one or more distribution companies, and there is substantial autonomy for the
newly created companies. In addition, some states have retained the state electricity board as a
holding company or it has retained roles such as power trading. Each individual state is
responsible for its own restructuring; hence there is no single model for unbundling. In all, 18
state electricity regulatory commissions have issued tariff orders, representing a significant shift
to independent tariff setting.

26.     The effect of the 1998 and 2003 acts, along with independent14 actions of some state
governments and state electricity boards, has resulted in a radically positive change in the
sector. The results of the changes on the state electricity boards imposed by the 1998 and 2003
acts are monitored by CRISIL Limited and Investment Information and Credit Rating Agency
(ICRA) Limited (India) and are published annually as individual and relative ratings for each
state electricity board. These reports include monitoring compliance with regulations and tariff
setting. The most recent (2006) review of the state electricity boards notes major improvements
in the state electricity boards, which result from the facts that
        (i)      the state electricity boards have now increased cash collections and there is an
                 overall decrease in subsidy levels,
        (ii)     supply costs have been contained, and


12
      Securitization of old outstanding dues: Tripartite Agreements under the Scheme for One Time Settlement of Dues
      have been signed between the Government of India, Reserve Bank of India and 28 states. One-time settlement of
      the dues from state electricity boards and successor entities in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
      Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
      Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, and West Bengal.
13
     As of 31 March 2005.
14
     Some states took steps to reform their power sectors. Foremost among them was Orissa, which, with World Bank
     assistance, completely unbundled its state electricity board and established the country's first state electricity
     regulatory commission in 1996. Reforms in Orissa were followed by similar reforms in Andhra Pradesh, Haryana,
     Karnataka, and Uttar Pradesh with World Bank assistance.
8


           (iii)    business processes of the state electricity boards have been significantly
                    commercialized.

27.     Overall technical and nontechnical losses remain high, metering of consumers is
incomplete, collections can still be significantly improved, and tariff filings in many states are not
finalized. Aggregate technical and commercial losses are in the range of 50% of the power
generated.15 High technical losses are due to the sector's low priority for funding; long lines to
remote locations, which exacerbate losses; high transformer losses; and poor load control,
which overloads the system. In most parts of India, distribution infrastructure has suffered from
inadequate transformer capacity; lack of redundancy; and poor executive information decision
systems, largely due to a lack of information technology. In summary, the distribution sector has
suffered from years of neglect, and both capital investments and operational improvements are
urgently needed.

28.     There is a shift in the distribution sector from an engineering supply orientation to a
customer service focus. Electricity call centers log and monitor complaint responses and are
further supported by customer service centers, with extended hours and computerized billing
being rolled out across several of the state electricity boards. Customer satisfaction (see survey
in Appendix 4) has increased with the better reliability and quality of supply and the lowering of
transaction costs when dealing with the state electricity boards (for instance, because of online
collections and billing centers).

                    c.       Public Generation Sector

29.     The installed interconnected generation capacity of the national grid as of 1 April 2007 is
shown in Table 2. Frequent supply interruptions and poor power quality have driven many
industries to develop captive generation plant having combined capacity of about 25,000 MW.

                         Table 2: Installed Interconnected Capacity of the System

                                Fuel                           Capacity (MW)
                                Coal                                  70,686
                                Gas                                   13,692
                                Diesel                                 1,202
                                Hydropower                            34,654
                                Renewable Energy                       7,760
                                Nuclear                                4,120
                                       Total                        132,114
                                Source: Ministry of Power. 2007.

30.     The public generation sector has been the outstanding beneficiary of the industry
restructuring. First, the securitization of the state electricity boards' outstanding debts and new
operating rules that rely on secure letters of credit have resulted in nearly 100% collections by
the major generation companies National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and National
Hydroelectric Power Corporation as well as by Power Grid Corporation of India Limited. North-
Eastern Electric Power Corporation's collections are over 95%. Furthermore, the central
government has corporatized most of its non-nuclear generation plant. NTPC is now publicly
listed, giving it a more commercial structure. This enables the company to obtain funding for


15
     Includes approximately 7­8% in station use, and hence transmission and distribution losses are above 40%.
                                                                                                                    9


new infrastructure through commercial institutions without the need for government guarantees,
and it thereby introduces private sector investment and diversification.

31.      Additionally, the CERC has introduced availability-based tariffs and performance-based
tariffs, which have resulted in increased system availability and large incentives to reduce
operating costs. Availability-based tariffs for electricity are promoting efficiencies, and plant load
factors 16 on generating plants rose from 72.7% to 74.3% in FY2004-2005 17 despite some
problems over fuel supplies. Hence, the structural changes outlined in the 1998 and 2003 acts
and the central government's actions have brought this sector forward to where direct central
government support and intervention may no longer be necessary.

32.     Despite these measures, however, supply still does not match demand. The Tenth Plan
program targeted capacity addition of 41 gigawatts. Coal and hydropower were seen as the
major sources for capacity addition and together constituted more than 85% of the total capacity
addition program. In the end, due primarily to a lack of hydropower and coal-fired capacity, this
addition is likely to be only 32 gigawatts (22% under plan). Also, the gas sector capacity
commissioned during this period is likely to be under plan due to fuel supply constraints.
Although the focus of capacity addition was shifted to gas and nuclear at the time of the midterm
appraisal, this failed to materialize. The anticipated capacity addition during the Tenth Plan is
32,094 MW, taking the country's total installed capacity to 137,100 MW by the end of 2007. The
table below provides a breakdown of capacity addition by fuel segment.

                           Table 3: Capacity Additions: Generation Sector

                      Target For Tenth Plan and Anticipated Capacity Additions
                               Hydro             Thermal             Nuclear                      Total
                                          Coal      Gas     Diesel
         Original Target      14,393.2 20,533.0 4,749.3      113.9    1,300.0                     41,109.8
         Midterm Appraisal    11,125.0 16,775.0 6,395.3       89.8    2,570.0                     36,955.1
         Now Anticipated       9,464.0 16,475.0 4,665.3       89.8    1,400.0                     32,094.2
         Slippage            (4,929.2) (3,578.0)     23.6 (632.1)       100.0                     (9,015.6)
       Source: Central Electricity Authority.

                 d.       Generation: Independent Power Producers (IPPs)

33.    In 2007, there were over 30 private generation stations in India with a total capacity of
17,113 MW18 and an estimated 25,000 MW of self-generation plant. Of the latter, approximately
14,000 MW is connected to the grid. With open access declared under the 2003 Electricity Act,
more plant could be connected where economic conditions enable these to be competitive with
interconnected plant and it is now possible to directly supply customers. However, there are
counterincentives for supplying large customers directly, as the wheeling charges for the power
include collecting the existing cross-subsidies payable by industrial and commercial consumers.

34.    The Government's PTC (formerly Power Trading Corporation) has created substantial
impetus for reintroducing independently produced power. The PTC now acts as an intermediary
between the state electricity boards and IPPs, holding long-term power purchase agreements

16
   Plant load factors are calculated as a percentage of actual deliveries divided by the maximum theoretical available
   output.
17
   In 1985, plant load factors were only 55%.
18
   Ministry of Power, April 2007.
 10


 with both purchasers and sellers. Moreover, the requirements of the new acts for open
 competitive bidding for all new generation capacity and PTC's ability to securitize the off-take
 has led to renewed interest in IPPs. Power trading is growing rapidly and allowing better
 matching of demand shortfalls with supply surpluses. During FY2004-2005, 3,949 MW of new
 IPP capacity was added, and there has been financial closure on some 4,000 MW of new IPP
 capacity since January 2006.

                    e.       Generation: Renewable Energy

 35.     Renewable energy has established itself as a viable source of power and constitutes 5%
 of the total installed load (7,760 MW in 2007). It has attracted private investment. From 3,000
 MW of installed wind power, for instance, 2,912 MW was privately funded. Small hydropower
 projects and wind power are being funded through commercial lenders, but other projects using
 biomass, solar, and energy from waste products have not developed sufficiently to assure
 commercial investments. There is considerable scope for further developments, and the Ministry
 of Non-conventional Energy Sources has identified potential sites for renewable energy
 development. There is strong regulatory support, including attractive financial and fiscal
 incentives, to promote additional capacity. Due to the high-risk nature of plant other than wind or
 small hydropower, however, public sector finance or guarantees will be needed to develop this
 sector further.

                    f.       Interregional Transmission

 36.     There is a large mismatch between load centers and power supply capacity.
 Interregional transfer capacity had been raised from 4,950 MW in 2002 to 9,500 MW by March
 2005. This expansion is still insufficient to transfer the excess thermal capacity to load-deficient
 areas (from the eastern to southern and western regions). Transfer of energy increased by 40%
 during FY2004-2005 compared to the previous year, and the high-voltage transmission system
 currently delivers 40% of the interconnected energy needs. Planning to 2012 indicates the need
 to expand the transfer capacity to 30,000 MW, which will mean transferring about 60% of all
 power consumption in India. This will be critical to the Government's development plans.

               Table 4: Regional Anticipated Power Supply Positions during 2006­07

                                          Peak                              Energy
 Region                            Surplus(+) Deficit(-)              Surplus(+) Deficit(-)
                                  MW                  %         Million Units            %
 Northern                         -5,999             -16.9          -25,141            -11.4
 Western                          -3,695             -10.5          -20,882              -9.3
 Southern                         -3,469             -11.2          -16,439              -8.5
 Eastern                            -405               -3.4           8,500             12.2
 Northeastern                       -123                 6.6           -806              -8.5
 All of India                    -13,727             -11.9          -54,916              -7.6
Source: Central Electricity Authority.

 37.    System availability is excellent and productivity improvements are evident. System
 availability is 99.74%,19 with an outage rate of 3.25% (as against 3.95% in the previous year).



 19
      As of FY2004­2005 according to Power Grid.
                                                                                                                     11


Since 1992, average annual growth in the asset base has been 43%, staff increase has been
held at 1.9% per year, and profitability per employee has increased by nearly 250%.20

                    g.       Rural Electrification

38.     The pace of electrification has been declining because of the lack of returns from these
programs. The Government has launched the Rajiv Gandhi rural electrification program which
plans to provide electricity access to 100% of rural households by 2012. The program,
administered through the Rural Electrification Corporation, envisages huge investment in
strengthening the existing electricity network and adding new assets in the forms of substations,
transformers, and lines. Also important is the ability of the utilities to provide power to these
customers at rates they can afford. These customers' ability to pay will be significantly less than
that of existing consumers, as 30% of these households are living below the poverty line.
Charged with implementing the scheme, the state-owned utilities have been facing financial,
technical, and human resources constraints on the huge project implementation. They lack
funds, qualified contractors, and manpower for the implementation. The Government is
supporting the program with a 40% capital subsidy and the remainder is being supplied by the
states. The challenge will be to develop the appropriate networks, either as extensions of
existing distribution systems or as distributed, remote generation systems with the assistance of
the Ministry of Nonconventional Energy Sources.

                    h.       Fuel for the Power Sector

39.     Finance has been a major impediment to growth in the power sector. Lack of available
fuel is now becoming another critical factor in the delay of generation development. The two
most commonly used fuels in India are coal and hydropower, together constituting more than
80% of the installed capacity. A small amount of plant is reliant on natural gas, diesel, and
nuclear-based fuels. Renewable power has grown rapidly in the recent past but its contribution
to meeting overall energy needs is marginal (Figure 2).

                                     Figure 2: Installed Generation Capacity

                                                     Res     Nuclear
                                            Diesel   5%        3%
                                             1%                              Hydro
                                      Gas                                     26%
                                      11%




                                               Coal
                                               54%

                                Source: International Publications and Information Services. 2006.
                                         Overview of Power Sector in India 2005 (revised edition).



20
     International Publications and Information Services. 2006. Overview of Power Sector in India 2005 (revised edition).
12



                            (i)      Hydropower

40.     Hydropower declined in the power mix from about 46% in 1966 to its current level of
26%. The lack of hydropower has increased the need for thermal-fired plant to take over a
considerable portion of the peaking role, which is traditionally the place of hydropower. This has
contributed to suboptimal use of resources in the power sector. Growth in hydropower has been
hampered by the large capital costs, cost overruns, poor planning, disputes between states, and
the lack of complementary infrastructure and land.

                            (ii)     Coal

41.    Coal is currently the most important and abundant fossil fuel in India and accounts for
66% of India's energy. However, mobilizing capital for generation plant and supply chain
investment has been a critical constraint on coal's playing a more dominant role. The
underdeveloped coal market has also been a constraint prolonging project development and
placing the burden on generation asset developers to manage fuel supply chain risks. The
Economic Survey of India has indicated that nonavailability of desired amounts of coal resulted
in generation loss of 1.512 million kilowatt-hours during FY2004­2005, and it has hampered the
growth of thermal generation.

42.     Legal and policy frameworks, monopolistic industry structures, and a restrictive market
have deterred serious investment into the coal sector. The Government controls almost all coal
production. Private mines are allowed only if they are captive operations that feed a power plant
or factory. While the country has considerable supplies, it faces two major hurdles: the existing
available quality of coal is gradually declining and the lead time to bring new mines on line is
about 8 years. India will need to import additional supplies in the near term and resolve its fuel
security concerns in the midterm.

                            (iii)    Gas

43.    As a result of gas supply shortages, 38 gas-based power stations with a total capacity of
9,536 MW had to operate at a load factor of only 58% during FY 2004-2005. The Government's
optimism with respect to the role of natural gas in the country's power mix can be perceived
from the fact that gas-based capacity additions during the Tenth Plan were revised upward from
4,749 MW to 6,395 MW in the midterm review. However, the anticipated additions during the
Plan period are expected to be only 4,665 MW. This target will be missed primarily because
committed gas supply agreements could not be signed and the affordability of gas was
uncertain for several plants in the pipeline.21

                            (iv)     Other Fuels

44.     Nuclear power constitutes about 3% of existing supplies, and renewable energy 6% (see
above). Nuclear fuel availability has been restricted until recently, and two of the existing plants
have reached or will reach the end of their useful operations within the next 2 years. Renewable
energy has not yet reached its potential due to the lack of commercial financing and the
relatively new technology involved, which is perceived to be highly risky.

21
     NTPC has altered its capacity addition mix for the Eleventh Plan period by dropping implementation of the 4,550
     MW of gas-based capacity consisting of the Gandhar, Kawas, and Kayakulam power plants due to a lack of
     confirmed gas availability on a long-term basis.
                                                                                               13


                    i.      Environment

45.     India is one of the largest emitters of carbon dioxide behind the U.S., People's Republic
of China, and Japan, respectively, and it contributes about 4% of world CO2 emissions.22 Among
the top seven emitters, India had the highest CO2 emission growth rate of 4.2% between 1993
and 2003. India is a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol but has not committed to a reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions. The poor quality of Indian coal and the requirement for disposing of
flying ash generated in the thermal power plants constitute a major environmental concern.
Although renewable energy sources are viewed to have lower environmental impacts, they are
not without impacts. For example, unsustainable use of biomass could lead to depletion of
forests and wind energy may cause noise.

46.      The 2003 Electricity Act recognizes the need for renewable energy in the energy mix,
but it does not mandate curbs to address the environmental concerns arising from unbridled
burning of fossil fuels. The 2003 Act only has a provision to promote cogeneration and electricity
generation from renewable energy sources, and the Government is mandated to prepare a plan.
At present, renewable sources that including wind, solar, and biomass constitute about 5% of
total electricity generation in the country.

47.     Cognizant of these issues, the Government set out the Integrated Energy Policy in
August 2006 with a vision to reliably meet the demand for energy services of all sectors with
safe, clean, and convenient energy in a technically efficient, economically viable, and
environmentally sustainable manner. The Policy provides specific measures that include (i)
optimizing the power supply mix through greater use of indigenous hydropower resources and
renewable energy, (ii) pursuing technologies that maximize energy efficiency, and (iii) continuing
related power sector reforms to control technical and commercial losses. To achieve this goal,
the magnitude of investment needs is vast. India's energy needs are primarily met by fossil fuels,
which have negative economic and environmental impacts. Historically, the Indian power sector
has been dominated by coal as the predominant fuel source while hydropower is the next
important source. By depending on fossil fuels, India may be exposed to price and supply
fluctuations that undermine its national energy security and, considering India's large and
rapidly growing share in energy consumption, global and regional energy security, as well.
Furthermore, the combustion of fossil fuels creates large amounts of greenhouse gas emissions,
thereby damaging the atmosphere and contributing to climate change.

            3.      ADB Lending and Nonlending Assistance

                    a.      Public Sector

48.    The power sector has accounted for 29% of ADB loans to India, second only to the
transport sector. This equals 20.4% of ADB's total public sector lending to the energy sector.
The focus of recent lending has been on (i) power sector reform; (ii) promoting higher efficiency
and low-carbon power sources; (iii) expanding, de-bottlenecking, and optimizing transmission
and distribution systems; (iv) institutional strengthening to implement reforms required by the
2003 Electricity Act; (v) promoting private sector participation; and (vi) encouraging energy
conservation, thus ensuring environmental and social sustainability.

 49.    Consistent with the changes in ADB's energy policy, ADB public sector lending has
exited from generation and upstream hydrocarbon activity and the Private Sector Operations

22
     International Energy Agency. 2003.
14


Department is now taking a larger role in financing generation. Since ADB's power sector
operations in India began in 1986, there have been 24 public sector loans for 22 projects with a
total value of $4.639 billion (Table 5). There has been a consistent focus on transmission and
distribution lending and a more recent focus on power sector restructuring. These loans were
supported by 50 technical assistance grants, totaling $23.5 million. A further $1.6 billion in public
sector loans were planned for 2007 and $1.75 billion for 2008.

              Table 5: Distribution of ADB Assistance to India's Energy Sector
                                   (As of 31 December 2006)

                           Loan Amount ($million)                       TA Amount ($'000)
 Subsector            1988­94    1995­99      2000­06             1988­94   1995­99     2000­06

 Thermal                590                                        1,764         375
 Hydrocarbon          1,077                                          980       1,200
 Energy Sector          447                            650         2,770       4,615        8,345
 Renewable                             100                           354         600
 Energy
 Transmission           250            425            1,100        1,200       1,300
 and Distribution

 Total                2,364            525            1,750        7,068       8,090        8,345
TA = technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank Database.

50.   The overall success rate of power sector projects implemented in India is 83%, which
compares favorably with the 82% success rate for all ADB energy projects (Table 6).

                              Table 6: Energy Project Success Ratings

                                      Highly          Partly      Unsatisfactory   Total
                                   Satisfactory-   Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
             India                   20 (83%)          4 (17%)           0          24
             All ADB Projects       142 (82%)         29 (16%)        3 (2%)       174
           Source: Asian Development Bank Database.

                b.      Private Sector Operations

51.    ADB's private sector operations took time to grow, owing to limitations in the country's
business-enabling environment and also because of little synergy with ADB's public sector
operations. In 1996, ADB's private sector operations supported a power company with a loan of
$25 million and an equity investment of $15 million. After a long gap, in 2003, it approved
another loan ($62.3 million) for a power transmission project. This was followed by an equity
investment of $9.7 million in an LNG terminal in 2004, an equity investment of $2.6 million in a
gas project in 2006, and a loan amounting to $75 million with a complementary financing
scheme of $225 million for a thermal plant in that same year.

C.       External Assistance to the Power Sector

52.   The major development partner in the electricity sector has been the World Bank, which
has supported power generation, transmission, and distribution projects, including assistance
                                                                                                 15


directed to state electricity boards. It is supporting power sector reforms in the states of Andhra
Pradesh, Haryana, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh. ADB coordinates with the World Bank
on the geographic demarcation of state-level operations, as well as to ensure overall
complementarity of actions at both the central and state levels. Other funding sources for the
sector include the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), German development
assistance through Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, the United Kingdom's Department for
International Development (DFID), Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), and
United States Agency for International Development (USAID). Although the combined
assistance of all multilateral agencies constitutes only about 8­10% of the total investments in
the sector, several key policy initiatives have been catalyzed as a result.

53.     JBIC has been supporting the expansion of public sector generation, transmission, and
distribution, including rural electrification. DFID's exclusive objective in providing assistance is
poverty reduction. It has financed studies for power sector restructuring in Andhra Pradesh,
Haryana, and Orissa. USAID has extensively supported and continues to support policy aspects
of private sector participation. It has supported studies for state sector reforms through PFC by
providing grant assistance for energy management, conservation, and training. CIDA assisted
Kerala State in conducting extensive studies for restructuring its power sector. ADB is following
up on CIDA's work through policy dialogue and preparation for a possible loan intervention.
Together with the World Bank, CIDA is providing similar TA for power sector reforms in Andhra
Pradesh. In Madhya Pradesh, CIDA and ADB are cooperating and coordinating closely in
providing assistance for power sector reform. Some of the major projects financed by other
multilateral agencies are also listed in Appendix 5.

                   III.    PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AND OPERATION

54.    The SAPE undertook a field study of a sample of lending and nonlending operations and
undertook a desk review of selected OED's energy sector reports relating to India. A summary
of the key findings and conclusions of the study is documented below. Further details are
presented in Appendix 6.

A.     Generation Sector

55.     ADB approved four public sector-financed power stations in India: two at North Madras,
and one each at Rayalaseema and Unchahar in the period 1986 to 1990. All projects were rated
"successful." All addressed power shortages and allowed for more efficient use of generation
resources. The choices of technology for the projects were well proven and the operating
efficiencies of the plants are high. However, these gains were not achieved without delays:
        (i)      The first North Madras project was held up by ineffective coal handling systems,
                 which problems were not resolved until the follow-on project was completed.
        (ii)     The Unchahar Thermal Power Project was approved in 1998 with Uttar Pradesh
                 Rajya Vidyut Utpadhan Nigam (UPRVN) as the Executing Agency. In February
                 1992, NTPC took over the power station from UPRVUN as part of a settlement
                 for amounts owed to it. After the takeover, NTPC identified many shortcomings in
                 the implementation and management of the project. Various changes were
                 implemented over the next 2 years and new equipment was commissioned. That
                 led to availability and plant load factors of greater than 92% by FY2004-2005.
                 Subsequently, the entire plant has run at a very high plant load factor (95.7% in
                 the FY2005-2006) and is described by NTPC as a jewel in its crown.
16


           (iii)    The Rayalaseema project suffered form inefficient use of suspended particulate
                    removers due to inefficient operations and maintenance. These issues have
                    subsequently been resolved.

56.      ADB used its Private Sector Infrastructure Facility to fund two loans to Industrial Credit
and Investment Corporation of India and Industrial Finance Corporation of India, each of which
supported private sector funding of nine generation subprojects totaling 1,806 MW. 23 The
generation subprojects were assessed to be operating at very high standards and all were
commercially viable. The facilities were also successful in promoting finance for private sector
infrastructure, as ADB's investment of $212 million catalyzed a further investment of $2.05
billion. These loans were considered to be pioneering in the development of private sector
participation in the power sector.

57.     All projects have benefited the socioeconomic well-being of the surrounding population,
including to increase rural connections, and particularly for irrigation, street lighting, and local
employment. Subsequently, there has also been a more reliable supply for local industries.

B.         Transmission Sector

                    a.      Electricity Transmission

58.    The transmission sector has been the major focus of ADB lending to India. Expanding
national transmission capacity was seen as an important means of increasing the effective
capacity of the power sector, which was a major constraint on economic growth. ADB has
funded both public sector-owned (Power Grid) and private-sector owned (Tala-Delhi
Transmission Company) transmission expansion.

59.     ADB lending to Power Grid included three loans with a total value of $925 million in the
period 1992 to 2004.24 A further loan of $1 billion was approved in 2007. The projects have
contributed to upgrading the interregional transmission system, the power control systems, and
operations and management of the transmission system, as well as to developing in-house
environmental evaluation and monitoring expertise. These are all parts of plans to create a
single national grid by 2012. Loans to Power Grid were timed to extend and upgrade the grid,
connect new supply to the grid, facilitate interregional transfer of power to optimize costs and
operations of the grid, and gain efficiencies in service delivery at a time of national shortages.
The resultant increased system capability was insufficient to meet overall demand, and
interregional transmission still suffers from bottlenecks. Without the added capacity, however,
shortages would have been worse. Both projects approved prior to 2004 were evaluated and
found to be satisfactory. The sector is operating at the world's best operating standards, and it
has persistently improved its operating methods and efficiency.

60.    In January 2000, the Government issued guidelines for private sector participation in the
transmission sector, and it identified two subprojects: a joint venture and an independent power
transmission company. The Government invited international competitive bids and selected
Tata Power Company to construct and operate the joint-venture facility under a build, own,
operate, and transfer agreement. In December 2002, ADB approved a local currency loan of

23
     ADB. 1996. Private Sector Infrastructure Facility (Loan Nos. 1480-IND and 1481-IND).
24
     ADB loans to Power Grid include: $275 million (Power Transmission [Sector] Project [Loan 1405-IND] approved in
     1995), $250 million (Power Transmission Improvement [Sector] Project [Loan 1764-IND] approved in 2000), and
     $400 million (Power Grid Transmission [Sector] Project [Loan 2152-IND] approved in December 2004), and $1
     Billion in 2007.
                                                                                                17


$62 million equivalent to Tala-Delhi Transmission Limited, the largest private sector power utility
in India, and to Power Grid, the state-owned national transmission utility. The project consisted
of power transmission lines from Siliguri in West Bengal to Mandaula near Delhi. The facility
would enable power to be exported from the Tala Hydroelectric Power Project in Bhutan and
allow transfer of surplus power from India's eastern to its northern region. Tala-Dekli would build,
own, and operate the transmission line for 30 years and then transfer it in accordance with an
agreement with Power Grid.

61.     Power Grid wants to continue to borrow from ADB and is appreciative of the assistance
it has received. ADB's financial involvement is viewed as advantageous, and Power Grid also
values the role ADB has taken as a catalyst for power sector reform. It feels that ADB's advice
on developing its environmental standards and social policies and on designing its procurement
procedures has assisted with its institutional development. These factors, along with the
additional credibility that Power Grid gains as an ADB client, are also vital parts of the lending
relationship.

                    b.      Gas Storage and Transmission

62.    ADB played a major role in the early 1990s enhancing the institutional capacity of Indian
hydrocarbon public sector enterprises by introducing competition, initiating divestment of
government equity in public sector enterprises, and initiating steps toward establishing a
regulatory framework.25

63.      To further the reform process, promote the use of commercial fuels, and provide the
infrastructure for meeting increasing demand for LPG in the north, ADB public sector funded an
LNG pipeline from Jamnagar in Gujarat State to Delhi in 1997.26 The objectives of the project
were to (i) improve the availability of LPG by addressing infrastructure constraints, (ii) minimize
the transportation cost of LPG, (iii) improve the environment by reducing energy consumption
and exhaust emission, and (iv) enable private sector importers and traders of LPG to access
infrastructure that was historically captive for public sector companies. The outcomes of the
project significantly arrested environmental pollution through substituting gas for diesel and coal
in the transport and generation sectors, respectively. The project also facilitated easy access to
LPG supply and improved its reliability and availability. The project complemented the reform
process by (i) establishing the principle of open access pipelines in India, (ii) unbundling gas
transmission from trading, and (iii) developing commercial access contracts that can serve as a
model for similar projects.

64.     The private sector-funded Petronet LNG project was the first step in liberalizing and
commercializing the liquefied natural gas segment of the Indian gas industry and in encouraging
the use of a clean, environmentally friendly fuel. The operating company has demonstrated the
high standards of performance that can be achieved by a modern, well-run public-private
partnership managed on a commercial basis. The business' success has been excellent
because of lower than expected operating expenses and interest costs. Economic sustainability
was rated excellent because of the substantial benefits derived from meeting unmet demand
and generating cost savings for firms that can use gas in place of diesel. ADB played a critical
role in facilitating liberalization of the gas market and then helping mitigate investor and lender
concerns in what was, in India, a new and untested product and technology and for which there
were limited skills and experience available locally.

25
     Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion Project.
26
     LPG Pipeline Project.
18



C.         Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy

65.     ADB has implemented energy efficiency initiatives, renewable energy projects, and
clean development mechanism (CDM) initiatives that promote a reduction in greenhouse gases.
Energy efficiency initiatives have multiple positive effects in (i) reducing input costs for capital
and materials required to produce the energy, (ii) decreasing the effect of greenhouse gas
emissions on the environment, and (iii) increasing fuel security as imports are reduced. The
direct recorded support for this sector has been very limited, primarily as ADB's record keeping
understates its contribution to energy efficiency. ADB has supported many projects that
contribute to energy efficiency but are not recorded as such. Examples include the LNG pipeline
project described above and other projects that have upgraded overloaded transmission and
distribution. These efficiency gains led to reductions in technical losses and the corresponding
decrease in generation requirements contributed to energy efficiency, lowered the cost of supply,
and led to a subsequent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.

66.      In 1996, a loan of $100 million was approved by ADB for the Indian Renewable Energy
Development Agency (IREDA)27 to develop its expertise to promote and fund renewable energy
(RE) technology in India. This project funded 318 MW of wind, biomass cogeneration, landfill
gas, and solar energy projects. It significantly avoided increases in emissions that would
otherwise have been produced by coal-fired plants. The project has had a catalytic effect on
funding for the renewable energy sector, and it has led to sustainable private sector investment
and financing of wind generation. IREDA has become a successful source for ongoing financing
of new RE projects, although competition from commercial banks and a lack of inexpensive
local funds has greatly reduced their capacity to fund wind power projects. Expertise gained by
IREDA has led to its being recognized as the leading source for appraisal of RE projects, and it
enables the Agency to successfully fund viable cogeneration, solar, and landfill gas generation
projects. Additional effects were noticed during site visits. These included start-up economic
activities, in such areas as cane transportation, lignite storage, industrial security services, tea
stalls, as well as vehicle maintenance and repair units and/or shops. Direct and indirect
employment for semiskilled and unskilled people resulted in quality of life improvements for
employees and their families. Discussions with managers and employees of selected
subprojects indicated gains in average household monthly income from Rs1,000 to Rs7,000.
Development of access roads to the subprojects led to improved connectivity for villages with
town and/or district headquarters.

67.     Financing for the State Power Sector Reform Project was approved in December 2002.
PFC was the borrower. The original loan amount was $150 million but only $50 million was
disbursed and the balance of the loan was cancelled at PFC's request. The objective of the loan
was to support investment in state electricity boards that were committed to power sector reform.
The loans were targeted at projects to improve system operations and reduce system losses in
power plants and in transmission and distribution. However, the loan did not achieve the level of
intended outcomes. The scope and level of detail in the loan conditions were major factors in
cancelling $100 million of the approved loan. Both PFC and the state electricity boards
themselves could borrow funds from other sources more easily and at rates similar to ADB's.

68.     Assistance through ADB-funded TA28 has produced a framework for developing energy
efficiency initiatives for the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE). The recommendations in the

27
     Renewable Energy Development Project.
28
     Preparing the Energy Efficiency Enhancement Project.
                                                                                                              19


consultant's report were being fully implemented by the BEE as policy with the state electricity
boards and community organizations as implementing agencies. Included in the initiatives were
energy efficiency labeling programs, the development of accreditation for energy auditors, and
the development of pilot projects to demonstrate the benefits of energy efficiency. The TA
developed monitoring and verification protocols and pro forma contracts for performance-based
contracting of electricity supply companies (ESCOs). Both of these have been used by other
projects since completion of the TA to execute contracts with ESCOs. In addition, the TA has
resulted in an innovative financing mechanism to catalyze domestic financing for energy
efficiency that would be better and more sustainable for India. The study rated the outcomes as
"successful" and "highly sustainable." The ongoing success of the program will rely on funding
availability and implementation of the energy efficiency initiatives by the state electricity boards
and states. There is considerable scope to include further energy efficiency initiatives in future
sector lending.

69.     TA supporting the development of clean development mechanism29 is still in progress. It
has identified several projects to be used as pilot projects as well as developing a toolkit to
evaluate potential projects. The field study found considerable progress had been made and
municipalities and financial institutions had been involved in workshops and consultations. The
outputs of the TA support ADB and Indian national energy policy initiatives and can provide
further incentives to broaden appreciation for this initiative.

                   a.       Energy Efficiency and Tariffs

70.       Demand-side initiatives, and in particular time-of-use (TOU) tariffs, have been successful
in improving resource use in several states. In the State of Gujarat, the state electricity board
bifurcated all rural feeder lines. Agricultural consumers now receive power for 8 hours a day, off
peak, at a concessionary rate. Rural households and villages are supplied continuously from a
separate feeder. Because agricultural power is no longer supplied at system peak, 500 MW has
been removed from the peak load and the load curve is almost flat. This load pattern improves
the efficiency of the power sector and reduces the need to invest in peak load generation
capacity. Households now have continuous supplies while farmers appreciate the improved
reliability for the 8-hour connection period and have accepted the change. In the State of Assam,
an optional time of day tariff was introduced. This moved about 7% of demand away from the
system and made the load curve significantly flatter. Consumers appreciated the new tariff and
the resulting improved reliability of supply.

D.         Power Sector Development Programs

71.    Power sector reform is a major component of the Government's plans to develop a
sustainable energy sector. ADB has provided considerable support in this area. The field study
reviewed the power sector lending programs and associated technical assistance grant projects
in Assam, Gujarat, and Madhya Pradesh. These three states had earlier received assistance
from ADB's public resource management programs that focused on revenue reforms, public
sector reforms, and creating an enabling environment for public-private sector participation.
Subsequent developments included debt management and expanding the level and sources of
revenue generation to sustainable levels.30



29
     Capacity Building for Clean Development Mechanism.
30
     ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study on Selected Resource Management Programs in India (forthcoming). Manila.
20


       1.     Gujarat

72.     ADB program (Loan 1803-IND) and project (Loan 1804-IND) loans for the Gujarat Power
Sector Development Program were approved in December 2000, along with technical
assistance grants. The project loan for $200 million funded investments by the Gujarat State
Electricity Board for transmission lines, substations, upgrading of distribution, and a pilot
scheme for drip irrigation. Three technical assistance grants were included in the program,
covering the preparation of a reorganization plan for Gujarat Electricity Board (GEB), consumer
awareness and participation in reforms, and support to the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory
Commission. These technical assistance projects supported key aspects of the reform program
and have all influenced the course of the reform program.

73.     The lending and technical assistance package offered by ADB was well prepared and
offered comprehensive incentives to implement a reform program. It provided both GEB and the
Gujarat state government with funding to enable implementation of reform and the technical
assistance needed to ensure that the program was well designed. There is now a very high
level of ownership of reforms in the successor entities that have replaced the GEB. The reform
program for the power sector in Gujarat was well advanced but not completed at the time of the
field visit. State government approval was still awaited for some aspects of asset transfers.
Although assets and liabilities had all been allocated to the new companies, the holding
company was still acting as a corporate treasury.

74.    Further capacity building is needed to enhance the skills of employees. Tariff reform
continues under the 2003 Electricity Act, with open access planned from 2009. The distribution
companies recognize the need for further reductions in technical and distribution losses.
Although they have fallen in the last 2 to 3 years to an average of 26­27% in the state, losses
remain very high in the Western (44%) and Northern (32%) distribution companies, which have
many agricultural consumers. Rural electrification remains a major challenge.

75.   There are a number of factors that contributed to the rapid success of the Gujarat reform
program. In addition to the well-structured support package offered by ADB,
      (i)     there was already agreement between state government and the utility before
              ADB became involved on the need for restructuring and the approach to adopt;
      (ii)    there is a broadly commercial culture in the State of Gujarat;
      (iii)   staff accepted reforms as a result of tripartite agreements between the state
              government, the utility, and unions;
      (iv)    metering is now compulsory for all consumers, enabling greatly improved
              monitoring of losses;
      (v)     a growing industrial sector in Gujarat is keeping revenue buoyant;
      (vi)    there were significant opportunities for cost reduction and performance
              improvement;
      (vii)   tariff levels and structures have been adequate to sustain cash flow;
      (viii) the quality of regulation has been good;
      (ix)    the regulator has appropriate expertise and has pressed for improvements in
              performance.

76.     The financial and organizational restructuring have turned around the finances of Gujarat
State Electricity Board so that it has gone from being a loss-making enterprise to a profitable
organization. This occurred without an increase in tariffs over a 4-year period and with high
levels of state government support for reform. While Gujarat provides an excellent model of how
power sector reform can progress and how ADB can support that process, it would be
                                                                                                           21


unrealistic to expect all other states to progress as far or as quickly. The study rated the overall
program and project loans together with the associated TA as "successful" bordering on "highly
successful."

           2.      Madhya Pradesh

77.     ADB approved a policy loan of $150 million (Loan 1868-IND) and an investment loan of
$200 million (Loan 1869-IND) to support the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development
Program in November 2001. The strategy for reform originated in a study prepared in 1997 for
the Madhya Pradesh state government which recommended unbundling, independent
regulation, private investment, and greater commercial efficiency. This was followed by a cluster
of six technical assistance grants, funded by ADB and CIDA to prepare more detailed reform
programs and continuing policy dialogue between the authorities in Madhya Pradesh and ADB.

78.     Restructuring has proceeded and the sector now has a regulator, the Madhya Pradesh
Electricity Regulatory Commission. The Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board (MPSEB) has
been separated into a generation company, a transmission company, three distribution
companies, and a power trading company. MPSEB is still in existence, with a number of roles
such as keeping old liabilities on its books, handling old litigation, and employing all staff.

79.    Because of extensive preparation, MPSEB was ready to proceed when the loan was
approved. MPSEB obtained very competitive prices in FY2002-2003 when suppliers were short
of work. This led to savings of $54 million compared to budget, which was reallocated to further
works. The reallocation and associated procurement arrangements were agreed promptly with
ADB. MPSEB is generally satisfied with the impact of the technical assistance funded under the
program. The sole exception is a human resources project that produced few results.

80.      The beneficial impact of the ADB loan for the transmission system can be seen clearly.
Overloading of transformers now affects only four substations, compared to 58 when the
program began. Transmission losses have come down from 7.93% in 2002 to the current level
of 5.22% and should fall further to 5%. Availability is now 98.4%, compared to 95% in 2002.
ADB funding provided the testing technology necessary to enable the transmission company to
undertake preventive, rather than reactive, maintenance. The impact is less apparent at the
distribution level, which received less comprehensive attention than did transmission. However,
a distribution pilot project in one area, involving 33x11-kilovolt transformers and capacitors, was
a success with better voltage and transformer loadings and improved metering. MPSEB hopes
to extend this approach and also to bifurcate some rural feeders.

81.     Major problems exist in preventing electricity theft. There are about 40,000 cases in the
courts relating to such theft. The courts cannot cope with the volume of cases and judges are
slow to reach decisions. These delays may impede improvements in commercial performance.

82.     A further loan to the Madhya Pradesh power sector for $620 million under a multitranche
financing facility (MFF) has recently been approved.31 The South Asia Department responsible
for negotiating the loan consulted with OED to access the preliminary findings addressed by this
SAPE. All concerns raised in the SAPE with respect to governance and risk management
issues have been fully addressed by the new MFF. DFID is addressing accounting and
information technology issues with a separate loan. The study rates the outcomes of the TA and

31
     ADB. 2007. Proposed Multitranche Financing Facility Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program (Loans
     2323/2324-IND).
22


project loan "successful," bordering on "highly successful," whereas the program loan is likely to
become successful given the additional coordinated assistance of ADB and DFID

        3.     Assam

83.    ADB approved a policy loan (Loan 2036-IND) of $150 million and an investment loan
(Loan 2037-INd) of $100 million for the Assam Power Sector Development Program in
December 2003. The loans were supported by TA, which was administered by ADB but
financed by DFID. Two previous ADB TA grants had prepared the way for the loans by
supporting development of a power sector development program and capacity building in the
Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission. The most important effect of the restructuring has
been the financial turnaround of the Assam distribution sector, which raised revenues and
reversed its cost increases (Figure 3).

                            Figure 3: Declining Losses in Net Revenues
                        8
                        7
                        6
                        5
                                      Average Costs
                Re/Rs




                        4
                        3
                        2
                        1                                     Average Revenues
                        0
                            FY86
                            FY87
                            FY88
                                   FY89
                                   FY90
                                   FY91
                                          FY92
                                          FY93
                                          FY94
                                                      FY95
                                                      FY96
                                                             FY97
                                                             FY98
                                                             FY99
                                                                    FY00
                                                                    FY01
                                                                    FY02
                                                                           FY03
                                                                           FY04
                                                                           FY05
              FY = financial year.
              Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2006.


84.     The Assam State Electricity Board (ASEB) has benefited significantly from technical
assistance, both before and since the ADB loans were approved. In order to sustain reform,
ASEB will undoubtedly continue to need consulting support, certainly for the next 2 to 3 years
and perhaps longer. The capacity of the new companies needs to be developed in many areas,
including finance, information technology, human resources, and core engineering capabilities.
Many ASEB staff are not accustomed to the business practices of a modern utility and it has
been a challenge for the consultants to ensure that ASEB staff are fully engaged with
TA-provided consulting projects, as distinct from attending associated training courses.
PricewaterhouseCoopers seems to have had more success in providing process consulting
support that engages with ASEB staff, and it is this type of assistance which ASEB needs in the
future in order to develop its capabilities for running a modern, consumer-driven utility.

85.     The Assam state government was concerned that the split into three distribution
companies may not have been optimal and there are concerns about the required future staff
expertise and numbers which, together with unbalanced customer mixes, may lead to at least
one distribution company's being unsustainable. An ADB-funded report by PA Consulting
recommended three distribution companies. This was accepted by ADB, the state government,
and ASEB, and it is incorporated in loan covenants as a restructuring commitment. There has
been continuing discussion, however, over whether it would be preferable to have a single
distribution company. The field study sighted conflicting information regarding this issue that
                                                                                               23


both supports and contradicts the concerns. It recommends that this issue be reviewed and
resolved as a matter of urgency.

86.     Assam wants and can effectively use more ADB loans. There is potential for rapid
demand growth, which requires more transmission capacity and significant performance
improvements in distribution. The reform program is clearly incomplete, and ADB should
continue to be involved in setting covenants that promote further improvements and in financing
both investments and TA. The study concludes that the program loan and associated TA are
successful. The project is not complete due to earlier delays, but it is showing early indications
of a successful outcome.

        4.     General Observations on Power Sector Development Programs

               a.     Sector Governance

87.     Sector governance has improved significantly in the three state electricity boards where
ADB has provided assistance. As part of the efforts to improve the transparency of their
management and accounts, the distribution companies are starting to computerize their financial
and management information systems with the initial focus on billing. Financial restructuring,
unbundling, and the need for new accounting for the new corporations set up by the state
electricity boards have led to numerous problems with accounting (Appendix 7). However, some
of the timeframes set by ADB covenants for setting up independently audited accounts may
have been overly optimistic, both from the technical and staffing capabilities viewpoints.
Unaudited manual accounts and asset registers and a lack of information technology skills have
made progress toward sound financial reporting systems slower than anticipated

88.     ADB often imposes financial covenants on borrowers in two areas: the provision of
audited accounts and the level of receivables from customers. These are both important areas
of governance in which it is sensible for ADB to impose covenants. In a commercial
environment, audited accounts should be available within 3 months of the end of the accounting
period to which they relate. Rates of progress and accounting and auditing standards are much
too low in the states. Accounts for the state electricity boards are unreliable in some areas and
slow to be produced. In accordance with statutory requirements, they are audited by the
Controller and Auditor General, who often finds shortcomings in the accounts and is also slow.
For example, as of mid-2006, the state electricity board in Madhya Pradesh had only reached
the draft accounts stage for the year ending March 2005 and figures were still awaiting audit
review. Moreover, review of the recent accounts for ASEB suggests that some of the figures are
doubtful even when they have received a clean audit opinion.

89.     State regulatory commissions in India found that the finances of the state electricity
boards were unsustainable, as a large farm sector had no metering of its power consumption
and was supplied power at a nominal tariff. There were also large transmission (technical) and
nontechnical losses (39% in the case of Madhya Pradesh). The regulatory commissions found
that most of the corruption in the retail supply revolved around metering and billing. This was
among the first issues addressed in the reform process, and the regulators in each of the states
visited by the operations evaluation mission (OEM) were jointly setting loss reductions targets
with the distribution companies. Within the distribution companies the most critical issue is
performance improvement--and in particular reducing losses. A lack of functioning meters, theft,
and nonpayment of bills remain big problems, and all the distribution companies are making
slow progress in reducing these losses. Metering of all consumers is progressing well generally,
but in states funded by ADB none has yet achieved the 100% that was targeted. The increased
24


metering levels are nevertheless a major factor in the decreasing gap between revenues and
costs (Appendix 8).

90.     With respect to the electricity industry, ADB has correctly identified the major sources of
corruption; petty theft on a grand scale plus high-value procurement kickbacks and politically
driven intervention on a smaller scale. All of these have been addressed through governance
measures in recent loans (i) electricity theft is being reduced through governance measures that
include matching of feeder loads and meters; (ii) the unbundling of utilities allows for
comparisons of financial performance and disaggregation of costs and revenues by utility
functions, and (iii) regulators' introduction of consumer inclusivity promotes and enforces
consumer interests in transparent decisions. These measures are relatively permanent, as they
are applied at the institutional level and have very high levels of success. Moreover,
procurement is increasingly being made more transparent through the likes of transparent
international competitive bidding, ADB's monitoring and control systems, and, where deemed
necessary, by using international procurement experts with specific industry knowledge.

91.     Pilot schemes are being initiated to demonstrate the effects of monitoring and
reconciling billing with meters, decentralizing transformer maintenance and parts procurement,
and providing customer service centers. The benefits of increased metering and monitoring are
being realized through faster identification of nontechnical losses and matching transformer data
with computerized billing of meters. A pilot project in Assam reduced losses in a feeder with
mainly industrial customers from over 65% to 6% in only 4 weeks after the controls were
established (see Figure 4). A similar pilot project reduced transformer failures in one district
from an average of 12% to 0% over a 22-week implementation period. Other innovative ideas
are being implemented to try and reduce losses, such as franchising supplies wherein the
franchisee undertakes billing and collection.



                          80%   Figure 4: ASEB Pilot Loss Reduction Scheme
                          70%
                          60%
                          50%
                 Losses




                          40%
                          30%
                          20%
                          10%
                          0%
                                                                                      Apr-06



                                                                                               May-06
                                Oct-05



                                         Nov-05



                                                  Dec-05



                                                           Jan-06



                                                                    Feb-06



                                                                             Mar-06




              Source: Assam State Electricity Board.

               b.          Regulation

92.   In India, the creation of independent regulation has proven to be a significant help in
removing the politics from tariff setting and creating an environment in which the power sector
can become more commercially focused. Regulators at both central and state levels are
demonstrating clear independence and using the internet and publicity materials as vehicles for
                                                                                                                     25


transparency. Appointment processes are sound, and regulators are moving toward financial
independence by collecting revenues from the utilities rather than through state budgets.
Considerable effort is being expended to communicate responsibilities and independence. For
instance, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and the three state regulators visited
during the evaluation study ensure that official communications (relating to state or central
governments and their agencies) to, and from, their commissions are made public through their
official websites. Consumer participation in regulatory processes was being mentored by the
regulators, and the regulators take into account both supply- and demand-side concerns. State
and central regulators are increasingly taking a performance-based approach for setting rates,
although the major revenues portion is still established on a normative cost-plus basis.32 State
regulators are taking a normative approach to managing costs and set agreed targets with the
distribution sector for loss reductions, collection efficiencies, and merit order dispatch of state-
owned generation assets.

93.     Funding and encouraging independent regulation has been a key factor in promoting
commercial practices. Regulators are learning from one another and from international best
practice. In discussions during the evaluation, regulators raised issues related to financially
competitive salaries, career structures for regulatory staff, staff training, developing methods to
achieve financial independence, and means of sharing information about best practice.

                    c.       Staffing

94.     Staffing issues have complicated restructuring. There has been little or no recruitment
for many years and, as a result, the workforce is aging with many staff approaching pension age.
There are relatively few younger staff with the skills in information technology and finance
needed to run a modern utility. This has created many problems for all state electricity boards.
For example, most of the linemen in Assam are aging and no longer able to climb poles. Clerical
staffs have no experience in working with computers. Another urgent problem associated with
the aging workforce was that large unfunded pension liabilities had to be transferred to the
unbundled companies. This has been achieved in the three states visited as part of the field
study through a mixture of (i) partial state assumption of the liabilities; (ii) using part of ADB's
assistance to the sector; and (iii) in the case of Assam, through a regulatory approved increase
in energy tariffs.

E.         Client Feedback

95.    EAs reported that the transaction costs of ADB environmental and resettlement
safeguard procedures have been found to be high relative to both the benefits and the EAs'
capabilities to bear the costs. A key reason is that in many cases EAs have to comply with both
national and ADB procedures, causing a duplication of effort. The inefficiency is compounded
because, in many cases, ADB's safeguard activities are heavily reliant on the national process
but separate from it. Inconsistency in the timing of environmental assessment also undermined
the value and efficiency of ADB's activities. ADB assessments were often undertaken before
adequate information was available, or after all key design decisions had been made.

96.    The relatively high transaction costs, as perceived by EAs and government officials,
include the direct costs of meeting ADB's procedural requirements (e.g., preparing

32
     At present, in the cost-plus structure, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission generation regulations provide for
     recovery of full fixed charges at 80% availability and incentive payment above 85% availability, subject to actual
     dispatch. Normative financing has been set at a 30:70 equity to debt ratio, and regulated assets are allowed a 14%
     return on their equity.
26


environmental impact assessments and resettlement plans and the costs of delays caused by
the slow approval process within ADB). The transaction costs are particularly severe for sector
loans and some emergency loans that have many small subprojects, each of which requires
preparation of a summary initial environment assessment at substantial time and monetary
costs but often with limited additional benefits. Efficiency is further decreased by the focus of
ADB's procedures on front-end processing with little emphasis on outcomes through
implementation and value addition. Dissatisfaction with this process led to the cancellation of
one project loan in India by the borrower.

97.     The evaluation notes two different experiences with international competitive bidding. In
some cases there were considerable savings (e.g., in Madhya Pradesh, $54 million), but in
other instances costs increased as the EAs were prevented from negotiating after bid closure.
International competitive bidding requirements and ADB approval procedures are often criticized
by EAs as creating additional costs and not being suited to local conditions. For instance, ADB's
disbursement process has been described as very time-consuming and complicated. Executing
agencies raised concerns regarding the process of international competitive bidding where a
local supplier had to use an intermediary to meet the requirements. Subsequently, the delivered
price was higher than if procured locally due to additional commissions to the intermediary.

98.     Compliance with covenants, and particularly financial covenants, and the timing of
deliverables such as audited accounts have in some cases unreasonably delayed
disbursements to the EAs (e.g., Madhya Pradesh, PFC). This was an issue raised by EAs that
were undergoing restructuring. They indicated that the process itself was delayed and hence the
timetables set were unrealistic. A more flexible approach that would interpret the spirit of the
covenants rather than imposing the letter of the law has been suggested by several EAs.

99.     Power Grid asserts that ADB attempts to exercise too much control over the detail of its
decisions. It finds ADB less flexible than the World Bank or the JBIC and wants more autonomy
over spending decisions, to be permitted to fund projects retrospectively, and to be allowed to
decide which projects to fund with ADB resources when the loan is made and not as a prior
commitment in lending covenants. It feels that ADB's commitment charges are high and that the
notional disbursement schedule upon which they are based is inflexible and often not realistic
for the projects that are being funded. It also finds some ADB conditions irksome--for example,
being asked for a resettlement plan for a transmission line project when it is not the company's
policy to acquire land but rather to pay compensation for crop losses.

100. ADB's client portfolio in India includes a number of companies, such as Power Grid and
PFC, which are well run and sophisticated organizations that are now able to borrow in capital
markets. Inevitably, such enterprises look at the conditions on lending imposed by ADB and
compare these with their own policies and procedures as well as the conditions imposed by
other lenders. In some cases, they regard ADB's conditions and procedures as unnecessary
and unduly complex. For example, commitment fees assume a schedule of disbursements that
may not be achievable in practice. Moreover, ADB requires a negative pledge in addition to a
sovereign guarantee even when a borrower is sufficiently creditworthy.

101. These comments are highly positive for ADB in the sense that they show clients are
evaluating borrowing conditions from an intelligent commercial perspective. Moreover, ADB has
shown itself responsive to similar comments as when it removed requirements for sovereign
guarantees, which were costing 1.2%, on loans to Power Grid and NTPC.
                                                                                                 27


102. The SAPE notes that many of these issues have been resolved through changes in
procedures and requirements and the remaining issues perhaps may be resolved with more
dialogue and the inclusion of more flexible mechanisms. It concludes, however, that ADB's
clients are often not aware of the changes and recommends that the changes be presented, as
a matter of urgency, to EAs or related government agencies in India with whom ADB has
intentions to develop further lending projects.

                         IV.     EVALUATION OF ADB ASSISTANCE

A.     Bottom-Up Assessment of ADB Assistance

103. This bottom-up assessment of performance in the energy sector is based on the five
evaluation criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact. These
components are summarized at the conclusion of this section to provide an overall assessment.

        1.     Relevance

104. Relevance of ADB assistance to the energy sector was assessed in terms of
consistency with ADB's sector and country strategies, alignment with national priorities, and
donor coordination. The energy sector has been a continuing focus of attention for both the
Government and ADB. Both ADB strategies and the Government's national plans consistently
emphasize energy shortages and the importance of increased supplies to India's overall
economic development. Access to energy is seen to be the largest impediment to the
commercial and industrial sectors' development, and 35% of all companies surveyed by the
Word Bank in 2006 indicated that this was their foremost concern. By international standards,
the 85 days of power outages that occur in India per year compare poorly with OECD countries
(1.5 days) and East Asia (8.9 days). Hence, providing additional infrastructure to reduce this
obstacle is relevant to increasing private sector participation in the country, and these are policy
objectives jointly held by ADB and the Government.

105. At the same time, there was recognition in ADB's country strategies for India that funding
needs to be linked to reform. The poor performance of many state electricity boards was a
continuing theme throughout the 1990s. The failure of the original EA for the Unchahar project
illustrates the problems. In recent years, however, and certainly since the passage of the 2003
Electricity Act, ADB and the Government have been pursuing fully consistent policies that are
clearly aligned with ADB's energy policy (Appendix 3, Table A3.2). The state-level interventions
all have been designed to support significant reform efforts. These programs have been well
coordinated with other development partners. There is a satisfactory division of labor between
ADB and the World Bank. Where additional assistance has been needed, ADB has coordinated
with other donors, such as DFID and CIDA, to bring additional funding to the programs.

106. The program loans supported the Government's overall economic reform agenda with
the states, and were consistent with the Ninth and Tenth five-year plans (1995­2000 and 2001­
2005) and other national policies. There was agreement for multilateral funding agencies such
as ADB to provide support directly to state governments. The assistance effort built on the
recommendations of the states' own analysis of solutions for their fiscal conditions and resulted
in strong state ownership of reform programs. The program loans were consistent with ADB's
institutional development objectives of supporting economic growth and with its India country
strategy, and in particular on reducing infrastructure constraints by (i) supporting development of
an effective policy, regulatory, and institutional environment; (ii) improving infrastructure
28


availability and service quality while promoting environmental upgrading and protection; and (iii)
targeting social sector interventions.

107. ADB's assistance focused largely on the weakest links in the provision of electricity, i.e.,
the state electricity boards. This subsector had suffered the most from policies designed to
improve the livelihoods of the poor and improve the agricultural sector so as to make India self-
sufficient in food. This is still the weakest sector, and recently approved MFF loans to
Uttaranchal and Madhya Pradesh indicate ADB's continued relevance. The Government has
signaled that it is seeking future assistance with significant value-added knowledge components,
as it seeks to further modernize its power sector. This points to a shift from pure infrastructure
funding to a wider technological response, and particularly in the areas of energy efficiency,
CDM, and renewable energy. Provided ADB staff capabilities match this need, ADB will
continue to be relevant to the sector. Overall, the SAPE concludes that the assistance was
"highly relevant", with shortcomings in projects from the 1990s being overcome in the most
recent interventions.

        2.     Effectiveness

108. Effectiveness was examined in terms of achieving immediate objectives for ADB
assistance to the energy sector. ADB assistance has been effective in removing many
bottlenecks to the delivery of power to businesses and households through improvements in
generation capacity, the grid, and local distribution systems. It has been well focused on priority
needs. However, the overall objectives of the effort, in terms of making good quality and reliable
power available to all consumers, have never been met because demand has always grown at
least as fast (and often faster) as has supply capacity. The fact that so many elements of the
program have been subject to delays, or, in the case of the loans to PFC and Gujarat, that loans
have been in part cancelled, has reduced the effectiveness of lending compared to objectives
set at the time of appraisal, and this has contributed to supply shortfalls.

109. The evaluation observed that there was a considerable period of time before lending
commenced to the states targeted for assistance, and this appears to reflect a fundamental and
successful change in procedural strategy. Initial assistance was preceded by extensive policy
dialogue that was used by ADB, the state electricity boards, and the state and central
governments to develop clear road maps and consensus for the expected outcomes of the
assistance. The reforms in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh preceded the 2003 Electricity Act, and
in both states independent regulation was introduced as a result of the public resource
management programs initiated by ADB.

110. This was followed by a limited number of TA projects to prepare the groundwork and
ensure there was sufficient capacity building for the major programs and projects to follow. The
use of conditional tranches ensured that commitments were largely met. The clear
improvements in both the state electricity boards' financial positions and their completion of
ADB-funded projects with minor delays reflect good planning by ADB and a high quality of
projects.

111. External assessment of the states by CRISIL and ICRA in 2006 (Table 7) verifies the
conclusions about the effectiveness of ADB assistance. Gujarat is ranked as the second best
                                                                                                                      29


state in India in respect to performance.33 ADB's support in commercializing the state electricity
boards in Gujarat and Assam has led to increases in their rankings relative to other state
electricity boards. Madhya Pradesh has had mixed success. It has unresolved legal issues
since the split-up of the state that have made its financial position unclear, and, while the
generation and transmission sectors in Madhya Pradesh have made considerable
improvements, the distribution sector has improved at a much slower rate than have those in
other leading states.

                   Table 7: Relative Rankings among 28 State Electricity Boards

                                                 Gujarat          Assam        Madhya
                                                                               Pradesh
                                  2003               6              21            17
                                  2006               2              11            20
                              Sources: CRISIL and ICRA.

112. ADB assistance has been least effective in the areas of human resource development
and in attaining the desired quality of governance in the distribution sector, including in relation
to management and accounting practices. However, the high level of success in effecting policy
changes, which resulted from (i) the preceding public sector reform programs, (ii) the covenants
with high hurdles, and (iii) the conditional release of tranches upon meeting these covenants,
have proven this to be a successful approach to ensuring policy changes. Overall the ADB
assistance to the energy sector is rated "effective."

          3.      Efficiency

113. Efficiency was measured by the extent to which ADB's resources provided to the sector
have been optimally utilized. This assessment is based on three major considerations (i)
evidence of improvements in sector policy and operations, (ii) high economic rates of return at
project level, and (iii) low cost of assistance program delivery. ADB assistance has had a
considerable positive impact on the three states in which it has actively pursued policy changes,
and this has led the way for further improvements in the financial viability of the power entities.
Institutional change has contributed to improving sector governance at state level and in some
cases there was a clear evidence of reducing electricity thefts.

114. The economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) of those completed projects evaluated
were higher than 12%, implying economic efficiency in resource allocation and use. The EIRRs
of the project or program completion report (PCR) performance evaluations ranged from 13% to
31.5%. All exceeded ADB's benchmark of 12% for successful projects, and some exceeded the
18% that is the benchmark for highly successful projects.

115. Average delay in project implementation in India was significantly shorter (6 months)
than that of all other energy projects (13 months) in the period 1995­2005.34 That assistance
programs were well focused, taking into account executing agency capabilities, has been a
major factor in the timely completion of most lending and TA projects. Sixteen out of 18 rated TA
projects were also found to be "successful." All things considered, the assistance is rated
"efficient" (Appendix 8). The study notes that the majority of the TA projects rated were for
33
   Performance is rated on external factors such as development and compliance with regulatory processes, the level
   of business and financial risks, progress in attaining commercial viability, sustainability of revenue and the creation
   of a competitive environment. A ranking of 1 indicates the highest score on these factors.
34
   Operations Evaluation Department database.
30


advisory TA, thus supporting the program loans and sector reforms. This suggests that a
significant contributing factor to the overall successful outcomes of the program loans can be
attributed to the preceding policy discussions and the quality and timing of the TA.

           4.      Sustainability

116. The sustainability criterion focuses on the likelihood that the achievement of sector
results and benefits will be sustained into the future. Where information was available, the
financial internal rate of return was generally greater than the weighted average cost of capital
at the time of project completion reports and/or project performance evaluation reports. In one
case, because of the tariff subsidy, the financial rate of return was negative.35 The assistance
ADB has provided to central power utilities such as Power Grid is clearly sustainable in that the
companies are well run, operating on a commercial basis, and now able to access funds from
market sources as well as development partners. NTPC is now a publicly listed firm on the
Bombay Stock Exchange and is developing a portfolio of nonsovereign loans. The sustainability
of change in some of the state power sectors is inevitably a little uncertain. While Gujarat no
longer requires significant support, there are continuing issues in both Assam and Madhya
Pradesh over the ability of the utilities to complete reforms. Reforms in these states are still
works in process, although substantial progress has been achieved. Moreover, success cannot
be defined only at the individual utility level but must also be considered at the sector level--and
there are continuing financial shortfalls. Institutional changes have been made across the sector
with the backing of state and central government policies, and the observed high level of
ownership of the changed institutional structures points to a sustained effort to improve
efficiency and governance in the power sector. Overall the assistance is therefore rated "likely"
to be sustainable.

           5.      Impacts

117. This criterion refers to the contribution of ADB assistance to long-term changes in
development conditions in the sector. The broader long-term impacts of the changes cannot be
established at this stage, but there has been a major turnaround of the power sector finances in
the three states where ADB has provided assistance, there are demonstration effects, and ADB
experience is now being extended to other states.

118.      The major impacts of the ADB assistance are summarized below:
          (i)   Financial restructuring, tariff restructuring, and lower costs have reduced the
                need for subsidies. This means fewer funds are required for the power sector,
                leaving more fiscal space to support other social sectors.
          (ii)  The improved quality of supply has increased the reliability of supply. This is a
                major attraction to industries that are heavily reliant on secure energy supplies,
                (such as the information technology industry) and will impact more highly on the
                developed states.
          (iii) The demonstration effects of renewable energy projects have made some of this
                sector self-sustaining.
          (iv)  The concurrent development of expertise and regulators' independence,
                transparency, and consumer advocacy is removing political interference and
                providing a balance between the needs of consumers and the industry. This has
                led to consumer involvement and a shift to a service focus from a supply focus
                across many of the states.

35
     Rayalaseema Thermal Power Project.
                                                                                                                 31



                  a.       Social Impacts

119. During the evaluation, a customer survey was carried out to examine the socioeconomic
effects of the structural changes in the three states where ADB has extended significant
assistance for sector restructuring. The survey extended earlier completed surveys by
Santhakumar (2006),36 which sought to establish the basis of support or rejection of privatization
in the electricity industry and to gauge effects of the changes in states where state electricity
boards were being restructured (Appendix 4).

120. The survey results for the three states where ADB has provided assistance reveal that (i)
power shortages still occur;37 (ii) the quality of the power as measured by voltage fluctuations
has improved; and (iii) the public has perceived a marked improvement in the quality of service,
such as relates to billing and responses to consumers concerns from the state electricity boards.
Although there is relatively little opposition to privatization in all three states, household
consumers in more affluent areas who receive a disproportionate amount of subsidies constitute
the single largest group opposing reforms. Industrial and commercial organizations strongly
support, or do not oppose, privatization of the electricity industry. The survey also indicates that
where consumers were paying close to the cost of supply, they were willing to pay additional
costs to increase the quality of supply.

121. More than 95% of the consumers in all states can avail themselves of alternative
sources and/or equipment whose costs per unit of energy are lower than that of the centralized
electricity supply. This has important implications. Electricity costs must be reduced significantly
or government subsidies may have to continue in order to sustain the current quality. This is
also directly attributable to the large extent of nontechnical losses.

         6.       Overall Bottom-Up Rating

122. The overall rating has been derived from the average of all evaluated project and
program loans. Seventeen of 20 public sector loans evaluated were rated as "successful" to
"highly successful." A review of TA projects indicates a higher success rate than for the loans
and adds support to the overall score of 18 (Table 8).38 All the private sector projects evaluated
were rated "successful." Therefore, the study concludes that the lending and nonlending
assistance was "successful." A detailed evaluation breakdown by project is in Appendix 9.




36
   Santhakumar, V. 2006. Unpublished Thesis. Poverty and Social Impact of Power Sector Reforms in India. India.
37
   This is consistent with the continued shortfall of power reported earlier, particularly at peak times.
38
   Sector performance (bottom-up) is rated as follows: highly successful, a score of 20 or higher; successful, 16­19;
   partly successful, 11­15; and unsuccessful, 10 or less.
32


                    Table 8: Overall Bottom-Up Rating of Public Sector Projects

                 Criterion              Evaluation Rating             Rating Scale          SAPE Rating
          Relevance                      Highly Relevant                  0­3                  2.9
          Effectiveness                     Effective                     0­6                  4.3
          Efficiency                         Efficient                    0­3                  2.1
          Sustainability                      Likely                      0­6                  4.7
          Impact                           Substantial                    0­6                  4.0

          Overall                           Successful                      24                 18.0
         SAPE = sector assistance program evaluation.
         Source: Operation Evaluation Mission. Sector assistance program evaluation team.

B.         Top-Down Evaluation

123. A top-down perspective is used to assess and rate ADB's sector positioning, the overall
contribution of the assistance effort to sector development results, and the quality and
responsiveness of ADB's services. It assesses whether or not ADB's choices of subsectors and
of partnership arrangements were appropriate, given evolving country requirements and
priorities. In light of that positioning, it assesses the extent to which the sector assistance's
overall contribution to development results was as great as could have been reasonably
expected. It then assesses the quality of the services ADB provided to influence the delivery of
development results.

           1.       Power Sector Development

124. ADB's operational strategy in India's energy sector evolved from the second half of the
1980s before economic reforms were implemented to open up the country's traditionally closed
and regulated policy regime to foreign and domestic private investors. From 1986 to 1990 four
loans39 were approved and implemented that financed the creation of new coal-fired thermal
power generation capacity. With these projects, ADB hoped to assist in addressing
infrastructure bottlenecks, and in particular industrial power shortages that resulted from the
lack of the energy infrastructure's capacity expansion in the country.

125.      During 1990­1995, ADB provided both financial and technical assistance to boost
generation efficiency and reduce transmission and distribution losses. This assistance
supported increasing capacity where it would help remove crucial bottlenecks to industrial
development and, where there was good opportunity, to simultaneously raise system efficiency.
The initial emphasis was on the state electricity boards, state generating companies, and other
state or central government entities that demonstrated commitment to reforms aimed at
institutional and operational improvement, efficiency enhancement, and financial soundness. In
addition to ensuring that projects included measures to mitigate adverse environmental side
effects, ADB provided technical assistance to address the problems of pollution arising from
power generation. At the sector level, ADB encouraged reforms leading to improved power
supply, better operational efficiency, and greater resource mobilization with a major emphasis
on tariff reform. ADB arranged cofinancing from other external sources, including commercial
financing under the Complementary Financing Scheme, and contributed to the development
and utilization of natural gas and nonconventional energy sources.

39
     These included North Madras Thermal Power (Loan 0798-IND), Unchahar Thermal Power Extension (Loan 0907-
     IND), Rayalseema Thermal Power (Loan 0988-IND) and Second North Madras Thermal Power (Loan 1029-IND).
                                                                                                 33



126. During 1996­1999, ADB approved only two loans for the energy sector, one for
renewable energy development and the other for an LPG pipeline. In recognition of the need for
more focused assistance at the state electricity board level, ADB extended TA grants that
assisted states to develop plans for restructuring.

127. After 1999, ADB assistance supported India's Tenth Plan. ADB increasingly focused its
assistance on restructuring the state power sector to promote operational and commercial
improvements of the state electricity boards, including to rationalize power tariffs. In addition to
its direct support, ADB leveraged its national-level support and private investments to support
states that had financially sound state electricity boards. It encouraged adopting substantive
reforms to turn the state electricity boards around. The rationale for ADB's state-focused
programs was to (i) broaden and deepen economic and administrative reforms that had lagged
behind in areas under state governments' domains, (ii) accelerate power sector infrastructure
development and restructuring, (iii) maximize synergy and the multiplier effect of ADB's
economic and sector policy dialogue and project interventions within a region, and (iv) improve
the efficiency and manageability of ADB's operations.

128. In the private sector, TA projects supported the gas segment by (i) establishing a
regulatory framework, and (ii) introducing international technical and management expertise.

        2.     Sector Positioning

129. ADB's overall operational strategy for India supports efforts to achieve more sustainable
economic growth in order to promote employment and reduce poverty. ADB's initial contribution
to higher growth was primarily aimed at improving supply-side efficiency of the economy,
especially by reducing bottlenecks in key infrastructure sectors. This included an emphasis on
improving the policy, institutional, and regulatory framework so as to enhance the efficiency of
public sector operations and to encourage private investment. The energy sector, primarily the
power sector, was a priority area for ADB assistance.

130. ADB, along with other development partners, in particular the World Bank, has been in
continuous dialogue with governments at the central and to a lesser extent state levels over
power sector reform. In the last few years, that dialogue has clearly led to major improvements
in sector policy and essential reforms. The importance of power to economic development is
accepted throughout the governments and ADB programs have focused on projects that were
well thought through and that generally have been delivered within budget. TA projects, with two
exceptions, have contributed strongly to sector reform and performance improvement.

131. Until 1995, operations of ADB and other development partners in the power sector in
India had been generally successful from a project point of view. That is to say that the projects
had been completed, albeit with implementation delays, and performed to the expected
technical levels. Although operations of the project components, taken individually, have been
satisfactory, the overall sector performance, in terms of delivering a high quality and reliable
power supply, continued to deteriorate as the overall strategy did not address the fundamental
structural weaknesses of the power system and spread ADB's resources too thinly.

132. By the mid-1990s, the Government recognized the urgent need for structural reform at
the state and central levels. In recognition of this fact and of the need to focus its assistance
more effectively, ADB revised its strategy for India in 1996 to provide a portion of its assistance
in a systematic and comprehensive manner at the state level. This reflected the facts that (i) a
34


geographic focus, together with the ongoing selective sector focus, enabled ADB to maximize
its development impact both in the states concerned and, through the demonstration impact of
its operations, in other states as well; (ii) state-level economic reforms, which had been lagging
behind initiatives taken by the Government, needed support and incentives; and (iii) the states
have considerable autonomy and have major legislative, administrative, and fiscal
responsibilities in many economic and social sectors, including the power sector.

133. The shift in ADB lending policy could not have been made earlier for a number of
reasons:
      (i)   The central and state governments had not been ready to take the necessary
            political steps.
      (ii)  There had been no consensus among concerned agencies on what should
            constitute reforms until adoption of the Common Minimum National Action Plan,
      (iii) The necessary legislation and financial incentive mechanisms were not in place.
      (iv)  The state electricity boards' financial burden on state governments' budgets and
            the resulting shortage of funds for other development needs did not come to a
            crisis point until the severe shortage of capacity became evident.

134.       Since 2000, ADB has primarily focused on the following:
           (i)    Program support to states committed to reforming and restructuring the power
                  sector in order to achieve holistic change in macroeconomic management. ADB
                  is assisting the reform process by limiting assistance to those states that have
                  demonstrated the political will to substantially reform their public sector
                  operations. It assists them to operationalize these reforms. Assam, Gujarat, and
                  Madhya Pradesh were initially identified as potential states for assistance, as
                  they met ADB's lending criteria.
           (ii)   Project support to include strengthening system expansion and promoting
                  commercial operations using sector and investment loans. At the national level,
                  projects supporting the development of interstate transmission systems have
                  been fundamental to ADB's overall energy sector program. ADB's intervention in
                  the transmission subsector has improved commercialization and overall
                  operating efficiencies.
           (iii)  Other assistance to support the development of renewable energy and energy
                  efficiency initiatives.

            3.      Contribution to Development Results

135. The thematic aims of the loans and TA reviewed as part of the SAPE follow ADB's
energy policy initiatives, and the assistance evaluated is considered to support the thrust of that
policy.

                    a.       Poverty reduction

136. The loans reviewed for the study had limited direct intervention regarding poverty.
Rather, the effects are likely to be indirect, mainly through improved financial performance of the
power sector, additional and more reliable supply to rural areas, and greater transparency and
consumer involvement. In Gujarat State, villages were connected with 24-hour access to power
through a redistribution of power that reallocated agricultural connections to off-peak periods.40
In Assam State, 78,000 new rural consumers were connected. ADB has recently targeted

40
     Subsequently, the quality of power to both sectors improved.
                                                                                                 35


program and project assistance to states with high poverty levels, and the Government forwards
the proceeds of ADB loans on a 90% grant basis. This suggests that the proposed macro focus
on poverty, as opposed to directly targeted intervention, is being realized. Given the relative
short time since these loans were approved, it is too early to evaluate poverty impacts.

137. Poverty is largely being addressed through sector restructuring and introducing better
sector governance and commercial management principles. In addition, ADB has encouraged
the use of subsidized lifeline tariffs for the poor, discouraged indiscriminate subsidies, supported
least-cost generation through international competitive bidding, promoted balanced sector
development, and helped reduce technical and nontechnical losses.

138. A major concern regarding rural electrification projects is that there is a danger of
making poor people poorer. This may occur when the rural population pays for the connection
charges and the related internal wiring of their houses, usually on a monthly basis, and invest in
household appliances that run on electricity. However, they still have to buy the kerosene,
batteries, and wood fuels for cooking when electricity is not provided at times when it is most
needed, particularly during the evening peak periods. There is a need to ensure that there are
sufficient supplies to meet the projected increased demand.

               b.      Promoting Private Sector Participation

139. The major thrust of ADB funding has been to promote sustainable commercial and
financial operations with improved governance in the electricity sector where the recipients have
shown a commitment to these reforms. The impacts of this thrust are significant, likely to be
sustained, and have led to demonstrable and replicable projects. Public sector operations in the
gas sector contributed to strengthening the framework for the private sector to enter the industry.
ADB's private sector operations have been material both in terms of helping catalyze industry
reforms and public sector lending and through direct investment that helped reduce financiers'
concerns about project risks. Cooperation between ADB's public sector and private sector
operations has facilitated private sector investments in the energy sector. Successful ADB-
supported reforms are starting to create conditions for private sector investment and possibly
increased Private Sector Operations Department deals in the power sector.

               c.      Regional and Global Environmental Impacts

140. ADB assistance under this strategy has had mixed outcomes. While the IREDA
renewable energy project and energy efficiency projects at BEE have led to demonstrable and
replicable projects, the outcomes of the other projects were only partly successful. The lack of
success can be attributed to procedural issues and suggests the modalities used may need to
be reviewed before lending further to this area. ADB's assistance for energy efficiency for most
of the evaluation period mainly focused on policy dialogue and capacity development. Its level
of investment in energy efficiency was far below both the potential and the need. Low energy
prices, which prevailed during the early part of the evaluation period, and weaknesses in the
policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks, did not provide the incentives for firms, households, or
governments to invest in these areas. A similar conclusion applies to ADB efforts to support
renewable energy, reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector, and, more
broadly, to address global warming and other environmental issues in the energy sector.

141.  ADB has developed new modalities to better position itself to promote energy efficiency,
renewable energy, CDM, and the development of cleaner technologies to help address the
36


energy-environment nexus. These are new initiatives, so it will be several years before
evaluation evidence is available to determine how successful these initiates will be.

               d.     Regional Cooperation

142. Development of a regional power grid and enhanced regional power sector cooperation
has long been discussed through the South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation. The
limited level of cooperation achieved to date reflects political tensions between countries in the
region. There is significant potential and need for enhancements in this area.

        4.     Overall Assessment

143. ADB's approach to state electricity board reform has been to wait for clear signs of state-
level commitment before providing support and then to provide a mix of program, project, and
TA support. This approach has worked well, as there has been continuity of commitment from
all three states. Gujarat has graduated from state support and is now largely self-sustaining.
Assam and Madhya Pradesh will need longer-term support. In all cases, the states should now
be able to allocate additional resources to poverty reduction and extending electrification to all
consumers rather than to indiscriminate subsidies and losses through theft. The overall impact
of the program is therefore rated "substantial."

144. ADB assistance can be broadly grouped into two phases: pre- and post-1996. Before
1996, ADB was active in generation, transmission, and energy efficiency initiatives, whereas the
focus since 1996 has predominantly been on sector improvement and transmission. The shift in
strategy and resulting new focus was complemented by good coordination between assistance
agencies having commonly agreed themes for sector restructuring and efforts to avoid
duplication of efforts. For instance, the World Bank funded the regulatory needs of Madhya
Pradesh and ADB funded major programs and projects for system expansion that are being
supported by DFID for the development of their information technology needs. Overlapping
assistance was not observed in any ADB project, and this is the result of good coordination
between country assistance agencies. ADB assistance to the renewable and energy efficiency
sectors has also been successful, and was consistent with the capacities of the EAs to absorb
the assistance. The shift in ADB policy and lending toward energy efficiency follows a worldwide
trend and matches the policy direction changes in the Indian energy sector.

C.     Assessment of ADB Performance

145. ADB fielded regular missions to review projects, and it provided significant additionality
that contributed to projects' success. This includes attracting private sector participation in
recent years, developing environmental evaluation capacity, efficient processing of variations
due to savings, assisting with bid approvals and awards, and advising on technical issues.
Furthermore, ADB provided timely and effective TA support that supported institutional
strengthening appropriate to design, operations, and development consistent with the projects.
ADB's India Resident Mission has been praised by EAs and the Ministry of Power for expedited
assistance to convert loan savings into additional funding for system improvements, and the
Government believes the Resident Mission should be handling more of the day-to-day
administration to further improve client services.

146. Over time, ADB has responded to the changing needs of the sector. ADB's recent
assistance was in synergy with the development goals outlined in India's Ninth and Tenth
development plans, and it supported both ADB policy and the development requirements of the
                                                                                                37


Government. While the overall power sector has made significant improvements in supply and
sector governance, ADB's assistance at the state level, where it has participated, has been
highly effective. The combined efforts of ADB and the World Bank, with their common focus on
restructuring, influenced the Government to undertake the major reforms implemented under
the 2003 Electricity Act. Overall, ADB's performance is rated as "satisfactory." The overall
top-down rating of 17 (Table 9) indicates that the ADB assistance was "successful" from the
strategic and institutional performance point of view.

                                Table 9: Top-Down Rating Summary

                                                               Rating Scale       SAPE Rating
             Country Positioning                                    0­8                 6
             Contribution to Development Goals                      0­8                 5
             ADB's Performance                                      0­8                 6
             Total                                                   24                17
         SAPE = sector assistance program evaluation.
         Source: Operation Evaluation Mission. Sector assistance program evaluation team.


D.     Overall Evaluation

147. The overall rating based on the bottom-up and top-down assessments of ADB's
assistance in the energy sector is "successful." Further evaluation of this program in, say,
5 years' time might well raise the overall scores when additional information is available about
impact and sustainability.

        V.       CONCLUSIONS, KEY LESSONS, ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Conclusions

148. With passage of the 2003 Electricity Act, the emphasis in India's energy sector has been
on increased competition, open access to transmission and distribution networks, merit order
purchase, power trading, and time-bound restructuring of state electricity boards. That has
established an enabling environment for reforms in the sector. ADB loans and TA have been
within the guidelines of ADB's energy policy, targeted those sectors outlined in the country
strategies and programs for India, and supported the reforms proposed in the 2003 Act. ADB
assistance to the state electricity boards was generally relevant, efficient, and effective. This
was a direct result of ADB's good understanding of the capabilities and desire of the state
electricity sectors to undergo the changes agreed during the loan processing. Tranche releases
of loans supported by covenants were well supported by the state electricity boards and have
ensured that major outcomes were achieved. The depth and length of ADB policy dialogue and
client interaction is evident from the length of time spent in loan preparation and from client
responses, and it has been instrumental in matching client capabilities and inputs with ADB
assistance. Overall, the outcomes of the project and program loans and supporting TA have
been successful. With continued support to the state electricity boards, the intended impacts are
likely to be sustained.

B.     Main Lessons Identified

149.   The main lessons identified from the evaluation are:
38


       (i)     ADB's approach to lending at state level has worked well and should be used as
               a model for future assistance,
       (ii)    sustained technical assistance is needed to support the reform programs at state
               level, and
       (iii)   corporatization is providing benefits similar to those normally attributed to
               privatization.

150. The key feature of the state electricity board assistance programs was patient and
thorough preparation that set assistance into a framework of reforming the state's
macroeconomic management. The programs set high initial hurdles for assistance, requiring
progress in a number of reform areas before any funds were committed. This ensured that
ADB's lending went to states where it would have the most impact. It enabled state power
sectors to create visible improvements at the same time as the painful aspects of reforms were
being implemented. ADB should adopt a similar approach in considering any future lending to
state power sectors.

151. Technical assistance has been crucial to the success of state programs, both before and
after loans were made. Such TA will need to be sustained in order to reach reform objectives.
ADB's coordination with bilateral development partners was also instrumental in developing
appropriate and timely support for the reform process.

152. ADB's experience has shown that full privatization of public utilities is not necessarily the
only option. Corporatization with government ownership can also deliver good results if
commercially and financially sustainable principles are introduced to improve efficiency and
deliver better services to customers. ADB assistance has increased the quality of governance
across the energy sector resulting in more efficient management, better use of financial
resources, and reduced opportunity for corruption. Reducing opportunities for corruption by
addressing two of its main causes--electricity shortages and a lack of good governance--
should be a continuing major initiative.

C.     Assessment of the Main Issues Facing the Power Sector

153.   The main issues facing the power sector are:
       (i)   maintaining the pace of reforms,
       (ii)  improving governance,
       (iii) increasing energy security, and
       (iv)  minimizing the environmental impacts of the energy sector.

        1.     Maintaining the pace of reforms

154. The overall environment in the power sector is one in which positive change is being
accomplished. While restructuring is progressing, energy shortfalls persist and impede
economic development and poverty reduction. The all-India average shortages during FY2004­
2005 were 8.3% in terms of energy and 12.8% in terms of peak load. There are considerable
regional, local, urban-rural, and seasonal variations in the power deficits. These figures have
changed very little over the past 5 years and indicate that additional capacity being introduced
into the system is only matching demand increases. Massive investment is needed to meet the
objective of power for all by 2012, eliminate load shedding, and improve the quality of power.
This can only be justified if the move to a more commercial approach in the power sector is
sustained.
                                                                                                   39


155. Reforms are unevenly progressing across states and may be threatened by increased
competition. There already are signs that some states, such as Gujarat, are moving ahead very
quickly with reform while others are lagging. Within a few years, the faster reformers may enjoy
lower tariffs, better quality supply, and greater success in achieving 100% rural electrification. At
the same time, the extension of open access may reduce even further the viability of slow
reforming state electricity boards. In Assam, for example, 1% of consumers account for 40­50%
of the sector's revenue, and this revenue would be at risk in a contestable market.

        2.     Improving Governance

 156. The following governance issues arose in some or all of the three states to which ADB
has already provided lending assistance and are likely to arise in others:
       (i)    There are still some shortcomings in political independence.
       (ii)   Distribution companies are not autonomous in setting tariffs or procuring power.
       (iii)  The finances of distribution companies are not separated from one another.
       (iv)   Human resources are shared between distribution companies.
       (v)    Risk management is notably absent.

157. Creating properly structured boards is a precondition for success in the long term. Few
of the new distribution companies have autonomous and well-structured boards. There is
extensive cross-membership on boards, with the same senior civil servants often sitting on the
boards of several of the newly created companies. Other nonexecutive directors often lack
power sector or commercial experience. There is often only one executive director (the
managing director) and the boards lack executive capabilities in finance and other specialist
areas. Sometimes senior positions are occupied by bureaucrats on secondment from
government. In other cases, senior staff from the former state electricity board hold positions in
more than one company and positions are held on acting rather than permanent bases. The role
of the former state electricity board is often unclear, and it seems to act as a holding company
even in cases where it does not have such a relationship with the new companies.

158. Many state governments are unwilling to permit different distribution companies to adopt
different tariffs. This practice is impeding the development of independent distributors. State
electricity boards are retaining the role of single buyer for the state and, by extension, the role of
system planner. The distribution companies do not have to negotiate power purchase contracts
with generators or to plan for sufficient supplies to meet their needs. In many cases, the
finances of the distribution companies are not independent. The former state electricity board
continues to act as a central treasury and to negotiate loans with banks on behalf of the
distribution companies. In some cases, it is uncertain how viable the individual distribution
companies will be if they will be fully separated. Open access will eventually enable larger
customers to shop around for power supplies and the better run utilities will be better able to
attract these profitable customers

159. Risk management in the trading of electricity has been noticeably absent at the state
electricity boards. Electricity is one of the most volatile products traded in any market, and
trading involves considerable risks. These include, for instance, financial, operational, and
counterparty risks at the corporate level and prudential and regulatory risks at the market level.
Most electricity trading organizations in developed nations recognize these risks and have
developed suitable risk management policies and procedures to mitigate and limit their
exposure. This requires a considerable investment in time and training, the development of new
staff skills to support these functions, new software, and organizational changes. It also requires
considerable capital investments for computer systems. Human resources are shared across
40


distribution companies in such areas as finance, legal, information technology, and other
specialist areas. While it may be difficult to achieve a full staffing complement in these areas,
the firms need to meet their skills requirements internally in order to perform autonomously.

160. The market design in India leaves the restructured state electricity boards exposed to full
volatility for at least some of their (uncontracted) loads, and these costs can be passed on to
consumers through the electricity regulatory commissions. Collective trading through the holding
companies still reallocates the risks between the distribution companies, thus circumventing the
need to shift the risk away from consumers.

161. Training and the cost of training are major issues. The design and implementation of the
restructuring failed to take into account risk management, its staff support functions, and its
implementation. It also was absent from the proposed franchising system proposed to take over
much of the retail role. Where ADB takes a role in the development of an electricity market, it
can be instrumental in assuring that sectors of the industry are not marginalized, as was for
instance the case in the Philippines electricity cooperatives.

        3.     Increasing Energy Security

162. India needs to rapidly implement measures to increase and secure its fuel supplies.
Appendix 10 gives a summary of the issues surrounding the current fuel constraints. The
current measures include the following to alleviate fuel shortages:
        (i)   rationing fuel,
        (ii)  securing additional coal supplies through imports, and
        (iii) diversifying fuel sources.

163. The Government's response to the fuel supply constraints has been to ration fuel,
diverting additional supplies of coal to the power sector and gas supplies away from the power
sector. As coal is also a primary fuel source in the cement and steel industries, the existing and
continuing constraints on gas and coal supplies impede economic growth. There appear to be
large-scale inefficiencies in the coal industry, in particular, which are attributable to governance,
outdated operational methods, a lack of regulation, and slow allocation of leases. Furthermore,
rail transportation is hampered by poor loading and unloading facilities at the mines and power
plants. It may be possible to replicate some of the reforms in the power sector and to achieve
similar gains in the fuel supply sector. The SAPE observes that, while the distribution,
transmission, and generation sectors have made rapid progress, without a secure and reliable
supply of fuel generation companies will not be able to meet their financing needs as the risk will
be perceived as too high. The World Bank has previously withdrawn its assistance to this sector,
following successive failures to promote structural changes. With the impending fuel supply
constraints and the sector's poor financial and operating performance, however, there may now
be sufficient impetus to assist the sector toward a more rational structure.

164. Other measures to increase fuel security will be to develop the additional infrastructure
to import coal. Coal handling facilities for importing coal in the medium term (to 2012) are
inadequate. Existing ports are not capable of handling the large additional import tonnage
required, and new infrastructure will be needed to meet the planned Ultra Mega Power Projects
on the Western seaboard.
                                                                                                41


        4.         Reducing the Environmental Impacts of the Energy Sector

165. Enhancing energy efficiency on the supply side is the most critical challenge, as the
power sector contributes large shares of the CO2 and SO2 emitted in the country. In addition, in
order to bridge the gap between demand and supply, and especially in the context of the limited
financial resources available, it has become imperative to look for optimum utilization of existing
installed capacity by maximizing the generation through renovation and modernization (R&M) of
existing power plants. The Central Electricity Authority has identified 106 thermal plants for
extending their economical lives by an additional 10 to 15 years, and it has plans to modernize
another 57 plants. These programs require changed practices for operations and maintenance
and to ensure that sufficient revenues are set aside for this. PFC is mandated to organize the
R&M initiative, which also will be applicable for CDM and non-CDM carbon trading.

166. Although the Indian Government has established its Integrated Energy Policy and set
targets, there are significant barriers to mainstreaming the R&M initiative. These include the
perceived advantages of capital investment in business-as-usual technology; the higher
transaction costs of preparing smaller projects; weak coordination and regulatory mechanisms;
and a lack of institutional capacities, particularly in the state governments. The following
institutional barriers have been identified:
         (i)    low energy prices,
         (ii)   scarcity and high cost of energy efficient products and services,
         (iii)  limited local human resource skills to implement demand-side management,
         (iv)   lack of commitment to demand-side management programs, and
         (v)    governments' reluctance to entrust the utilities with implementing demand-side
                management programs.

             VI.        STRATEGIC IMPLICATIONS FOR INDIA'S POWER SECTOR

167. India has to manage three conflicting goals in its energy sector: attaining security of fuel
and energy supplies, increasing the efficiency of supply and financial operations, and minimizing
the environmental effects of the increased supplies. India's continuing shortage of energy
supplies, both of fuels and generation capacity, threaten its economic and social development
goals. The energy sector's viability needs to be strengthened through improved governance and
operational efficiency. There is also a need to minimize the environmental impacts of the
increased generation needed to meet the growing energy demand. These conflicts are
illustrated in Figure 5 below.
42



                          Figure 5: Conflicts in the Energy Sector
                                        trade-offs between
                     The energy sector: trade-
                     three important but potentially conflicting goals
                                Market stability
                                and robustness           Competition


                                Security                      Efficiency
                           Geopolitical        Electricity
                                                                   Monopoly
                           instability           Sector
                                                                   regulation

                                              Environment



                                 Nature            Climate        Air
                               Conservation        Change      pollution


                     Source: Adapted from 2005 NorskHydro Presentation.
                     .

        168. The weakest links in attaining these goals are at the state level, where there are
major deficiencies in operational and technical efficiencies and continuing financial losses. As
this sector provides the primary revenues for system expansion, restructuring the state
electricity sector to be self-sustaining should be the highest priority for assistance. In parallel,
general electricity system expansion and in transmission and in generation should be addressed
to balance supply and demand, as their viability will be assured with reliable revenues from the
restructured state sector. Concurrently, environmental concerns must be integrated through (i)
state system upgrades that reduce losses from the overloaded systems, (ii) rehabilitation of
existing older generation plant, (iii) greater emphasis on energy efficiency, and (iv) a strategic
environmental focus on the development of the system. Supporting these efforts, there should
be a continued emphasis to improve the operational efficiency of the state electricity sector
through improved governance and the development of independent regulation.

A.     State-Level Distribution and Transmission Sector Reforms

        1.     Expanding Reforms to Other States

169. ADB's performance as lead donor for the power sectors in Assam, Gujarat, and Madhya
Pradesh has been successful. System performance has improved, losses have been reduced,
governance has improved, and there is a clear financial turnaround in each of the three states.
In each case, the study finds that ADB should continue to be involved. Power sector reform in
Assam and Madhya Pradesh continues to be a work in progress, and continuity of support from
ADB is vital to ensuring the sustainability of reform efforts. The ultimate success of programs
will depend on achieving success with distribution companies. Even in a progressive state such
as Gujarat there is still considerable scope for improving performance through reducing
technical and nontechnical losses and better collecting amounts billed. The potential for
improvement is significantly greater in Madhya Pradesh and Assam. ADB should stay engaged
with the retail sector and continue working with utilities to promote improving performance.
                                                                                                   43


170. Based on this experience, ADB should be willing to take on another state as a client and
with ADB as the lead development partner. However, the hurdles should be high in the same
way as they were in the three states supported so far. The state should need to show a clear
reform commitment before lending begins, a program loan should be divided into tranches, and
a project loan and TA should again be adopted. There should be reform covenants to be met
before lending begins and as a condition for tranches, as with the existing loans.

        2.     Promoting Operational and Financial Efficiencies in the Energy Sector

171. ADB should increase its efforts to promote better governance through (i) better designed
covenants, (ii) the inclusion of risk management, and (iii) continued support for independent
regulation.

172. The challenges surrounding energy sector governance are enormous. The impacts on
investment, financial stability, competitiveness, and economic development are great. Their
impacts on the poor can be overwhelming, as inefficiencies force the poor to absorb the
inequitable costs of power. Cost recovery, for example, is one of the biggest issues facing
India's energy sector. In many states, consumer revenues do not cover even the cost of energy
supply and the environmental costs associated with energy generation and distribution. This
situation may simply be unattractive for private sector investors due to the associated high costs
of demands from all kinds of concessions and the high costs associated with risks mitigation.

               a.      ADB Covenants Should be Realistically Designed.

173. A realistic long-term objective for ADB would be to raise accounting and auditing
standards in the state utilities to the same level as those at the central government. The
transition from statutory state electricity boards to companies established under the Companies
Act provides a good basis for doing this. The new companies will have the freedom to set their
own accounting policies and processes and may be able to have commercial auditors. Both
these developments would be positive. In the short term, however, restructuring is creating
greater problems. The establishment of new companies necessitates the splitting of accounts of
former state electricity boards between several new entities. This, in turn, demands a cleanup of
the accounts that is frequently time-consuming. It delays completion and internal approval of
accounts and may give rise to numerous audit queries that lead to further delays. The process
is beneficial, despite the delays, because it leads to more accurate accounts. However, the
delays can lead to noncompliance with ADB covenants and hence the suspension of lending.
This is counterproductive. A better approach would be to have a set of financial conditions,
covering a number of years, which would lead to improvements in both accounting and auditing
standards through the cleaning up of accounts and appointment of commercial auditors. ADB
should be prepared to accept some delays in the submission of accounts provided that
appropriate steps are being taken to upgrade standards.

174. It is also understandable for ADB to set covenants regarding accounts receivable so that
distribution companies reduce outstanding debts of customers to commercial levels. Typically,
this might be around 2 months' billings. At many state electricity boards, however, receivables
are far higher than this and include debt for which there is negligible hope of recovery. The key
issue here is the method by which, and the time over which, reductions should be achieved.
State electricity boards can make immediate cosmetic improvements simply by increasing
provisions, but this will not improve real financial performance. Moreover, because of poor
accounting and political unwillingness, there are often difficulties in deciding what should be
written off and in sanctioning the write-off. A sensible plan is likely to include steps to verify all
44


outstanding debts, write off those that are clearly irrecoverable, disconnect delinquent
consumers and ensure that consumers remain up-to-date with payments based on current bills.
Requiring state electricity boards to reduce receivables to low levels in the short term is unlikely
to be productive as this is a two to three year process. It is better to ensure that a plan is put in
place along the lines discussed above and, if a short-term performance indicator is required, to
focus on the level of collections compared to current billings.

                    b.       ADB Should Ensure that Risk Management, as a Component of
                             Good Governance, is an Integral Part of an Overall Plan for Market
                             Liberalization.

175. In emerging markets, risk management is an essential requirement for the long-term
survival of all participants. Risk management needs to develop simultaneously with a market
structure, and it will require significant funding to implement the knowledge and systems needed.
This is particularly the case where a market has many small participants, such as that proposed
by the franchising arrangements being implemented in India.41

176. Future lending may shift toward nonsovereign lending. Hence, additional financial risks,
along with potential performance-based risks imposed by regulators, will become concerns for
restructured state electricity boards. General corporate risk management, including a
requirement that there be a risk management committee reporting directly to an independent
board, should be included in lending covenants. In addition, staff capacity in finance and
accounting need to be developed in the electricity sector to support the governance and timely
management decisions required to run a modern utility.

                    c.       ADB Should Continue Support for Independent Regulation.

177. Power sector regulation in India, both through the CERC and state electricity regulatory
commissions, is playing a crucial role in promoting reform and the enforcement of both the
underlying principles and the details of such legislation as the 2003 Electricity Act. It is the state
regulators who are taking the lead in reducing political interference in state utilities and ensuring
a proper balance between the interests of consumers and commercial good practice. The OEM
was impressed by the skill, commitment, and enthusiasm with which regulators and their staffs
are pursuing their new roles and how they are convinced that their role is crucial to better
performance and commercial autonomy for the sector. In particular, all the regulators have done
a good job in establishing transparency through websites and other public information
mechanisms.

178. Regulation is a relatively new activity, both in India and internationally. Indian regulators
are already learning from one another and from foreign experience. Numerous issues were
raised in discussions with regulators, such as the need to ensure financially competitive salaries,
the scope for creating career structures for regulatory staff, meeting training needs, methods of
achieving financial independence, and means of sharing information about best practices. There
is no doubt that dialogue between power sector regulators has been a powerful tool in sharing
and promoting best practices. Where there are opportunities for ADB to promote cooperation
and skills development, these should be taken advantage of.


41
     In the Philippines, where little or no risk management is practiced, the costs of transactions and the requirements
     for risk management may be beyond the financial capabilities of the participants. As a result, there is a very high
     level of payment defaults for power among the smaller cooperatives.
                                                                                                              45


179. There is also further scope to improve the regulatory environment in the fuel supply
sector (Appendix 10) and to enhance the regulatory capacity of the CERC. A model such as the
Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Members Electricity Regulators Forum and
international mentoring are some possible options that warrant further discussion.

B.         Funding System Expansion

180. Transmission capacity needs to be expanded from the current level of 9,500 MW to
30,000 MW by 2012 and will require approximately $15.8 billion of capital investments to reach
this target. The financial status of the transmission sector and its potential capability to attract
nonsovereign lending suggests that future funding for this sector may largely be provided
through a combination of public and private sector finance.

181. The development of new thermal generation capacity should be a lower priority for
ADB's public sector operations, especially at the state level. Central generators generally have
a better record of constructing and operating successfully. ADB's involvement in the Unchahar
project illustrates this point in that the project's success wholly depended on the takeover by
NTPC. PFC is well funded, is deeply involved in generation, and may be better placed to assist
states. Power Grid is a long-standing ADB client which can now raise funds on the open market.
However, the company values the continuing link to ADB. The connection also gives ADB a
clear opportunity to offer its views on reform issues at the centre of the power sector and helps
in sustaining policy dialogue with the Government on the overall direction of reform. Such
relationships may prove invaluable in view of the many uncertainties that lie ahead as reform
proceeds.

182. ADB may also consider support for hydropower and other renewable energy sources.
The development of hydropower has lagged in recent years. The Government's plans envisage
developing a further 50,000 MW of hydropower capacity over next few years. Hydropower
projects are often difficult to finance because of long payback periods, and ADB's ability to offer
long-term loans can therefore be especially helpful to promoting such projects. ADB may also
be able to offer more complex financing support by, for example, offering loans during the
construction phase of hydropower projects that can then be refinanced from other, commercial
sources once the project is operational. The funding released can then be devoted to the
construction stage of further hydropower projects. However, future ADB involvement in projects
with dams will be controversial. 42 ADB will need to make special efforts to apply its safeguard
policies during project preparation, implementation, and operations. ADB will need to find a
more constructive way to work with nongovernment organizations and affected people to ensure
that the hydropower projects that it funds do not harm people and the environment.

           1.      ADB Should Increase its Role to Promote Interregional Cooperation as an
                   Additional Source of System Expansion.

183. With the development of a national grid within India, which is scheduled by 2012, and
the rapid growth in power demand, the potential benefits of regional cooperation are greatly
enhanced. The most obvious example is the unrealized hydroelectric potential in Bhutan
(estimated at 21,000 MW) and Nepal (estimated at 83,000 MW). Pakistan has 36,000 MW of

42
     Arturo Nuera. 2005. The Asian Development Bank and Dams. Philippines: NGO Forum on ADB; Greenpeace
     International and European Renewable Energy Council. 2007.The Report of the World Commission on Dams.
     London.. Energy [R]Evolution: A Sustainable World Energy Outlook. The Netherlands: Greenpeace and EREC.
     Greenpeace, for example, criticizes ADB for supporting large hydroelectric power plants and promotes smaller
     "run-of-the-river" hydropower that is said to be more environmentally friendly.
46


unrealized hydropower capacity. Bangladesh has considerable gas reserves it uses for power
generation and that could be used more effectively if complemented by hydropower resources.
Cooperation with all these neighbors could help to manage system stability, maintenance, and
peaks more effectively across the region.
184. Development partners such as ADB can provide the impetus to move such regional
projects forward, both financially and politically. In addition to acting as a source of finance, ADB
is widely recognized as an honest broker that could help to overcome some of the difficult
issues in negotiations between countries and provide momentum in achieving an agreement.
The commercial case for regional linkages is compelling, and in promoting regional cooperation
ADB should aim to involve the private sector as well as public utilities.

            2.      Increase The Number And Volume of Nonsovereign Transactions To Fund
                     System Expansion

185. The Government's shift toward viability gap funding, along with general progress on
unbundling the power sectors and putting in place independent regulators, suggests that
circumstances are starting to improve for private sector activities in India. This change has been
reflected in the scale of PSOD's operations, as approvals started to accelerate after 2003. The
study concluded that both the generation and transmission sectors in India are capable of
undertaking nonsovereign lending to support their expansion needs. It is appropriate that
nonsovereign lending can take on a larger role to fund this sector and to catalyze private sector
funds, particularly into the transmission and generation sectors as new areas for public-private
partnerships. PSOD is uniquely situated to coordinate with ADB's public sector operations, and
it has the expertise needed to develop the transition of the generation and transmission sectors
into private sector-like operations. Current PSOD limitations on funding ceilings and staffing
needs may be the primary inhibiting factors, and perhaps these should be addressed as a
matter of urgency.

C.         Integrating Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy to Improve the Environment

186. There is great potential to integrate energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives
into ADB-funded projects. In India's case, in particular, there is great potential and interest to
conduct more follow-on projects for developing cleaner technologies and energy efficient
projects. The BEE sees this as a responsibility of the states, and it is providing policy support.
However, state governments have no technical expertise and lack adequate funding
mechanisms. Future assistance of this nature may best be served by smaller loans
accompanied by significant partial credit guarantees. Policy interventions will also be required to
address awareness, access to capital, and savings uncertainties.

187. Current energy efficiency initiatives do not as yet have the desired impact. Demand-side
electrical and thermal energy efficiency projects are undertaken to improve end-use energy
consumption, manage energy, or adopt efficient technologies or processes. There is also a
large underdeveloped capacity in renewable energy, estimated to be around 81,000 MW. 43
ADB's Asia Least-Cost Greenhouse Gas Abatement Strategy (ALGAS) project assessed the
potentials of energy efficiency improvements in some of the energy intensive subsectors and
concluded that energy savings from 30% to 50% are technically feasible in many industries. The
energy efficiency potentials within reach of the agriculture, industry, buildings, transportation,
and electricity sectors could provide a major boost to developing member countries' economies.

43
     Ministry of Nonconventional Energy Sources. India Website.
                                                                                                                  47



188. There are many state and central governments generating plants that require
rehabilitation, and this should generally be a higher priority than new construction as it should
be more cost-effective. Financing of such rehabilitation may be more risky because of the
difficulty of obtaining warranties on equipment for rehabilitation. There may, therefore, be some
worthwhile opportunities for ADB involvement in lending to these plants, both public and private.

189. Use of TOU tariffs should also be encouraged, as these enhance supply-side efficiency
by reducing the need for investment in additional peaking plants as load is shifted from peak to
off peak. The load shift also releases capacity in transmission and distribution. TOU wholesale
pricing (supply-side TOU) encourages the development of plant to serve peaking loads. The
evaluation findings indicate that market-based signals in the form of TOU tariffs can be a
powerful incentive to encourage energy efficiency initiatives. Tariffs can be used to encourage
the customers of electricity utilities to change their behavior in ways that result in energy
conservation, less capital investment, and fewer emissions from the sector.

190. ADB should complement these initiatives to improve the policy, legal, and regulatory
framework and the use of market-based incentives to improve the enabling framework for
energy efficiency, renewable energy, and ways to address environmental concerns in the
energy sector. Where possible, energy sector roadmaps should be the basis for (i) incorporating
environmental costs and benefits into the economic analysis undertaken for energy projects,
and (ii) undertaking strategic environmental assessments for the energy sector.

D.         ADB Should Tailor its Products and Services to Client Needs.

191. ADB should continue to reduce and simplify its conditions for stronger borrowers
wherever possible and delegate responsibilities to the India Resident Mission where this can
speed decision taking. For Power Grid, in particular, the OEM could see little need to impose
any other than financial covenants on lending, as the company is commercially run and viable.
ADB should also consider embarking on a publicity campaign to correct misperceptions and to
assess the viability of changes to address outstanding concerns.

192. ADB staff dealing with the energy sector must have a broad range of skills to deal with
the wide-ranging requirements of the energy sector. The continued sustainability of ADB's
operations in the energy sector will depend on successfully matching the staff skills mix with
client expectations. A survey of energy specialists conducted by the Regional and Sustainable
Development Department found that the self-ratings of competencies indicate that energy staff
have a moderate to high level of expertise in the traditional supply technologies.44 However,
skills in areas such as procurement, corporate governance, renewable energy, and financial
management were more limited. Going forward, operations will require more staff with expertise
in procurement, governance, and financial management in the energy sector. This may require
some changes to ADB's staffing skills mix.




44
     ADB. 2007. Special Evaluation Study on Energy Policy 2000 Review: Energy Efficiency for a Better Future. Manila.
48


              VII.     RECOMMENDATIONS: FUTURE ASSISTANCE PRIORITIES

A.      Recommendations

193. Based on the evaluation findings, the following recommendations are put forward for
consideration in future ADB assistance to the energy sector in India. They are designed to
provide broad guidance but not to be overly prescriptive.


 Recommendations                                              Department              Implementation
                                                              Responsible
  1. Subject to the Government's agreement, continue          SARD                    As part of the India
     and expand the current focus on state electricity                                CPS and its
     sector restructuring and system expansion to                                     implementation
     balance supply and demand.
  2. Integrate into, and increase energy efficiency and       SARD, RSDD              As part of the India
     renewable energy initiatives in, lending programs                                CPS and its
     at both central and state levels.                                                implementation

  3. Tailor products and services to meet clients'            SARD, RSDD,             As part of the India
     evolving needs.                                          PSOD, INRM              CPS and its
                                                                                      implementation
  4. Increase the number and volume of nonsovereign           SARD, PSOD,             As part of the India
     transactions   to  expand    generation   and            INRM                    CPS and its
     transmission.                                                                    implementation
CPS = country partnership strategy, INRM = India Resident Mission, PSOD = Private Sector Operations Department,
RSDD = Regional and Sustainable Development Department, SARD = South Asia Regional Department.
                                                                                Appendix 1   49

       LOANS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS TO INDIA'S ENERGY SECTOR

                    Table A1.1: Public Sector Loans to India's Energy Sector

  Loan                                                             Amount         Date
                               Project Name
 Number                                                            $million     Approved
 Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)
  0798    North Madras Thermal Power                                  150      18 Nov 1986
  0907    Unchachar Thermal Power Extension                           160      29 Sep 1988
  0988    Rayalaseema Thermal Power                                   230      21 Nov 1989
  1029    Second North Madras Thermal Power                           200      30 Aug 1990
          Subtotal                                                    740

 Hydrocarbon Program
  1117    Gandhar Field Development                                   267      14 Nov 1991
  1148    Hydrocarbon Sector Program                                  250      17 Dec 1991
  1222    Gas Flaring Reduction                                       300      30 Mar 1993
  1285    Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion                            260       7 Dec 1993
          Subtotal                                                  1,077

 Energy Sector Development
  1081    Special Assistance                                          150       4 Apr 1991
  1212    Energy Conservation and Environment Improvement             147      17 Dec 1992
  1343    Industrial Energy Efficiency                                150      13 Dec 1994
  1804    Gujarat Power Sector Development - Project Loan             200      13 Dec 2000
  1869    Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program             200       6 Dec 2001
          (Project)
  1968    State Power Sector Reform                                   150      12 Dec 2002
  2037    Assam Power Sector Development Program (Project)            100      10 Dec 2003
          Subtotal                                                  1,097

 Renewable Energy Generation
  1465    Renewable Energy Development                                100      26 Sep 1996
          Subtotal                                                    100

 Transmission and Distribution
   1161   Power Efficiency (Sector)                                   250      26 Mar 1992
   1405   Power Transmission (Sector)                                 275      16 Nov 1995
   1591   LPG Pipeline                                                150      16 Dec 1997
   1764   Power Transmission Improvement (Sector)                     250       6 Oct 2000
   1803   Gujarat Power Sector Development (Program Loan)             150      13 Dec 2000
   1868   Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program             150       6 Dec 2001
          (Program)
   2036   Assam Power Sector Development Program (Program)            150      10 Dec 2003
   2152   Power Grid Transmission (Sector)                            400      21 Dec 2004
          Subtotal                                                  1,775

 TOTAL                                                              4,639
Source: Asian Development Bank Database.
 50       Appendix 1



                Table A1.2: Technical Assistance Grants to India's Energy Sector

  TA                                                                             Amount      Date
         Project Name
Number                                                                    Type    $'000    Approved
Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)
1228     APSEB Operational Improvement Support                            AD     1,000    21 Nov 1989
1229     National Program for Environmental Management for Coal-Fired     AD       664    21 Nov 1989
         Power Generation
1701     Training Workshop on Environmental Issues Related to Electric    AD      100     25 May 1992
         Power Generation
2742     Solicitation of Private Sector Implementation of the Chhara      AD      375     17 Dec 1996
         Combined Cycle Power Plant
         Subtotal                                                                2,139

Hydrocarbon Program
 1416     Undertaking a Review of the Hydrocarbon Sector Operations       AD      100      8 Nov 1990
 1598     Evaluation of Petroleum Exploration and Development Risk        AD      180     14 Nov 1991
          Contracts
 1645     Examination of Public Sector Oil Refining, Distribution and     AD      200      2 Jan 1992
          Marketing Activities
 1646     Promotion of Private Sector Investment in Downstream            AD      400      2 Jan 1992
          Activities
 1837     Natural Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion                        PP      100     31 Dec 1992
 2702     Preparation of Natural Gas Development Master Plan              AD      600      9 Dec 1996
 2775     Hydrocarbon Exploration and Production Database and             AD      600      3 Apr 1997
          Archive System
          Subtotal                                                               2,180

Energy Sector Development
 1119     Power Sector Loan                                               PP       50      6 Feb 1989
 1365     Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Operational Improvement            AD      740     30 Aug 1990
 1366     Environment Monitoring and Pollution Control                    AD      490     30 Aug 1990
 1597     Safety and Environmental Management of ONGC's Activities        AD      890      2 Jan 1992
 2008     Regulatory Framework for the Gas Industry                       AD      600      7 Dec 1993
 2474     Environmental Improvement and Sustainable Development of        PP      600     15 Dec 1995
          the Agra-Mathura-Ferozabad Trapezium in Uttar Pradesh
 2490     Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs in Andra     AD      300     20 Dec 1995
          Pradesh
 2738     Preparation of a Power System Master Plan for the State of      AD      600     17 Dec 1996
          Gujarat
 2739     Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs in Gujarat   AD      300     17 Dec 1996
 2740     Review of Electricity Legislation and Regulations in Gujarat    AD      235     17 Dec 1996
 2741     Financial Management Support to Kheda and Rajkot                AD      580     17 Dec 1996
          Distribution Centers of the Gujarat Electricity Board
 2980     Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development                         AD     1,000     7 Jan 1998
 3305     Support to the Power Finance Corporation                        AD     1,000    24 Nov 1999
 3573     Reorganization Plan for Gujarat Electricity Board               AD       600    13 Dec 2000
 3574     Consumer Awareness and Participation in Power Sector            AD        50    13 Dec 2000
          Reforms
 3575     Support to Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission            AD      450     13 Dec 2000
 3734     Kerala Power Sector Development Program                         PP      800      4 Oct 2001
 3882     Development of a Transfer Scheme for Madhya Pradesh             AD      400     14 Jun 2002
          Power Sector Reform
 3883     Legal Support for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform            AD      150     14 Jun 2002
 3885     Energy Efficiency Enhancement Project                           PP      600     21 Jun 2002
 3953     Assam Power Sector Development Program                          PP      800     29 Oct 2002
                                                                                                         Appendix 1      51

   TA                                                                                         Amount           Date
            Project Name
 Number                                                                             Type       $'000        Approved
  3972      Strengthening Consumer and Stakeholder Communication for                 AD         150         5 Nov 2002
            Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform
  4083      Building the Capacity of Assam Electricity Regulatory                    AD            500      24 Jan 2003
            Commission
  4182      Urban Clean Fuel                                                         PP         995        24 Sep 2003
  4241      Reorganization of Assam State Electricity Board                          AD       1,000        10 Dec 2003
  4242      Institutional Development for Rural Electrification                      AD         400        10 Dec 2003
  4243      Policy and Legal Support for Power Sector Reforms                        AD         100        10 Dec 2003
  4380      Uttaranchal Power Sector Development                                     PP         150        23 Aug 2004
  4496      Capacity Building for Clean Development Mechanism                        AD         700        17 Dec 2004
  4630      Uttaranchal Power Sector Capacity Building                               AD         500        11 Aug 2005
            Subtotal                                                                         15,730

 Renewable Energy Generation
  1953      Renewable Energy Development                                             PP            354     13 Sep 1993
  2648      Institutional Strengthening of Indian Renewable Energy                   AD            600     26 Sep 1996
            Development Agency, Ltd.
            Subtotal

 Transmission and Distribution
  1756      Study of Bulk Power and Transmission Tariffs and                         AD            600     29 Sep 1992
            Transmission Regulations
  2116      Power System Planning in Orissa                                          PP         600        28 Jun 1994
  2560      LPG Pipeline Project Study                                               PP         100        24 Apr 1996
  2752      Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal                                           PP         600        27 Jan 1997
  3380      Private Sector Participation in Electricity Transmission                 AD         600        28 Dec 1999
            Subtotal                                                                          2,500

 TOTAL                                                                                       23,503
AD = advisory technical assistance, PP = project preparatory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank Database.



                 Table A1.3: Private Investments and Loans to India's Energy Sector
                                    ($million, as of December 2006)

                                               Investment            Loan          Complementary             Total
                                                                                     Financing
  Conventional Energy Generation                     9.67             257.00            225.00                  491.67
  (other than hydropower generation)
  Transmission and Distribution                      2.60              79.80                0.00                 82.40
  Total                                             12.27             336.80              225.00                574.07
 Source: Asian Development Bank Database.
52   Appendix 2



        SECTOR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM EVALUATION STUDY METHODOLOGY

1.     Within the scope and budget of the evaluation it was not possible to examine all of the
power sector interventions and assistance modalities of Asian Development Bank (ADB) in full.
The review was therefore focused on a sample of investments and the technical assistance
which supported those investments. In addition to focusing attention on recent investments, the
sample was chosen to
       (i)     ensure coverage of a broad mixture of projects, taking in generation,
               transmission, and distribution;
       (ii)    identify projects which illustrated ADB's involvement in India's power sector
               reform program; and
       (iii)   exploit existing knowledge in the Operations Evaluation Department (e.g., by
               reviewing a private sector investment which was the subject of an earlier
               operations evaluation mission to India).

2.     The evaluation adopted two main approaches:
       (i)   Interviews with officials in the main agencies in the Indian power sector, both at
             the central government and in selected states At the center, this included the
             Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,
             National Thermal Power Corporation, National Hydroelectric Power Corporation,
             Power Grid Corporation, Rural Electrification Corporation, and PTC India Limited
             (the former Power Trading Corporation). In Assam, it included the Government of
             Assam; the Assam State Electricity Board and five successor companies
             responsible for generation, transmission and distribution (three companies); as
             well as the Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission and consultants from
             Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation and PricewaterhouseCoopers who
             were supporting reform in the power sector under ADB funding. In Gujarat, it
             included Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigram Ltd (the holding company for the state's
             interests in the power sector) and its six subsidiaries (a generation company, a
             transmission company and four distribution companies) as well as the Gujarat
             Electricity Regulatory Commission. In Madhya Pradesh, it included senior
             officials in the state government, the regulator, and the power utilities. Other
             agencies included the Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency, Bureau
             of Energy Efficiency, Energy and Resources Institute and World Bank.
       (ii)  Analysis of information in reports, including ADB reports (i.e., reports and
             recommendations of the President, project completion reports, technical
             assistance completion reports, project performance audit reports, back-to-office
             reports), annual reports, accounts of the utilities, consultants' reports, and reports
             and studies prepared by other development agencies active in the sector.
                        TABLE A3.1: INDIA'S ENERGY POLICY AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT MILESTONES


  Year                                India Energy Policy and Program Development                                            Asian Development Bank Policy and Strategy

1910        Indian Electricity Act
            Provided the basic framework for electric supply industry. Provided for license for supply of electricity in a
            specified area, legal frameworks for laying down of wires and other works. Provisions established
            relationship between licensee and the consumers.
1948        Electricity (supply) Act
            Rationalization of the production and supply of electricity, and generally for taking measures conducive to
            electricity sector development. Mandated the creation of state electricity bureaus (SEBs). Expressed the
            need for the states to assume role (through SEBs) in expanding electrification across the country.
1956        Industrial Policy Resolution
            Envisaged the generation, transmission, and distribution of power almost exclusively in the public sector.
            Indian Electricity Rules
            Framed under Section 37 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 to regulate the supply, transmission,
            generation, and use of electricity.
1960s       The country was divided into 5 regions in order to optimally utilize the dispersed sources of the country for
            power generation. The division by region was believed to facilitate the planning process and achieve
            self-sufficiency in power development.
1974­1979   1973­74 Oil price shocks
            The Government got involved in a big way in the generation and bulk transmission of power to
            supplement the efforts of the states and took upon itself responsibility for setting up large power projects
            to develop coal and hydroelectric resources in the effort to meet the country's power requirements.
            Coal Mines Nationalization Act was promulgated.
            Setting up of state-owned power corporation
            National Thermal Power Corporation
            National Hydro-electric Power Corporation
            To implement the regional power projects in the North-East, North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation
            was set up in 1976.
1986        India joined Asian Development Bank.                                                                             ADB energy policy focus on overcoming crisis caused
                                                                                                                             by the oil price shocks. Emphasis on energy supply
                                                                                                                             augmentation through generation.




                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3
                                                                                                                             I. Loan 0798-IND: North Madras Thermal Power
1988        Thermal and Hydro Development Corporation and Nathpa Jhakri Power Corporation set up.                            Conventional Power Generation ADB Loan 0907-IND:




                                                                                                                                                                                   53
                                                                                                                                                                                   54
                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3
  Year                                India Energy Policy and Program Development                                                Asian Development Bank Policy and Strategy

                                                                                                                                 Unchahar Thermal Power Extension

1989        National Power Trans Corporation set up to construct, operate, and maintain the interstate and                       Conventional Power Generation
            interregional transmission system.                                                                                   (i)      ADB Loan 0988-IND: Rayalaseema Thermal
                                                                                                                                          Power
1991        Start of the Energy Reform Process                                                                                   Conventional Power Generation
            Conference of Chief Minister and Power Ministers on Power Sector Reform (3 March 1991). The                          (i)      ADB Loan 1117-IND: Gandhar Field
            Conference resolved inter alia that commercial viability has to be achieved in distribution in 2­3 years                      Development
            through any or all of the following: (i) creating profit centers with full accountability; (ii) handing over local   (ii)     ADB Loan 1148-IND: Hydrocarbon Sector
            distribution to panchayats, local bodies, franchisees, users association, wherever necessary; (iii)                           Program
            privatization of distribution
            To allow liberal capital structuring and allocation of attractive return on investment, 100% foreign equity
            participation was permitted for projects set up by foreign private investors in the sector.
            Administrative and legal environment modified to simplify the procedures and clearance of projects.
1995        Orissa was the first to introduce major reforms in the power sector. Orissa Electricity Reform Bill: under           ADB Second Energy Policy
            this Act Orissa Generating Company, Orissa Grid Company and Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission                 (i)     ADB Loan 1405-IND: Power Transmission
            were formed.                                                                                                                 (Sector)
            Haryana Electricity Power Commission constituted.
            Policy guidelines for private sector participation in the renovation and modernization of power plants were
            issued.
            Policy for Mega Power Projects (1,000 megawatt capacity) was introduced, allowing supplying power to
            more than one state. The Mega projects were to be set up in regions having coal and hydropower
            potential or in coastal regions.
                                                                                                                                 .
            Liquid fuel policy permitting liquid fuel-based power plants to achieve the quick capacity addition to avert
            severe power crisis.
1996­1997                                                                                                                        Renewable Energy Generation
                                                                                                                                 Conventional Energy Development
                                                                                                                                 (i)      ADB Loan 1465-IND: Power Transmission
                                                                                                                                          (Sector)
                                                                                                                                 (ii)     ADB Loan 1591-IND: LPG Pipeline
1998        Regulatory Commission Act
            The Electricity Law was amended to make transmission a separate activity and invite greater participation
            from public and private sectors. Creation of Central and State Transmission Utility. The Central
  Year                             India Energy Policy and Program Development                                             Asian Development Bank Policy and Strategy

         Transmission utility was headed by the Power Grid Corporation.
2000                                                                                                                       ADB Energy Policy Review: Operational strategies
                                                                                                                           include: a) poverty reduction; b) promoting private
                                                                                                                           sector involvement c) addressing regional and global
                                                                                                                           environmental impacts, and d) promoting regional
                                                                                                                           cooperation.

                                                                                                                                 ·  ADB Loan 1765-IND: Power Transmission
                                                                                                                                    Improvement (sector)
                                                                                                                               · ADB Loan 1803-L1804-IND: Gujarat Power
                                                                                                                                    Sector Development (Program and Project
                                                                                                                                    Loan)
2001                                                                                                                       Loan 1868-IND Madhya Pradesh Power Sector
                                                                                                                           Development
2002                                                                                                                       Sector Reform. Transmission and Distribution
                                                                                                                           I. ADB Loan 1968-IND: State Power Sector Reform
2003     Electricity Act                                                                                                   Sector Reform
         - Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar                II. ADB Loan 2036/2037-IND: Assam Power Sector
         Pradesh enacted their state electricity reforms acts, which provide, inter alia, for unbundling and                   Development (Program and Project Loan)
         corporatization of SEBs, as well as setting up of state electricity regulatory commissions.
         The Act seeks to create a liberal development framework for the power sector by distancing government
         from regulation. Replaced three existing acts, namely, Indian Electricity Act, 1910, the Electricity (Supply)
         Act, 1948, and the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998. The objectives of the Act are "to
         consolidate the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity and
         generally for taking measures conducive to development of electricity industry, promoting competition,
         protecting interest of consumers and supply of electricity to all areas, rationalization of electricity tariff,
         ensuring transparent policies regarding subsidies, promotion of efficient and environmentally benign
         policies, constitution of Central Electricity Authority, Regulatory Commissions and establishment of
         Appellate Tribunal and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto."
         - The SEBs of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttaranchal
         Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh were unbundled and corporatized.
         - Distribution was privatized in Orissa and Delhi.




                                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3
2004                                                                                                                       (i)       ADB    Loan    2152-IND:    Power    Grid




                                                                                                                                                                                  55
                                                                                                                                                                            56
                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 3
    Year                                India Energy Policy and Program Development                                            Asian Development Bank Policy and Strategy

                                                                                                                                   Transmission (sector)
2005          National Electricity Policy                                                                                      Sector Reform
              It aims at laying guidelines for accelerated development of the power sector, providing supply of electricity
              to all areas, and protecting interests of consumers and other stakeholders while keeping in view the
              availability of energy resources, technology available to exploit these resources, economics of generation
              using different resources, and energy security issues.
2006          Tariff Policy
              The objectives of this tariff policy are to: (i) ensure availability of electricity to consumers at reasonable
              and competitive rates; (ii) ensure financial viability of the sector and attract investments; (iii) promote
              transparency, consistency, and predictability in regulatory approaches across jurisdictions and minimize
              perceptions of regulatory risks; and (iv) promote competition, efficiency in operations, and improvement in
              quality of supply.
              Eighteen state electricity regulatory commissions issued tariff orders.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, IND = India, SEB = state electricity board.
                   Table A3.2: Relevance of ADB Energy Policy and Country Strategy Directions to India's National Priorities
   Relevant Sectoral                 Country National Energy                   Relevant Elements            ADB Energy Strategy                ADB Projects Since Release of the
        Issues                              Strategy                            of Energy Policy               Addressed in the                          2000 Review
                                                                                                                   CSP-CAP
  th
10 Five Year Plan           10th Five Year Plan                                                        CSP (2003­2006)                      Loans
Electricity                  Ensure energy competition in each                 Private sector          ADB-promoted South Asia                    Loan 1968-IND: State Power Sector
 Rapid growth will place      subsegment of the energy sector and              participation           Subregional Economic                    Reform
   heavy demand on            remove all entry barriers to rationalize                                 Cooperation Action programs                  Loan 1868-1869-IND Madhya
   electric power.            optimal fuel and technology choices for          Sector                  were developed for subregional          Pradesh Power Sector Development
 Huge losses of state         extraction, conversion, transportation,          restructuring           projects in energy, environment,          Loans 2036/2037-IND: Assam
   electricity boards         and end use of energy                                                    transport, and private sector
                                                                               Efficiency
                                                                                                                                             Power Sector Development
                             Ensure energy pricing that leads to                                       cooperation.
Coal                          efficient choices of fuel, inter-fuel            improvement                                                       Loan 2152-IND Power Transmission
                                                                                                       Emphasis on hydrocarbons and
 Coal production is           substitution, and technology so that
                                                                               Subsidies,              power development. Investments       Technical Assistance
  nationalized at present     resource allocation takes place based on
                                                                               efficiency              were directed to removing key        2000
  and limited private         market forces operating under a credible
                                                                               improvement             bottlenecks where private             TA 3573-IND: Reorganization Plan for
  investment is allowed.      regulatory regime
                                                                                                       investment is not forthcoming.         Gujarat Electricity Board
 Environmental pollution     Incentivize rational use of energy across
                                                                               Sectoral reform                                               TA 3574-IND: Consumer Awareness
                              all sectors, including agriculture, industry,
                                                                               and restructuring       CSP Update (2005­2007)                 and Participation in Power Sector
Oil and Gas                   commerce, domestic, personal transport,
                                                                                                       Continued association with             Reforms
 High dependence on           public transport, and haulage
                                                                                                       private and public sectors,           TA 3575-IND: Support to Gujarat
   crude oil imports         Ensure an institutional framework that            Tariff reform
                                                                                                       especially in developing the           Electricity Regulatory Commission
 High subsidy                 provides a level playing field to public
                                                                                                       national gas transmission grid in    2001
 Pricing of domestically      sector and private sector players, and           Poverty reduction,
                                                                               rural electrification   the country.                          TA 3734-IND: Kerala Power Sector
   produced natural gas       provides comparable incentives to
                                                                                                                                              Development Program
   and its allocation to      producers across all energy sectors
                                                                               Environmental           Focus on sector restructuring,       2002
   power and fertilizer      Ensure a consistent tax and regulatory                                    including private sector              TA 3882-IND: Development of a
   industry                   structure across all energy subsectors           protection
                                                                                                       participation and critical             Transfer Scheme for Madhya Pradesh
 Strengthening               Meet social objectives as far as possible                                 investments to support improving       Power Sector Reform
   upstream regulation        through direct trade and tradable                Energy efficiency
                                                                                                       efficiency and system reliability,    TA 3883-IND: Legal Support for
 Ensuring competition         entitlements offered to those genuinely in                               and increasing distribution            Madhya Pradesh Power Sector
                              need                                             Renewable energy
   and open access                                                                                     coverage (including rural              Reform
                             Treat environmental externalities                 development
                                                                                                       electrification).                     TA 3885-IND: Energy Efficiency
                              uniformly under the "polluter pays"                                                                             Enhancement Project
                              principle                                        Clean
                                                                               development             CSP Update ( 2006­2008)               TA 3953-IND: Assam Power Sector
                             Strengthen institutions for promoting                                     Continued focus on important           Development Program
                              energy conservation and energy                   mechanism
                                                                                                       areas, such as strengthening the      TA 3972-IND: Strengthening
                              efficiency                                                               national transmission grid and         Consumer and Stakeholder
                                                                               Capacity building
                             Develop renewable and nonconventional                                     other critical investment needs.       Communication for Madhya Pradesh
                                                                               and information
                              energy                                                                                                          Power Sector Reform




                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 3
                                                                               systems
                             Set up research and development to                                        Continued focus on state power       2003
                              develop technology and energy sources                                    sector loans for upgrading            TA 4083-IND: Building the Capacity of
                              that will enhance energy security, leading                               transmission, distribution, rural      Assam Electricity Regulatory




                                                                                                                                                                                      57
                                                                                                                                                                              58
                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 3
    Relevant Sectoral                Country National Energy               Relevant Elements            ADB Energy Strategy            ADB Projects Since Release of the
         Issues                             Strategy                        of Energy Policy               Addressed in the                      2000 Review
                                                                                                                CSP-CAP
                               to energy independence                                             electrification, and capacity       Commission
                                                                                                  building of power sector           TA 4182-IND: Urban Clean Fuel
                                                                                                  institutions aimed to improve      TA 4241-IND: Reorganization of
                                                                                                  metering and collection of bills,   Assam State Electricity Board
                                                                                                  and to reduce system losses.       TA 4242-IND: Institutional
                                                                                                                                      Development for Rural Electrification
                                                                                                                                     TA 4243-IND: Policy and Legal
                                                                                                                                      Support for Power Sector Reforms
                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                     TA 4380-IND: Uttaranchal Power
                                                                                                                                      Sector Development
                                                                                                                                     TA 4496-IND: Capacity Building for
                                                                                                                                      Clean Development Mechanism
                                                                                                                                     TA 4498-IND: North East Power
                                                                                                                                      Development
                                                                                                                                     TA 4336-IND: Hydropower
                                                                                                                                      Development
                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                                                                                        TA 4630-IND: Uttaranchal Power
                                                                                                                                        Sector Capacity Building
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CAP = country assistance plan, CSP = country strategy and program, IND = India, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department database.
                                                                                               Appendix 4          59


                                             CUSTOMER SURVEY

1.     The Operations Evaluation Department commissioned a survey to examine the effects of
the structural changes in the three states where the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has
extended significant assistance with sector restructuring. The survey extended earlier
completed surveys by Santhakumar (2006)1 which sought to establish the basis of support for,
or rejection of, privatization in the electricity industry and to gauge effects of the changes in
states where state electricity boards were being restructured. The study was done over an
extended period. Initially 7,000 households in 14 states were interviewed in FY2004­2005. The
sample, around 20% of which was households without electricity connections, was selected by
considering regional variations in connectivity and urban-rural population. A second household
study was conducted in late 2006 in Assam. Furthermore, industry groups in Assam, Gujarat,
and Madhya Pradesh were contacted to ascertain their views.

A.        Overall Conclusions

2.     The opposition to reforms is stronger among the urban households than the rural ones.
Although households belonging to socially weaker sections are mainly ignorant of the issues
related to reforms, they are slightly less likely to support privatization compared to the general
population. The outcomes of the analysis made by Santhakumar show that upper income
groups (i.e., the topmost 40% in the income ladder) receive a significant share of the electricity
subsidy in the so-called "anti-reform" states. Thus, there is scope for reducing subsidy first for
the higher income groups without causing much wider social opposition. Once out of the
subsidy net, these higher-income groups will enhance the support base for drastic efficiency
reforms of the utilities.

3.       While analyzing the impact of tariff (or subsidy), it was seen that those who pay a higher
tariff (or who get less or no subsidy) are 1.5 times more likely to support privatization or 3.6
times more likely to be indifferent. This is the most striking result of the analysis carried out here,
implying that the reduction of subsidy or the prevalence of near-cost tariffs would encourage
people not to oppose (if not necessarily to support) privatization of electricity utilities. It was also
observed that those who are currently paying more already are ready to pay more still for better
quality electricity. This clearly indicates that those who pay near-cost tariffs can afford to do so
and regard it as beneficial rather than to depending on an alternative means of getting
electricity, such as self-generation. Those who pay more are also likely to view their electricity
utility as inefficient. Less than 5% of the consumers in all states use alternative sources and or
equipment if their expenditure per unit of energy is higher than that of the centralized electricity
supply. This has important implications. Costs will need to be reduced significantly, as
otherwise government transfer may have to continue in order to sustain the current quality. This
is also directly attributable to the large extent of nontechnical lessons which are currently
recovered through additional uplifts on tariffs.

4.      The survey also elicited households' perceptions on any improvements in the quality of
electricity supply during the last 3 years. There have been improvements in the quality in five
(out of 13) states, but in two of them people perceive an "unreasonable" increase in tariff.

5.     The study shows most people who oppose reforms are doing so not because they are
ideologically or culturally against it. There are reasons of rationality and self-interest behind this
opposition. Opposition to market-oriented reforms is not intrinsic to any particular income group
or class (such as the poor). In fact, the poor do not seem to be opposing much at all. Nor is it

1
    Santhakumar, V. 2006. Unpublished Thesis. Poverty and Social Impact of Power Sector Reforms in India. India.
60      Appendix 4



that the middle class opposes reforms in all situations. They oppose when it suits them, and
they are not opposed to trying privatization when they already pay near-cost tariffs. Their
opposition also moderates when they receive poor quality service.

6.     Industrial and trade establishments generally support electricity reforms in the country.
The employees of the utilities by and large oppose the reforms in all states, even though
assurance is given that there will be no retrenchment as part of the reforms. It is argued that the
farmers who receive very highly subsidized electricity oppose reforms. However, very little
knowledge exists on the position of society or households, in general. Moreover, it is the positions
of households that reflect in electoral choices in democratic societies.

B.        Assam

7.      The quality of electricity supply in Assam continues to be such that power is cut off for
around 2 hours daily in the capital city and for about 6 to 8 hours (including the evenings) in
other parts of the state. Thus, the average duration of power cut is around 420 minutes per day
(for the state as a whole). By the quality of its power, Assam is among the states that are about
average (similar to, e.g., Haryana and Andhra Pradesh). Household surveys indicate that
people have seen no improvements (albeit also no worsening) in the state's power outage
situation. Thus, the level of power cuts seems to be the same as that prevailing 3 years ago.
This is evident also from comparing the load shedding reported by the utilities.

8.     Some people have noted improvements with regard to voltage fluctuations. Some 23%
of the customers note an improvement in the billing procedures. The majority see an
improvement in the way line staff respond to consumer's requests, and especially with regard to
the repairing of line faults and the like. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that there has been
some improvement in the customer service of the utilities during the last 3 years.

9.      The tariff assistance to different segments of domestic consumers in Assam show that
average tariffs are higher compared to other Indian states. About 67% of the consumers pay an
average tariff of Rs3 per unit (kilowatt-hour) in the state. Thus, relatively speaking, Assam in
this regard is among the higher-tariff states, which also include Karnataka, Punjab, and
Rajasthan. The tariff rates subsidies to many segments of consumers (including households) in
Assam are closer to the average cost of electricity prevailing in other states. This indirectly
points to improvement in the commercial performance of the utilities. Even with these higher
domestic rates, however, the majority of consumers are receiving a subsidy in Assam. This is
due to the facts that the average cost of supply in Assam is much higher, due to historical
reasons, and the cost at which electricity can be bought for the state is high due to the very low
level of electricity generation within the state.

10.     Around 85% of the consumers in the State of Assam take less than 100 units per month.
This has a number of implications. In general, it is seen that a greater percentage of consumers
in higher-tariff states such as Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan (and Assam) take only a smaller
number of units per month. Does this indicate an efficient and careful use of energy as prices
increases? This needs to be verified. If it is so, then this points to lower efficiency of electricity
use in other (low-tariff) states. This issue has another implication, too, and that is with regard to
the design of a lifeline tariff. In many other states, the discussions on lifeline tariff are targeting
around 50 to 100 units per month in order to qualify for a subsidy. When 85% of the consumers
in a state like Assam take less than 100 units, that level may be inappropriate.2

2
    The Operations Evaluation Mission notes that the regulators in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh were considering 30
    kilowatt-hours per month, as suggested by the recent regulators conference.
                                                                                              Appendix 4       61



11.     Most of the consumers realize that the crucial problem within the State of Assam is the
lack of generation or provision of adequate electricity supply. Compared to other Indian states,
many people support privatization or similar types of reforms in the electricity sector within the
state. About 60% of the connected consumers either support or are indifferent to privatization in
the state. Around 60% of the households in Assam do not have electricity connections at all,
and 90% of these do not oppose privatization. The combined support or indifference to
privatization is very high in the state. The picture is similar to those of states like Bihar or
Gujarat, as evident from Santhakumar (2006), where the prevalence of higher tariff rates and/or
poor quality of supply encouraged significant sections of society to support drastic reforms such
as privatization. Commercial and industrial consumers vehemently support privatization. From
interviews conducted in Assam, only six out of 27 commercial and industrial consumers
surveyed opposed privatization, whereas 17 of them supported it and the others were
indifferent. There was support also among significant segments of domestic consumers.3 The
study found that sector funding has helped to improve the commercial functioning (such as the
periodical revisions in tariff, customer service, and billing) of electricity supply in the state,
although it has not helped in alleviating power interruptions. There was a distinct improvement
in the power supply (as evident from the power interruption situation) in Assam.

C.        Madhya Pradesh

12.    The situation in Madhya Pradesh is similar to that of Assam. The power cuts do not
seem to have improved in the state during the last 3 years, and power cuts of around 2 hours
daily prevail in the cities. People do not perceive any reliable power supply within the rural
areas. The practice of providing highly subsidized electricity to farmers (which is not prevalent
in Assam) is continued, even though farmers complain about the quality of supply. Tariffs
assistance to many domestic consumers is lower when compared to other Indian states, and so
are the costs of supply. The burden of subsidizing farmers and the state's lesser ability to bear
that burden in Madhya Pradesh translate into poor quality of power supply. That is despite
unbundling of the electricity utilities and some visible improvements in the functioning of the
unbundled utilities, especially with regard to technical and distribution loss reduction. Despite
the subsidized tariff, the poor quality encourages significant sections of domestic as well as
commercial and industrial consumers to support drastic measures such as privatization.

D.        Gujarat

13.    The situation in Gujarat seems to be different. Though subsidized, farmers pay a part of
the cost of supplying electricity to them as a tariff. The state's ability to bear the remaining
burden of providing the subsidy to farmers is also stronger in comparison to states such as
Madhya Pradesh. As evident from Santhakumar (2006), the domestic tariff is higher compared
to those of many other Indian states, and significant segments of households pay near or above
the cost of the supply. The unbundling is also at an advanced stage and the state has
experience in working with private distribution companies in certain urban areas. Even though
there are still power cuts (for example 1 day per week for industries in the city of Baroda), this
seems to be managed well, and the quality of power during other times is reasonably good.
Due to the prevalence of tariffs closer to the cost of supply, opposition to privatization is less
among the domestic consumers.



3
    It may be noted that the majority of domestic consumers oppose privatization in states such as Andhra Pradesh,
    Kerala, and Tamil Nadu, and the picture in Assam is different from that prevailing in these states.
  62     Appendix 5



         DEVELOPMENT COORDINATION MATRIX FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR IN INDIA

Names of
Development                            Other Development Partners' Strategies and/or Activities
Partners
Canadian                  Contributed to organizational restructuring and policy reforms to improve energy
International             sector efficiency in several states.
Development               Current Activities:
Agency (CIDA)             The Energy Infrastructure Services Project, Phase II, supported power sector
                          reforms in three states: Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh.
                          Activities in Uttar Pradesh are now completed. Activities in Madhya Pradesh and
                          Andhra Pradesh were completed in 2006. Due to the phasing out of Canadian
                          bilateral assistance to India, CIDA will not provide any further direct assistance in
                          this sector.
Danish International      Assistance for wind turbine test stations and production.
Development
Agency (Danida)
Department for            Power sector reform assistance in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Orissa.
International             Cofinancing of technical assistance (TA) with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in
Development (DFID)        Madhya Pradesh, and restructuring of the Grid Corporation of Orissa.
Japan Bank for            Several loans for transmission, distribution, thermal and hydroelectric power
International             projects, and renewable energy. Future assistance may include power distribution,
Cooperation               transmission, and hydroelectric power.
Germany                   Loan assistance for augmenting power generation capacity in Andhra Pradesh.
                          Loans for hydropower and nonconventional sources of energy. Support for credit
                          lines to financial institutions for various energy projects, including renewable energy.
                          Advisory services to the Ministry of Power on energy efficiency.
United States             Assistance to improve the commercial viability and performance of India's energy
Agency for                sector by improving water management and electricity distribution, as well as by
International             promoting access to clean energy technologies. Helps reduce losses and improve
Development               cost recovery in water and electricity, improves water and power management, and
(USAID)                   helps lower greenhouse gas emissions.

United Nations            Activities are included in the environment section.
Development
Program (UNDP)
World Bank                Ongoing state power sector restructuring loan to Rajasthan, plus assistance to
                          Power Grid Corporation and for developing renewable energy sources. In keeping
                          with priorities agreed with the Government under the India Country Strategy for
                          FY2005­2008, World Bank is developing activities in the following areas: (i)
                          developing the national power grid, with a focus on enhancing the efficient
                          generation and allocation of electricity; (ii) developing environmentally and socially
                          sustainable large-scale hydropower; (iii) supporting expansion of electricity access in
                          rural areas, with a focus on piloting and scaling up sustainable "last-mile" delivery
                          models, and (iv) supporting ongoing reforms of state-level utilities and improving
                          their service delivery. The World Bank is developing a carbon finance portfolio
                          aligned with these activities and exploring options for additional support for low-
                          carbon growth of the power sector, notably through coal station rehabilitation.
Source: ADB. 2005. India: Country Strategy and Program Update of (2006-2008), Manila.
                                                                                Appendix 6     63


                    OPERATION EVALUATION MISSION CASE STUDIES

1.    Within the scope and budget of the evaluation it was not possible to evaluate all Asian
Development Bank (ADB) power sector operations in full. The SAPE was therefore focused on
a sample of lending and nonlending operations:
      (i)      ADB Loan 907, Unchahar Thermal Power Project
      (ii)     ADB Loan 1465 Renewable Energy Development Project
      (iii)    ADB Loan 1968, State Power Sector Reform Project.
      (iv)     ADB Loan 1405 Power Transmission (Sector) Project
      (v)      ADB program loan 1803 and project loan 1804 for the Gujarat Power Sector
               Development Program, along with associated technical assistance grants
      (vi)     ADB program loan 2036 and project loan 2037 for the Assam Power Sector
               Development Program, along with associated technical assistance grants
      (vii)    ADB program loan 1868 and project loan 1869 for the Madhya Pradesh Power
               Sector Development Program, along with associated technical assistance grants
      (viii) ADB TA 3885 Energy Efficiency Enhancement Project
      (ix)     ADB TA 4496 Capacity Building for Clean Development Mechanism
      (x)      A private sector investment in a liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant at Dahej

        1.     Unchahar Thermal Power Project

2.      The Unchahar Thermal Power Project was approved by the ADB Board in September
1988. The proposed executing agency (EA) was the Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut Utpadhan
Nigam . The EA was already in the process of implementing 2 x 210 megawatt (MW) units at
Unchahar. The proposed loan was intended to double capacity by adding a further 2 x 210 MW
units in order to meet significant capacity shortfalls in power supply in Uttar Pradesh. The first
two units were commissioned in November 1988 and March 1989. The two units were not
operated successfully, however, and work on the two additional units did not begin.

3.      In February 1992, National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) took over the power
station as part of a settlement of amounts owed to NTPC. At the same time, NTPC wished to
develop the two additional units. NTPC, with Government support, requested that it become the
EA for the project. This change was approved in November 1993.

4.       After the takeover, NTPC identified many shortcomings in the implementation and
management of stage 1 of the Project. Numerous items of equipment had not been
commissioned. Employee morale was low and industrial relations were poor. NTPC's first
priority was to make the existing units work effectively, as the plant load factor was about 18%
and there were numerous industrial relations problems and operational shortcomings. Various
changes were implemented over the next 2 years and new equipment was commissioned.
Availability and plant load factors rose to over 92% by FY2004-2005. Part of the loan was
cancelled because of savings in the procurement process, reducing the final loan amount from
$160 million to less than $127 million. Subsequently the entire plant has run at a very high plant
load factor (95.7% in FY2005-2006) and is described by NTPC as a crown jewel. The plant has
won performance awards, both within NTPC and externally, and enjoys a strong reputation as a
socially responsible employer. The study rates the Project "successful" and supports the
findings of the project completion report (PCR).

5.      The Unchahar Thermal Power Project has been successful, but for ADB this is partly a
fortuitous outcome. UPRVUN was a failure as an EA. The problems at the company were
beginning to affect its performance at the time that ADB selected it as the EA for the two new
units at the power station and became more serious over time. The first two units of the project
64   Appendix 6



were not implemented successfully. ADB could itself have recognized this and sought an
alternative EA. In fact, it was only through the involvement of NTPC that the problems at
Unchahar were identified and resolved. ADB was not involved in the decision for NTPC to take
over the two existing units and it took some 18 months to agree for NTPC to become the EA for
the new units. The eventual outcome has nevertheless been a positive one.

        2.     Renewable Energy Development Project

6.     In 1996, an Ordinary Capital Resource loan of $100 million was approved by ADB for
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) to develop its expertise to promote
and fund renewable energy (RE) technology in India. The Project funded 318 megawatt of wind,
biomass cogeneration, landfill gas and solar energy projects and significantly avoided increases
in emissions that would otherwise have been produced by coal-fired plants.

7.     The Project has had a catalytic effect on funding for the renewable energy sector, and it
has led to sustainable private sector investment and financing of wind generation. IREDA has
become a successful source for ongoing financing of new RE projects, although competition
from commercial banks and a lack of inexpensive funds has largely reduced its capacity to fund
wind power projects. Expertise gained by IREDA has led to its being recognized as the leading
source for appraisal of RE projects, enabling it to successfully fund viable cogeneration, solar,
and landfill gas generation projects. Both changes in investors, who are now predominantly
driven by energy generation rather than (as previously) fiscal incentives, and better project
appraisal skills are reflected in improvement of the company's balance sheets since publication
of the PCR. However, the study has some outstanding concerns over the level of doubtful
receivables, which is about 7% of outstanding loans.

8.       Additional effects were noticed during site visits. These included start-up economic
activities, such as for cane transportation, lignite storage, industrial security services, tea stalls,
and vehicle maintenance and repair units and/or shops. Direct and indirect employment for
semiskilled and unskilled people resulted in quality of life improvements for employees and their
families. Discussions with managers and employees of selected subprojects indicated increases
in average household monthly income from Rs1,000 to Rs7,000. Development of access roads
to the subprojects led to improved connectivity for villages with town and/or district
administrative centers.

9.     As with the State Power Sector Reform Project (Loan 1968-IND) (see below), ADB's
lending product is no longer competitive with local funding, and IREDA is accelerating
repayments. However, IREDA has identified more than 5,000 MW of RE (biomass) projects that
commercial lenders do not have the expertise to assess or fund. ADB will need to review its
products if it is to maintain its presence in the RE sector in India.

10.     Due to the relatively low share of power from RE projects and the time needed to reform
the power sector in the new context, the 2003 Electricity Act will not immediately result in
significant impacts on RE projects. To prepare the sector for the emerging regulatory
environment, harmonization of renewable energy policies with the overall power policy is
needed. Reforms at the distribution level would set the stage for a more hands-off approach to
creating incentives for private sector investments in RE projects. The other outstanding concern
for development of the RE sector is the poor financial condition of the state electricity boards,
and thus their capacity to guarantee RE energy payments. ADB support for this project was
highly praised for its innovativeness and flexibility and the study fully concurs with the
"successful" rating given by the PCR.
                                                                                 Appendix 6    65


       3.      State Power Sector Reform Project

11.     The State Power Sector Reform Project (Loan 1968-IND) was approved in December
2002. The borrower was the PFC. The original loan amount was $150 million but only $50
million was disbursed and the balance of the loan was cancelled at the request of PFC.

12.      The objective of the Project was to support investment in state electricity boards (SEBs)
which were committed to power sector reform. The project was to improve system operations
and reduce system losses in power plants, transmission, and distribution. State electricity
boards in Assam, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, and West Bengal were
identified as possible recipients. The funds were onlent from PFC to the state electricity boards.

13.     There were extensive conditions for the loans, both on PFC itself and on the state
electricity boards as sub-borrowers. State electricity boards had to prequalify for loans based on
their reform plans. Thereafter, the first subproject for each state electricity board had to be
approved by ADB as well as any subproject costing over $10 million or that involved
resettlement or significant environmental impacts. In several cases, states became impatient
with ADB conditions and began work using other funding sources. As a result, such projects
were no longer eligible for ADB finance. The scope and level of detail on the loan conditions
were major factors in the cancellation of $100 million of the proposed loan. Both PFC and the
state electricity boards themselves could borrow funds from other sources more easily. PFC
was disappointed with the outcome of the loan, on which it had commitment charges. It
cancelled only reluctantly when it was clear that take-up would not be adequate and after
discussions with ADB about ways of simplifying procedures.

14.    As an example of the procedural problems, PFC cited environmental issues. PFC's own
approach is to impose environmental conditions but to leave it to the borrower to ensure
compliance within the framework of Indian law. Environmental issues led to lengthy
correspondence on a number of ADB projects.

15.    The study concludes that the on-lending product is no longer suitable for the Indian
market, as ADB is not able to compete with local funding, and it rates the project "partly
successful." The study confirms the "partly successful" rating of the PCR.

       4.      Power Transmission (Sector) Project

16.     The Power Transmission (Sector) Project (Loan 1405-IND) was approved in November
1995, following an appraisal process that had begun in September 1994. The EA was the
Power Grid Corporation of India. The original amount of the loan was $275 million, but $23
million was cancelled during loan effectiveness. The project supported a number of
improvements in India's Power Grid that are parts of ambitious plans to create a single national
grid by 2012. ADB has since approved further loans to Power Grid of $250 million (Loan 1764-
IND, approved in October 2000) and of $400 million (Loan 2152-IND, approved in December
2004).

17.     The project also supported broader policy dialogue with the Government to achieve the
restructuring and unbundling of the power sector, permit the entry of independent power
producers, and ensure that Power Grid was financially viable. The various elements of the
Project have all been completed successfully, albeit with a slight delay in project implementation.
Restructuring and reform of the power sector is continuing.
66   Appendix 6



18.    Power Grid is a large company with well developed management and technical expertise,
and it has borrowed extensively to finance grid development. It invested about $450 million in
FY2004-2005 and investment is likely to stay at similar high levels as the grid develops. ADB is
a minor lender and accounts for only 7­8% of Power Grid's borrowings. Other lenders include
the World Bank, European Investment Bank, Japanese Bank for International Cooperation
(JBIC) as well as many local and foreign banks. The World Bank and ADB share a common
agenda in lending to Power Grid.

19.     Power Grid wants to continue to borrow from ADB and is appreciative of the assistance
it has received. This reflects Power Grid's continuing large investment program, the long-term
nature of ADB loans, and the tax advantages (through avoiding customs duties) that result from
using ADB resources. But while ADB's financial involvement is paramount, Power Grid also
values the role ADB has taken as a catalyst for power sector reform. It that, too, ADB's advice
on developing its environmental standards and social policies and on designing its procurement
procedures has assisted with its institutional development. These factors, along with the
additional credibility that Power Grid gains as an ADB client, are also vital parts of the lending
relationship.

20.     However, Power Grid feels that ADB attempts to exercise too much control over the
detail of Power Grid decisions. It finds the ADB less flexible than the World Bank or the JBIC
and wants more autonomy over spending decisions. Power Grid wants to be permitted to fund
projects retrospectively and to decide which projects it will fund with ADB resources when the
loan is made and not as a prior commitment in lending covenants. It feels that ADB's
commitment charges are high and the notional disbursement schedule upon which they are
based is inflexible and often not realistic for the projects that are being funded. It finds some
ADB conditions irksome, such as to be asked for a resettlement plan for a transmission line
project when it is not the company's policy to acquire land but rather to pay compensation for
crop losses. The PCR rated the Project "successful" and the study concurs with this evaluation.
In India, a central government agency such as Power Grid is required to borrow directly from
ADB. ADB's requirement of a negative pledge as security in addition to a sovereign guarantee
often makes our product such as an MFF less attractive. Central agencies in the power sector
actively borrow from the domestic market to meet their huge capital investment needs by
providing their assets as security. The negative pledge requires them to come to ADB for prior
concurrence each time they provide their assets to lenders and go through cumbersome legal
process to give ADB pari passu security. This creates for both ADB and borrowers huge
amounts of administrative work while not providing additional assurance of repayment in the
presence of a sovereign guarantee. It is strongly suggested that ADB should be more flexible
about negative pledge requirement when lending with sovereign guarantee.

       5.      Gujarat Power Sector Development Program

21.     ADB program and project loans for the Gujarat Power Sector Development Program
were approved in December 2000, along with technical assistance grants. The program loan
(1803), of $150 million, was in three equal tranches, with the release of each tranche dependent
on progress in the power sector reform program. The conditions on the first tranche included
establishment of the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC), approval of
restructuring by the state government, a tariff award by GERC, creation of generation and
transmission companies, circulation of a metering plan, approval of budgets and a staffing
structure, and payment of municipality dues. Similar conditions, related to development of the
reform program, applied to subsequent tranches.
                                                                                               Appendix 6       67


22.     The project loan (Loan 1804-IND) of $200 million funded investments by the Gujarat
Electricity Board (GEB). The loan agreement proposed funding for transmission lines,
substations, upgrading of distribution, and a pilot scheme for drip irrigation. The drip irrigation
project was subsequently dropped and this part of the funding was cancelled.

23.     Three TA projects 1 were included in the Program, covering preparation of a
reorganization plan for GEB, consumer awareness and participation in reforms, and support to
the GERC. These TA projects supported key aspects of the reform program and have all
influenced the course of the reform program.

24.   The lending and TA package offered by ADB was clearly well prepared and offered
comprehensive incentives to implement a reform program. It provided both GEB and the state
government with funding to enable reform implementation and the TA needed to ensure that the
Program was well designed. There is now a very high level of ownership of reforms in the
successor entities that have replaced the GEB.

25.      The rating agencies CRISIL and ICRA, which carry out ratings of state power utilities,
have noted significant improvements in Gujarat in recent years, including significant reductions
in financial losses, formulation of a financial restructuring program, and the Government's
continued support for reform. ADB's assistance has therefore clearly been successful and there
may be learning points from the Gujarat experience that can be applied in other states. The
financial and organizational restructuring have turned around the finances of Gujarat State
Electricity Board from a loss-making enterprise to a profitable organization without an increase
in tariffs over a 4-year period. The average cost of service has gone down from Rs4.15 per
kilowatt-hour in FY2003­2004 to Rs3.53 in FY2005-2006, and average realization has gone up
from Rs2.84 to Rs2.98 per unit without any increase in tariffs. Subsidies have been reduced
from 19.2% of revenues to 15.9% and, when included in annual revenues, these have brought
the companies into a situation of net profit

26.   There are a number of factors that contributed to the rapid success of Gujarat's reform
program, in addition to the well-structured support package offered by ADB,
      (i)     There was already agreement between state government and the utility on the
              need for restructuring and the approach to adopt before ADB became involved.
              The Gujarat state government had passed necessary legislation before the
              federal 2003 Electricity Act, reflecting local understanding of the need for change.
              The government has maintained this commitment. It has, for example,
              encouraged the recruitment of professional management and avoided political
              appointments, taken over some of the sector's debt, and committed to provide
              continuing financial support for agricultural consumers.
      (ii)    There is a broadly commercial culture in the State of Gujarat. As a result, the
              need for reform has widespread acceptance among consumers.
      (iii)   Staff accepted reforms as a result of tripartite agreements between the state
              government, the utility, and unions. All 50,000 staff received commitments about
              job continuity, and in many cases staff gained promotions as a result of
              restructuring. Some 3,000 people have been recruited with a 3-year trial period to
              replace retirees. Overall, the companies have the technical and commercial skills
              needed to reform the utility, and performance has been enhanced by setting
              targets for staff.

1
    ADB. 1996. Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs in Gujarat (Loan 2739-IND). Review of Electricity
    Legislation and Regulations in Gujarat (Loan 2740-IND). Financial Management Support to Kheda and Rajkot
    Distribution Centers of Gujarat Electricity Board (Loan 2741-IND). Manila.
68   Appendix 6



       (iv)     The bifurcation of all rural feeders to separate power for villages from power for
                agricultural consumers is highly successful. Agricultural consumers now obtain
                power for a predictable 8 hours per day and at a concessionary rate. Rural
                villages and households are continuously connected. Because agriculture power
                is not supplied at system peak, some 500 MW of load has been removed from
                the peak and the system load curve is almost flat. Households are happy to have
                a continuous supply while farmers appreciate the improved reliability of supply
                during the 8-hour period and have accepted the change.
       (v)      Metering is now compulsory for all consumers. The metering program is not yet
                complete, with about 400,000 (out of 8,000,000) customers still unmetered. But
                some 60% of meters have been replaced and meters have now been placed on
                all feeders, enabling greatly improved monitoring of losses.
       (vi)     A growing industrial sector in Gujarat is keeping revenue buoyant.
       (vii)    There were significant opportunities for reducing costs and improving
                performance. Negotiations with independent power producers resulted in
                reductions in unit rates from Rs2.34 in FY2003­2004 to Rs2.06 in FY2004­2005
                and Rs1.85 in FY2006­2007. The load factor was on generation plant and fuel
                management were both improved. Interest rates on borrowings were
                renegotiated and reduced. As a result of better system monitoring, transmission
                and distribution losses were reduced by 6­7% over the past 2 to 3 years and are
                now around 26­27%. Collection efficiency was boosted from 91­93% of billings
                to near 100%.
       (viii)   Tariff levels and structures have been adequate to sustain cash flow. The
                regulator granted increases in 2000, including a 300% increase for agricultural
                consumers. The next increase came in June 2004, when rates rose by about 1%,
                and a further application was being processed at the time of the Mission. Overall,
                there should be a profit across the group in FY2005­2006.
       (ix)     The quality of regulation has been good. The regulator has appropriate expertise
                and has pressed for improvements in performance. There are good
                communications with all power sector stakeholders. There is transparency at the
                regulator through publication on the Commission's website. The regulator has
                also published a future road map for the sector, covering such topics as open
                access and consumer choice.

27.      The authorities in Gujarat are appreciative of the support they received from ADB and
recognize the contribution this made to the success of the Program. However, there were some
criticisms of ADB's performance. Essentially, it was hard work to use ADB (and World Bank)
money, because so many decisions had to be approved in Manila. Furthermore, ADB and World
Bank procurement procedures were less cost-effective than the utilities' own bidding procedures.
The most intense dissatisfaction concerned the drip irrigation project, where GEB was unable to
proceed because of the involvement of an Israeli company. But there were other concerns, for
example over the specifications for transformers in tender documents and over GEB proposals
to test meters, which was not permitted under ADB procedures. The overall outcome is that
GEB does not propose to seek any further multilateral funding for the development of its power
sector, preferring to rely on sources within India. Funding is freely available and GEB believes it
can borrow funds at an interest rate below the effective ADB rates.

28.     The reform program for the power sector in Gujarat is well advanced but not complete.
Several senior staff members hold positions in more than one of the newly created subsidiaries
as well as in the holding company. State government approval is still awaited for some aspects
of asset transfers, although assets and liabilities have all been allocated to the new companies.
The holding company is still acting as a corporate treasury. Further capacity building is needed
                                                                                    Appendix 6   69


to enhance the skills of employees. The GEB is implementing an Oracle Enterprise Resource
Planning system to fully computerize its finances, planning, and operations. This will take a
further 4 years to complete. Tariff reform continues under the 2003 Electricity Act, and open
access is planned from 2009. The distribution companies recognize the need for further
reductions in technical and distribution losses. Although they have fallen in the last 2 to 3 years
to around 26­27%, losses remain very high in the Western (44%) and Northern (32%)
distribution companies, which have many agricultural consumers. Rural electrification remains a
major challenge, with significant investments taking place under the rural elctrcification scheme.
Privatization might be considered in the future, although it is not current GEB policy.

29.    There are numerous reasons why power sector reform has progressed so well in Gujarat.
While the state provides an excellent model of how power sector reform can progress, and how
ADB can support that process, it would be unrealistic to expect all other states to progress as
far or as quickly. The study rates the overall program and project loans together with the
associated TA "successful" bordering on "highly successful."

       6.      Assam Power Sector Development Program

30.     ADB provided a policy loan (Loan 2036-IND) of $150 million and an investment loan
(Loan 2037-IND) of $100 million for the Assam Power Sector Development Program. The loans
were supported by TA, which was administered by ADB but financed from the India Trust Fund
of the UK's Department for International Development (DFID). The loans were approved in
December 2003. Two previous ADB TA grants had prepared the way for the loans by
supporting the development of a power sector development program and capacity building in
the Assam Electricity Regulatory Commission (AERC). The policy loan was divided into two
tranches of $90 million and $60 million. Conditions on the first tranche included actions by the
Assam state government to sanction necessary staffing for AERC, development of an
unbundled industry structure including at least three distribution companies as well as
registration of the new companies, commitment to budgetary support, some financial
restructuring, and filing of a tariff petition. The most important effect of the restructuring has
been the financial turnaround of the Assam distribution sector, which raised revenues and
reversed its cost increases.


                               8
                                   Figure A6.1: Declining Losses in Net Revenues
                               7
                               6          Average Cost to Serve
                               5
                       Re/Rs




                               4
                               3
                               2
                               1
                                                                 Average Revenues
                               0
                                   FY86
                                   FY87
                                   FY88
                                          FY89
                                          FY90
                                          FY91
                                          FY92
                                                   FY93
                                                   FY94
                                                   FY95
                                                           FY96
                                                           FY97
                                                           FY98
                                                                    FY99
                                                                    FY00
                                                                    FY01
                                                                    FY02
                                                                            FY03
                                                                            FY04
                                                                            FY05




                               FY = financial year.
                               Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers.



31.    The detailed planning that preceded the loan had been complemented with a
commitment to reform from the power authorities in Assam. Throughout the sector, there is an
acceptance that the overall conditions imposed by ADB were well thought out and necessary to
support change. Financial restructuring would not have taken place without ADB. Procurement
procedures have been improved. There is general support for the principle of unbundling.
70   Appendix 6




32.     Unbundling is partly complete and there are five new companies responsible for
generation, transmission and distribution (three companies). The new companies are
established under the 1956 Companies Act and are owned by the state government. Assam
State Electricity Board (ASEB) is not acting as a legal holding company. In many ways, however,
it continues to behave as a holding company and there is limited separation between the
finances and human resources of the five companies. The three distribution companies, in
particular, are still largely behaving as a single unit. Power purchasing is a central function and
the three distribution companies have identical tariffs.

33.     Staffing issues have complicated the restructuring process. ASEB had around 16,000
employees when ADB became involved. There had been no recruitment for 10 years and, as a
result, the workforce is aging. Many staff are approaching pension age and there are few
younger staff with the information technology skills needed to run a modern utility. This has
created many problems for ASEB. For example, most of the linemen are aging and no longer
able to climb poles. Clerical staffs have no experience of working with computers. In the past
year, ASEB has taken on some 70 graduates, 85 diploma engineers, and 45 accounts officers.
There are plans to recruit 50 more engineers this year. The new staffs are generally information
technology literate and enthusiastic.

34.     There is uncertainty over how many staff the new companies will need, especially in
distribution. Work undertaken by Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation (SMEC) has
estimated total staffing needs in the distribution companies at 14,087 people, which on some
estimates is around current staffing levels. But recent submissions to the regulator show total
distribution companies staffing as 10,765 and falling to 9,974 in FY2006-2007. SMEC's figures
are not fully accepted, and it seems that further analysis will be required in the new companies
to establish final staffing needs and the skills sets of those staff. At present, moreover, staff
transfer between companies without much consideration for procedures. The high levels of
retirement over the next few years offer an opportunity to restructure staffing, but the pension
costs are also high.

35.     As part of the process of reducing political interference in the sector, the Government
has established an independent committee to make senior power sector appointments. It has
external membership from organizations such as Power Grid and PFC. The current managing
directors of the new companies are temporary and one is on secondment from the public
service. Permanent appointments will be made through the committee.

36.     Pensions have proved to be a major issue. When ADB made its loan, there was no
employee database and hence the uncertainty over the number of staff and their age structure.
Analysis undertaken in the past 2 years, with support from consultants, has exposed a major
shortfall in funding for pensions. This has been partially remedied. Government has provided
additional funding and ADB has picked up $48 million of costs through another project.

37.   Transmission and distribution losses have fluctuated since the ADB loans were made,
as shown in the following table.
                                                                                 Appendix 6    71



                           Table A6.1: Transmission Losses ASEB

                          Financial Year             Transmission and
                                                 distribution losses as a %
                                                 of power available for sale

                            2000-2001                        39.80
                            2001-2002                        42.50
                            2002-2003                        39.07
                            2003-2004                        36.29
                            2004-2005                        38.94
                     Source: Operation Evaluation Mission.

38.    There are doubts over the reliability of the figures. In discussion,
PricewaterhouseCoopers suggested that the FY2004­2005 figure was a reasonable estimate
but the FY2003­2004 figure was too low and a more accurate figure would be about 40%.
Errors arise because a large number of consumers are not metered and billing records are not
reconciled properly. However, the figures do illustrate that there is considerable scope for
improving operational and financial performance by reducing losses.

39.     There are still about 80,000 unmetered consumers in rural areas. A meter installation
program is in progress and all new consumers receive a meter. All 11-kilovolt feeders are now
metered, and this has exposed examples of very high losses (e.g., 64% on one line). Only 25%
of households are electrified and hence there is likely to be considerable expansion in the next
few years. In order to help meet this challenge and manage losses, the distribution companies
are introducing a rural franchising scheme under which franchisees undertake billing and cash
collection.

40.      Accounting issues are many (see Appendix 7). As part of the efforts to improve their
accounting and finance, the distribution companies are starting to computerize--with the initial
focus on billing. There are around 150 accounting units, divided between 14 circles. Computer
billing is being rolled out in phases, with the first phase covering three of the circles. The new
systems provide better management information and enable faster billing. Progress so far has
been good, and plans call for achieving 100% coverage within a period of 3 to 4 months. There
is no communications connectivity between offices or with the center at present. This impedes
both effective backup procedures and data consolidation. Full connectivity is likely to take time
to achieve and involve a combination of land lines, mobile communications, and very small
aperture technology. Data backup procedures involve keeping a copy of the data on site on tape,
and there are clear security shortcomings.

41.     There are plans to computerize other aspects of accounting in the longer term, but this is
bound to be both costly and time-consuming. Other deficiencies in accounting systems will need
to be addressed, such as the absence of fixed assets registers. Further cleanup of accounting
data is needed, which requires a more thorough reconciliation of records between accounting
units, circles and the head office.

42.     Pilot schemes are being initiated to demonstrate the effects of monitoring and
reconciling billing with meters, decentralized transformer maintenance and parts procurement,
and customer service centers. The benefits of increased metering and monitoring are being
realized through the faster identification of nontechnical losses and matching transformer data
with computerized billing of meters. A pilot project reduced losses in one feeder having mainly
industrial customers from over 65% to 6% in only 4 weeks after the controls were established
72   Appendix 6



(see figure 2 below). A similar pilot project reduced transformer failures in one circle from an
average of 12% to 0% over a 22-week implementation period. Customer service centers have
been set up in several districts, where all customer service requests and complaints are logged
on computers and are being regularly monitored. This has increased transparency, and
customer response will in future be part of the performance-based regulation of the Assam
regulator. There has been widespread acceptance of these pilot programs by management and
employees and they are now being gradually introduced throughout Assam.

                                                        % Losses
                           Figure A6.2: ASEB Pilot Loss reduction Scheme
                  Losses
                    80%
                    70%
                    60%
                    50%
                    40%
                    30%
                    20%
                    10%
                     0%
                             Oct-05



                                      Nov-05



                                               Dec-05



                                                         Jan-06



                                                                   Feb-06




                                                                                     Apr-06



                                                                                              May-06
                                                                            Mar-06
                  Source: Assam State Electricity Board.

43.     ASEB has had difficulties in presenting audited accounts to ADB on a timely basis.
ASEB's accounts were unreliable and the audit reports on those accounts were also unreliable
in the sense that they were incomplete. Hence the level of assurance that ADB has gained by
seeking audited accounts is quite limited. It is entirely appropriate and understandable that ADB
should request the accounts, and the timetable for completing the accounts and audit has
generally been reasonable. However, in these circumstances, ADB needs to take a long view
and assess whether progress is being made to improve accounts rather than becoming unduly
focused on whether exact deadlines are being met. Cleaning up accounts is often slow and
contentious, as it involves detailed reconciliation of ledgers, writing off old balances, and
recognizing losses that often occurred some years ago. Consequently, the process of cleaning
the accounts commonly delays the finalization and audit of the accounts. In circumstances such
as Assam faces, it is worth waiting and delaying the audit as the resultant accounts are likely to
be to a higher standard.

44.     ASEB has benefited significantly from technical assistance, both before and since the
ADB loans were made. Currently, ASEB is receiving advice and support from SMEC and
PricewaterhouseCoopers. SMEC is providing implementation support on management of the
investment program as well as undertaking a systems planning study and advising on various
other aspects of reform implementation. PricewaterhouseCoopers has been involved on various
financial issues and is training and supporting ASEB in loss estimation and reduction. All
consulting support will be completed by the middle of 2007 upon completion of a systems study.

45.     There were initial spending delays with the project loans, largely because capacity was
lacking in ASEB. Staff lacked knowledge of ADB procedures and only started to consider how
to manage the loan funds after loan effectiveness. It then took a year to appoint an
implementation consultant. Tasks such as route surveys were also initiated only after loan
effectiveness, and the work was then delayed by flooding. With hindsight, the surveys should
have been undertaken earlier. However, progress has accelerated since appointment of the
implementation consultant. Currently, expenditure is somewhat over 6 months behind schedule
and a loan extension of up to 1 year will be needed in order to complete the four remaining
                                                                                     Appendix 6     73


packages of works. The expenditure program is now adhering to the revised timetable. This
aspect of consulting support has therefore been needed and it has worked well.

46.     A regulator has been appointed for the sector and is making tariff decisions. The
regulatory function is working well in some areas in that, for example, decisions and
correspondence are now made transparent through the internet. There have been some losses
of trained staff, however. Initial TA funding for setting up the regulator and preparing tariff filings
have established well documented procedures and guidelines for future staff. The
documentation was considered to be sufficiently detailed to permit a continuity of functions
without a loss of institutional memory. Additionally, the AERC is assisting consumer
representatives with understanding the regulatory process and to make filings to express
consumer concerns.

47.     The introduction of time of day tariffs has shifted about 7% of demand away from system
peak. Over time, there is an expectation that Assam will move toward a more cost-related tariff
structure for each of the distribution companies.

48.     Peak demand in Assam is currently around 750 MW, but this could rise to 1,000 MW if
constraints on transmission and distribution were removed. There is about 380 MW of captive
capacity in four refineries and paper mills, but the owners are currently unwilling to sell surplus
power to ASEB because they are apprehensive about synchronizing with the grid. In any case,
the energy would be expensive as the generating sets burn heating oil. ASEB currently
generates around 20% of its own needs and it would like to increase this through rehabilitation
of existing stations and new construction. There is potential for hydropower development as well
as new thermal capacity.

49.     In order to sustain reform, ASEB will undoubtedly continue to need consulting support,
certainly for the next 2 to 3 years and perhaps longer. Capacities of the new companies need to
be developed in many areas, including finance, information technology, human resources, as
well as core engineering capabilities. Many on ASEB's staff are not accustomed to the business
practices of a modern utility, and it has been a challenge for the consultants to ensure that
ASEB staffs are fully engaged with consulting projects, as distinct from attending associated
training courses. This has been an issue with the systems planning study and parts of the other
work undertaken by SMEC. For example, the work on staffing does not seem to be fully
accepted within ASEB. The information technology strategy component is essentially a long
report that has not been read by ASEB staff and seems to have little impact.
PricewaterhouseCoopers seem to have had more success in providing process consulting
support, which engages with ASEB staff, and it is this type of assistance which ASEB needs in
future in order to develop its capabilities.

50.     This lesson may be useful in designing future programs of support for state electricity
boards. There are a number of other points which may help to improve future designs. First, the
division of labor between different groups of consultants might be improved. PA Consulting's
work on finance was of very limited assistance to PricewaterhouseCoopers in advising ASEB on
financial issues. Second, for utilities with limited internal capacity, such as ASEB, the
implementation consultant to support the utility in making use of ADB funds needs to be brought
into place more quickly. Third, work on performance improvement and on organizational
restructuring and human resource issues could beneficially be brought forward to earlier in the
program. Fourth, the Assam experience makes a clear case for the use of demonstration
projects where management and technological changes can deliver a better customer-focused
service.
74   Appendix 6



51.     Assam wants and can use more ADB loans. There is potential for rapid demand growth,
which requires more transmission capacity and significant performance improvements in
distribution. The reform program is clearly incomplete and ADB needs to continue to be involved
by setting covenants that promote further improvements and in financing both investments and
technical assistance. The study concludes that the program loan and associated TA are
successful. The Project is not complete, however, due to earlier delays. It is showing early
indications, though, of a successful outcome.

       7.     Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program

52.     ADB provided a policy loan of $150 million (Loan 1868-IND) and an investment loan of
$200 million (Loan 1869-IND) to support the Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development
Program. The loans were approved in November 2001. The strategy for reform originated in a
study prepared in 1997 for the state government (known as the Tata Rao report, after the
chairman of the committee which prepared it). It recommended unbundling, independent
regulation, private investment, and greater commercial efficiency. This was followed by a cluster
of six TA projects, funded by ADB and the Canadian International Development Agency, to
prepare more detailed reform programs and continuing policy dialogue between the authorities
in Madhya Pradesh and ADB.

53.     Restructuring has proceeded and the sector now has a regulator, the Madhya Pradesh
Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC). The Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
(MPSEB) has been separated into a generation company, a transmission company, three
distribution companies, and a power trading company. MPSEB is still in existence, with a
number of roles such as keeping old liabilities on its books, handling old litigation, and
employing all staff. Staff transfers to the new firmss are notional and, for example, any
dismissals would require approval from MPSEB. Delays in settling staff allocations stem in part
from disputes with the State of Chhattisgarh, which was created by being split off from Madhya
Pradesh.

54.     Staff in MPSEB had no previous experience with ADB procedures when the loan was
agreed. As a result, ADB presented a 4-day seminar in Jabalpur before disbursement began,
and this proved very helpful to staff in gaining an understanding of ADB procedures.
Subsequently, some staff members participated in ADB workshops in Delhi. MPSEB also
received ongoing guidance and support from ADB personnel, in both Manila and Delhi,
throughout the disbursement. In general, MPSEB has received necessary approvals well within
ADB timetables. MPSEB also planned ahead on civil works so that sites were prepared and all
transformers and circuit breakers could be delivered direct to site.

55.    Because MPSEB was ready to proceed when the loan was approved, it obtained very
competitive prices in FY2002­2003, when suppliers were short of work. This led to savings of
$54 million compared to budget, which was reallocated to further works. The reallocation and
associated procurement arrangements were agreed promptly with ADB. As a result, MPSEB is
about 6 months late on the overall project timetable but with the benefit of additional equipment
compared to initial plans. Issues in procurement have been small. There were delays by a cable
supplier and problems with some 132 kilovolt-ampere transformers. There were also problems
when ADB made payment to suppliers even though MPSEB had not approved invoices in full
because of short deliveries or penalties. In general, though, the problems were minor and have
been resolved.

56.    The beneficial impact of the ADB loan on the transmission system can be seen clearly.
Overloading of transformers now affects only four substations, compared to 58 when the
                                                                                          Appendix 6      75


Program began. Transmission losses have come down from 7.93% in 2002 to current levels of
5.22% and should fall further to 5%. Availability is now 98.4% compared to 95% in 2002. ADB
funding has provided the testing technology necessary to enable the transmission company to
undertake preventive maintenance rather than just repairs.

57.     The impact of the project is less apparent at the distribution level, which has received
less comprehensive attention than transmission. However, a distribution pilot project in one area,
involving 33x11-kilovolt-ampere transformers and capacitors, was a success and brought better
voltage and transformer loadings and improved metering. MPSEB hopes to extend this
approach and also to bifurcate some rural feeders if it obtains further ADB funding.

58.    MPSEB is generally satisfied with the impact of the TA2 funded under the program. The
sole exception is a human resources project that produced few results.

59.     The MPERC is taking an active role in pressing for improved performance through
regulations. It has obliged every distribution companies to appoint a head of compliance who
must report to the regulator on compliance with these regulations. MPERC has put in place a
road map up to 2012 for reducing losses, and it aims to ratchet up performance over this period.

60.     The distribution companies are aiming to achieve universal metering, including for
agricultural consumers, by late 2007. But this depends on the procurement of satisfactory
meters. At the same time, the distribution companies are replacing defective meters. There may
be some restructuring of tariffs, for example by extending time of day tariffs for high-voltage
consumers in the mining sector and eliminating tariffs that are based on end use.

61.     MPSEB and its successor companies are targeting a reduction in technical and
commercial losses from the today's 43.5% to 27% by 2012. The current position is an
improvement from the 53% at the time ADB became involved, but it shows clear room for further
improvement. Revenue collection has also improved, from 80% of billings to 85%. As part of the
program for financial improvement, there are plans for a new revenue management system.
DFID has made funding available to support this development, but progress has been slowed
by opposition from vested interests. The distribution companies are also developing proposals
to franchise parts of their distribution operations. The franchisee will read meters, collect cash,
and connect and disconnect consumers.

62.    Major enforcement problems exist regarding electricity theft. There are about 40,000
cases in the courts relating to the theft of electricity. The courts cannot cope with the volume of
cases and judges are slow to reach decisions. These delays may impede improvements in
commercial performance.

63.     The new power sector policy has resulted in higher tariffs for small consumers and in
particular for agricultural consumers, who were previously given free electricity. This has
created dissatisfaction with the program in certain quarters, but high-end consumers have the
same or lower tariffs than before and better supply quality. They are therefore reasonably
satisfied with the impact of reform. Agricultural demand creates a seasonal peak, with demand
concentrated in the months from October to April.

64.     MPSEB has experienced delays in submitting audited accounts, and these delays have
led to loan suspensions and payment delays. The FY2004­2005 accounts are now overdue.

2
    ADB. 2002. Development of a Transfer Scheme for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform (Loan 3882-IND). Legal
    Support for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform (Loan 3883-IND). Manila.
76   Appendix 6



The draft accounts are complete but awaiting an audit opinion from the Controller and Auditor
General. It will be some time before the audit is complete and this may lead to further loan
suspensions, even though audit delays are outside MPSEB's control. MPSEB's successor
companies became accounting entities with effect from 1 June 2005. However, opening balance
sheets are not yet finalized and the division of assets and liabilities between the companies is
still a work in progress. There is, therefore, a strong likelihood of delays on the accounts for
FY2005­2006.

65.      MPSEB's successor companies have not yet taken control over revenue management,
which is still controlled centrally. The accounting function within some of the new companies is
weak. MPSEB retains a central treasury function that arranges all funding with the banks. Power
purchase is planned and implemented centrally without input from distribution companies.
Consequently, the distribution companies are not subject to the market disciplines of estimating,
planning and contracting supply arrangements to meet demand in their areas. Load shedding is
also planned centrally. As a result, the new companies, and especially the distribution
companies, lack operational and financial autonomy. The lack of independence means there is
no competition between distribution companies. Each distribution company charges the same
retail tariffs, and this is unlikely to change in the near future.

66.    Governance arrangements on company boards need to improve. Boards have only one
executive director, the managing director. Other directors are part-time. A few are
knowledgeable about the power sector, based on previous experience with, for example, NTPC
or PFC, but the majority are not knowledgeable about the sector and have no commercial
experience. The managing directors of the generation and transmission companies are
engineers and hence there is some technical capacity on the board, but the distribution
companies have seconded bureaucrats as their managing directors. All the boards could be
improved by a better balance between nonexecutive and executive directors and by appointing
nonexecutive directors with more relevant skills.

67.    The chief secretary and secretary at the Ministry of Power are on the boards of all or
almost all of the companies. In the medium term, as the companies become more independent
of one another, this will be inappropriate as the companies will often have conflicting interests.

68.     A further loan to the Madhya Pradesh power sector for $620 million under a multitranche
financing facility (MFF) is currently under negotiation. The South Asia Department, responsible
for negotiating the loan, consulted with the Operations Evaluation Department to access the
preliminary findings addressed by this SAPE. All concerns raised in the SAPE with respect to
governance and risk management issues have been fully addressed by the new MFF. DFID is
addressing accounting and information technology issues with a separate loan. The study rates
the outcomes of the TA and project loan "successful" and bordering on "highly successful" while
the program loan is likely to become successful given the additional coordinated ADB-DFID
assistance

       8.      Technical Assistance (TA 3885 and TA 4496)

69.     TA 3885 (Energy Efficiency) was completed in 2003 and produced a framework for
developing energy efficiency initiatives for the Bureau of Energy Efficiency. The
recommendations in the consultant's report are being fully implemented by the Bureau as policy,
with the state electricity boards and community organizations acting as implementing agencies.
The initiatives include energy efficiency labeling programs, developing accreditation of energy
auditors, and developing pilot projects to demonstrate the benefits of energy efficiency.
                                                                                                  Appendix 6       77


70.    The TA was divided into two phases. The first was to begin by conducting a baseline
review of the Government's energy efficiency policies and to identify the constraints to their
successful implementation. This was in order to make recommendations on how to develop the
energy efficiency market, draft a policy matrix with a sequenced action plan for implementing
the conditions necessary for its success, and recommend how the work would be carried out.
The second phase would be to develop and propose several financial products designed to
catalyze development of an energy efficiency market, while identifying financial institutions
capable and willing to offer these new products and electricity supply companies (ESCOs) that
would utilize them. Moreover, it would identify specific subprojects for potential investments,
then conduct financial and economic feasibility assessments as well as the necessary social
and environmental impact assessments for the subprojects.

71.     Phase 1 was completed in a timely and efficient manner. However, implementation of
the TA was delayed during Phase 2 because, due to the financial liquidity in the Indian economy,
there was little demand among Indian financial institutions for a dollar-denominated loan to be
on-lent for energy efficiency. It was determined, however, that there was tremendous demand
from those institutions for a partial credit guarantee (PCG) from ADB to leverage the
mobilization of domestic resources for energy efficiency investments in industry and commercial
buildings and for financing ESCOs. The PCG was more attractive to financial institutions
because energy efficiency was a new market for them and what they needed was for an entity,
such as ADB, to share the risk in entering that market. Consequently, the focus of the TA was
changed. Instead of a project loan (i) to develop a line of credit for financial institutions that will
be offering the new financial products to ESCOs, and (ii) for investments in specific energy
efficiency subprojects, the TA is now developing a PCG facility to catalyze domestic financing
for energy efficiency.3

72.     In addition to the outputs outlined above, the TA produced model monitoring and
verification protocols and pro forma contracts for performance-based contracting of ESCOs.
Both of these have been used by other projects since completion of the TA to execute contracts
with ESCOs. In addition, the TA has resulted in an innovative financing mechanism to catalyze
domestic financing for energy efficiency that would be more suited to and sustainable for India.
The study rates the outcomes "successful" and "highly sustainable." The ongoing success of the
Program will rely on funding availability and implementation of the energy efficiency initiatives by
the state electricity boards and states. There is considerable scope to include additional energy
efficiency initiatives in future sector lending. The TA is therefore rated "highly successful."

73.      TA 4496 (Clean Development Mechanism) is still in progress. It has identified several
projects to be used as pilot projects and has developed a toolkit to evaluate potential projects.
The study finds considerable progress has been made and that municipalities and financial
institutions have been involved in workshops and consultations. The outputs of the TA support
ADB and Indian national energy policy initiatives and can provide further incentives to broaden
appreciation of this initiative. It is too early to rate the TA.

           9.      Private Sector Investment in LNG Terminal

74.     The project was the first step in liberalizing and commercializing the liquefied natural gas
segment of the Indian gas industry and in encouraging the use of a clean, environmentally
friendly fuel. Demand for energy in India continues to grow rapidly, and increasing availability of

3
    See the project performance evaluation report for Loans 1480/1481-IND. That report also recognizes the lack of
    applicability of dollar-denominated loans and recommends the use of partial credit guarantee as a better instrument
    for developing an uncertain and/or new technology.
78   Appendix 6



energy at internationally competitive prices is critical for the country's development. The project
has demonstrated it is possible to import LNG successfully at competitive prices, thereby
supporting liberalization of the gas sector and enhancing the level of private sector participation
in the energy sector. The operating company has demonstrated the high standards of
performance that can be achieved by a modern, well-run public-private partnership managed on
a commercial basis. The business success has been excellent because of operating expenses
and interest costs that are lower than expected. Economic sustainability was rated "excellent"
because of the substantial benefits derived from satisfying unmet demand and generating cost
savings for firms that can use gas relative to diesel. While the project was assigned an
environmental rating of category A at project appraisal, in practice, social and environmental
impacts have been minimal and the main issues relate to the safety of the mooring facilities
during the monsoon period.

75.      ADB played a critical role in facilitating the liberalization of the gas market and then
helping to mitigate investor and lender concerns about what was a new and untested product
and technology in India (and where there were limited relevant skills and experience available
locally). ADB obtained a position on the board of directors and contributed to improvements in
corporate governance by heading the audit committee.
                                                                                  Appendix 7    79


                                     ACCOUNTING ISSUES

A.     Assam Accounting Issues

1.       Assam State Electricity Board (ASEB) has had difficulties in presenting audited accounts
to Asian Development Bank (ADB) on a timely basis. Moreover, the accounts that have been
produced are unreliable even after allowance for the comments in the audit reports. The issues
predate ADB's involvement. The accounts for FY2002­2003 (the last before the ADB loans)
illustrate the problem, but there is a very similar pattern for the accounts for the previous and
following year. The FY2002­2003 ended on 31 March 2003 and the accounts were approved by
the board on 25 August 2003. They were then audited by the Controller and Auditor General's
office. The audit report is undated. The format of the accounts is determined by the Electricity
(Supply) Annual Accounts Rules.

2.      The audit report identifies problems across many account headings. For example, some
unbilled revenue has been excluded from the accounts, rebates on power purchases were
wrongly calculated, invoices from power and gas suppliers are higher than the amounts shown
in the accounts, interest on loans is understated, payments were posted to the wrong accounts,
physical stocks of fuel had not been properly reconciled with the figures in the accounts and
there were arithmetic errors. There were errors in both directions, but in general the audit report
suggests that the accounts as presented were too optimistic. The audit certificate states that,
subject to the observations in the audit report, the accounts present a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of the corporation. The number and nature of the errors strongly suggested,
however, that there were likely to be other errors elsewhere in the accounts. Moreover, audit
concerns are often not dealt with even in the following year's accounts. The FY2003­2004
accounts detail the same concern over reconciling physical stocks to accounting records.

3.       Scrutiny of the FY2002­2003 accounts readily provides examples of other areas where
figures are unlikely to be correct. The level of advances for operations and maintenance
suppliers and work is Rs619 million, but the expenditure during the year on repair and
maintenance is Rs198 million. This strongly suggests that costs are not being moved from
advances to expenses over a period of many years. The inter-unit transfer account has a
balance of over Rs1 billion. This account should clear to zero, and the high balance suggests
that records have not been reconciled properly between units. Net amounts receivable against
the supply of power are equivalent to 76% of annual billings, which suggests that many debts
are likely to be irrecoverable and so the provision in the accounts is far too small. Intangible
assets and deferred costs were static from year to year and, while not significant in their own
right, this suggests that accounts are not reviewed regularly and hence there may be far bigger
issues in such accounts as capital expenditure in progress.

4.      Subsequently, PricewaterhouseCoopers were engaged as consultants. Their work found
even more significant problems in ASEB's accounting. For example, ledgers were not being
reconciled between the subdivisions (the lowest-level accounting unit) and head office. Their
work has led to cleaning up a number of accounts as part of the process of splitting up ASEB's
assets and liabilities to form the opening balance sheets of the new companies. A number of old
balances have been written off and the accounts are now more reliable than they were,
although further effort is needed to clean them up fully. For example, the inter-unit account has
not yet been properly reconciled and provided for. The draft accounts for FY2004-2005 include
some Rs9.8 billion of other debits and extraordinary items which largely relate to cleaning up the
accounts and financial restructuring in accordance with the financial restructuring plan.
80   Appendix 7



5.      Cleaning up accounts is often slow and contentious, as it involves detailed reconciliation
of ledgers, writing off old balances, and recognizing losses which often took place some years
ago. Consequently, the process of cleaning the accounts commonly delays the preparation and
audit of the accounts. In circumstances such as at Assam it is worth waiting and delaying the
audit, as the resultant accounts are likely to be to a higher standard.

6.      In discussions, PricewaterhouseCoopers suggested that a number of other state
electricity boards face worse accounting problems than does ASEB. As such, it is difficult for the
Controller and Auditor General to hold ASEB to proper commercial standards of accounting
when many other state electricity boards are performing to an even lower standard. Under the
restructuring plans, the newly created companies have been formed under the Companies Act.
This gives the new companies greater freedom over both the format of their accounts and their
choice of auditors. There can be significant improvements in both the accounts and the audit
when the new companies take advantage of these new freedoms, and ADB should be active in
pressing them to make appropriate changes.

7.     ASEB's accounts were unreliable and the audit reports on those were also unreliable in
the sense that they were incomplete. Hence, the level of assurance that ADB has gained by
seeking audited accounts is quite limited. It is entirely appropriate and understandable that ADB
should request the accounts, and the timetable for completing the accounts and audit has
generally been reasonable. In these circumstances, however, ADB needs to take a long view
and assess whether progress is being made to improve accounts rather than becoming unduly
focused on whether exact deadlines are being met.

8.      ADB also introduced a covenant that ASEB should reduce its accounts receivable to the
equivalent of 2 months billings. As of 31 March 2003, ASEB had gross receivables against the
supply of power of Rs5.483 billion and had provided Rs110 million against doubtful receivables.
The net receivables shown in the accounts were Rs5.373 billion. In the preceding year, ASEB's
total revenue from sale of power had been Rs7.071 billion. The net receivables were therefore
equivalent to 76.0% of the previous year's revenue and the provision against doubtful
receivables was 2% of gross receivables. These figures are not credible. There were clearly
large amounts of irrecoverable debt in the receivables account and ADB could and should have
required purposive action from ASEB to resolve the high level of overdue receivables. However,
simply requiring a reduction to 2 months billings was unlikely to resolve the problem.

9.     ASEB could have met this criterion very quickly by the simple expedient of changing its
accounting policy to provide for all debts over some suitable age (probably between 3 and 5
months). However, in practice the utility has carried out a review of its receivables with the aim
of improving the accuracy of its accounts.

10.      ASEB's draft FY2004-2005 accounts show gross receivables of Rs6.560 billion and net
receivables after allowing for doubtful debts of Rs2.635 billion. This may be compared with total
revenue from power sales of Rs9.061 bmillion. The net receivables were therefore equivalent to
29.1% of the previous year's revenue and the provision was 43.3% of revenue. This is a much
more realistic presentation of the results than in FY2002-2003. It shows some improvement
compared to previous years in that both gross and net receivables have fallen in relation to
revenue. Moreover, the higher level of provisions suggests that ASEB now has a much more
realistic understanding of which debts are recoverable and which are not. These limited
improvements are probably as much as ASEB could be expected to achieve over a 2-year
period. The company is still far short of the objective of reducing receivables to the equivalent of
2 months billings, but it has a solid foundation for sustained reductions.
                                                                                     Appendix 7    81


11.     ASEB could not in the short term have achieved the objective set in the covenant,
except by the artificial approach of writing off all its debt over a certain age. But at the same time,
ASEB has achieved a better understanding and a worthwhile restructuring of its receivables
portfolio. In practice, it would have been better to frame the covenants in a different way. In the
short term, the highest priority should be attached to collecting cash. A suitable target would
have related cash collections to amounts billed. In the longer term, ASEB and its new
subsidiaries should aim for an approach that reduces receivables to a realistic level of around 2
months billings through a combination of separating recoverable and irrecoverable debt, writing
off amounts which are totally irrecoverable, disconnecting consumers who have long
outstanding bills and no likelihood of payment, and pursuing through the courts amounts which
may be recoverable through this route. In practice, this often is best achieved by separating the
old debt (say 6 months and older) from new debt. Special procedures are initiated for old debt,
often through a dedicated recovery unit. The utility's standard procedures should be focused on
keeping existing customers current.

B.     Madhya Pradesh Accounting Issues

12.      In 2001, the Government of Madhya Pradesh and ADB reached an agreement on the
basic model for the reformed sector. While successor companies have been established and
nominal operational autonomy achieved, some pre-unbundling management practices are still in
effect. The Operation Evaluation Mission noted that these traditional management practices,
along with some reluctance to face challenges associated with corporate reforms, will continue
to retard progress toward achieving financial viability of the companies and, hence, the
sustainability of the power sector. Benefits to be realized through introducing proven, modern
utility management practices into the day-to-day operations were discussed. These included
building on the foundations of good corporate governance now in place, establishing strong
financial management capacity, and strengthening the new companies' operational
management capabilities to deliver performance improvement and, in the longer term, face
market competition.

13.    For this purpose, the United Kingdom's Department for International Development
(DFID) is providing up to £18.5 million in technical (£14.5 million) and financial (£4 million)
assistance from 2006 to 2010. This initiative forms the second phase of a long-term
commitment by DFID to develop and reform the Madhya Pradesh power sector. Approved in
2005, contracts for consultancy services were let and consultants fielded from April 2006.
Capacity building is being provided through the following main work streams: (i) support to the
Government of Madhya Pradesh for mapping further reforms, (ii) capacity building in the
Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission, and (iii) financial management and human
resources development across all companies. In addition to these principal work streams,
funding is also allocated for program coordination plus review and monitoring, and including
socioeconomic impact studies.

14.    Consultancy services are being delivered in a way consistent with a key theme of reform,
namely to facilitate the development of increasingly autonomous, corporatized, licensed, and
commercially focused companies. Thus, where support is being provided to, for example, all
companies on human resources by a single consultancy firm, it is to be delivered through
discrete teams located in each company. DFID financial assistance is for management
information systems technology and will be released over a shorter timescale, during the
FY2006­07 and FY2007­2008.
82   Appendix 7



15.    The capacity building planned by DFID is comprehensive and is at an early stage of its
scheduled 5-year program. The initial capacity building envisaged during the earlier ADB
Mission has therefore been partially diverted to different areas, such as supervisory control and
data acquisition, distribution management systems, and others to ensure that duplication with
the DFID program is eliminated.

16.    The first quarterly review of the DFID program took place on 11 August 2006. There
were delays sufficient to cause comment on progress in two work streams, and there were
some issues concerning coordination and integration of the consultancy effort. The first review
confirmed the comprehensive nature of the capacity building, however, and no adverse
comments were of sufficient weight to question the potential value of the DFID program.
                                                                                                 Appendix 8      83


                      POTENTIAL FOR CORRUPTION IN THE ENERGY SECTOR
1.       The energy sector is a target and source of corruption because energy is central to
almost all socioeconomic activities, and power is essential to production and operation.
Individuals and institutions that control access to the sources, transformation, and distribution of
energy hold significant power. The sector's potential for generating economic rents from energy
extraction, transformation, and use, and the large capital investments it engages, makes the
sector vulnerable to corruption. Opportunities for corruption occur at all stages--from energy
extraction to transformation and distribution (see Table 8.1). At the project level, corruption
occurs during the early stages of power project identification and formulation, project tendering
and bidding, as well as operation and maintenance. Corruption in the sector is difficult to prove
and determine because of the complex systems and the multidimensional scale at which they
operate in the development of a country. Corruption may occur in developing and transitional
economies because judicial and regulatory systems are weak or lacking, and there may exist a
political culture that overlooks corrupt acts. 1 The central role of government agencies that
oversee virtually all aspects of the energy sector, whether privatized or not, make transactions
and decision making less efficient because decisions are often made in favor of political
interests. The limited prosecution of corruption cases and low conviction rates make it difficult to
deter corrupt practices in the sector.
.
2.      The forms and extent of corruption in the energy sector affect the demand and supply
sides of energy operations differently. At the consumer level, what might be termed "petty
corruption" involving minor bribery and collusion happen because consumers are willing to pay
for convenience (getting new connections quickly, avoiding time-consuming paperwork) has
created a supply-side pressure that perpetuates this form of corruption. Corruption on energy
transformation and distribution is manifested through
        (i)    nontechnical system losses (e.g., falsified meter readings, altered invoices, and
               illegal purchase),2
        (ii)   interference in the flow of funds in such forms as barter or offsets within the
               system and to fuel suppliers,
        (iii)  manipulation of the flows of electricity to favored customers,
        (iv)   opaque and uneconomic import arrangements,
        (v)    bid manipulation through limited specifications and/or pre-qualifications,
        (vi)   commissions paid by bidders for contract awards,
        (vii)  collusion of bidders, and
        (viii) payments for positions favorable to extracting corrupt payments.

3.     Box A8.1 illustrates potential areas where corruption occurs in different segments of the
sector and efforts the Government has taken to combat corruption.




1
    Mathias, Ruth. 2002. Corruption and the Energy Sector. Paper presented during a workshop on Sectoral
    Perspectives on Corruption sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development. Washington,
    DC.
2
    Surveys sponsored by the World Bank as part of load management and agricultural electricity studies in India have
    shown that 20­30% of electricity attributed to unmetered agricultural consumption is appropriated by high-income
    households, industry, and large commercial establishments such as shopping malls. Such "appropriations"
    constitute corrupt behavior if those entities who receive electricity free or at reduced prices provide in return
    financial or political support to individuals who are in charge of payment collection.
84        Appendix 8



                          Table A8.1: Vulnerability to Corruption in Electricity Sector

I.          Government Policies
                     Activity                    Areas Vulnerable to Corruption                         Red Flags
     Estimates of the additional capacity    ·    Manipulation of the estimates             ·    No or inadequate analysis of
     required to meet demand                                                                     demand
                                                                                            ·    No public consultation
                                                                                            ·    Lack of transparency in
                                                                                                 demand forecasting
     Norms and procedures for licensing      ·    Alteration of licensing criteria to       ·    Ad hoc revisions or
                                                  favor particular interests                     exceptions made to the
                                                                                                 criteria
                                                                                            ·    Nontransparent process for
                                                                                                 revising norms

     Statutory and other                     ·    Dilatory and repetitive procedures        ·    Vague procedures
     clearances                                   with no time limit for final decision     ·    Authorities with overlapping
                                                                                                 jurisdictions

     Sale of the energy                      ·    Restrictions on who may buy the ·              Noncompetitive procurement
     generated                                    energy and the price payable                   of independent power
                                                  under power purchase agreements                producers

     Acquisition of land and                 ·    Payment of compensation to                ·    High level of activity in land
     rehabilitation of project-                   landowners and resettlement of                 transactions before
     affected persons                             project-affected people                        government notification for
                                                                                                 zoning or land acquisition
                                                                                            ·    A few transactions registered
                                                                                                 at inflated prices to raise the
                                                                                                 benchmark for rates of
                                                                                                 compensation
                                                                                            ·    Opaque procedures for
                                                                                                 compensation payments
                                                                                            ·    Several partial payments

     Subsidies to specified                  ·    Administration of subsidy,           ·         Unmetered supply
     consumer groups                              including selection of beneficiaries ·         Absent or weak linkage with
                                                                                                 means criteria

     Selection of regulators and top         ·    Manipulating selection criteria           ·    Undue delay in appointments
     management of utilities                                                                ·    Lack of transparency in the
                                                                                                 selection process


II.         Different Stages of Project Development
               Activity                Areas Vulnerable to Corruption                               Red Flags

Project                           ·    Technical-economic studies to            ·       A perfunctory study (or no study at all)
formulation                            establish feasibility and viability      ·       Omitting surveys and site
                                  ·    Surveys and site investigations                  investigations or leaving them to be
                                  ·    Estimation of costs and                          done later by the contractor
                                       implementation schedules                 ·       Estimation of costs
                                  ·    Statutory and other clearances           ·       Vagueness about procedure for
                                  ·    Land acquisition for the plant                   obtaining clearances
                                  ·    Rights-of-way for transmission lines     ·       Not allocating sufficient resources for
                                  ·    Rehabilitation of persons affected by            compensation to project-affected
                                       the project                                      persons
                                                                                                         Appendix 8         85


Project                     ·       Procedure for contractor selection      ·       Procedure not spelled out in bid
implementation              ·       Type of contract (works, labor,                 documents
                                    turnkey) and contract documents         ·       Lack of specificity in the contracts
                            ·       Monitoring and supervision of           ·       Failure to designate supervisors with
                                    contractor's work                               clear responsibilities
                            ·       Purchase and supply of plant,           ·       Not allocating sufficient funds for
                                    machinery, and materials                        payment, leading to disputes and
                            ·       Stage payments to contractors                   claims of costs escalation
                            ·       Completion and commissioning

Project operation           ·       Performance of plant and machinery      ·       Failure to specify performance
                                    during initial guarantee stage                  parameters and methodology of
                            ·       Execution of operations and                     verification
                                    maintenance (in-house or                ·       Failure to spell out clear procedures for
                                    outsourced)                                     routine as well as emergency
                            ·       Emergency repairs                               purchases
                            ·       Purchase and use of materials,          ·       Requiring multiple authorizations (thus
                                    stores, and consumables                         diluting individual responsibility) before
                            ·       Emergency purchases                             payments can be made
                            ·       Payments to contractors, suppliers,     ·       Absence of codified and transparent
                                    and vendors                                     procedures
                            ·       Employee-related issues, such as        ·       Failure to specify responsibilities of
                                    promotion, transfer, payment of                 individual officers to ensure compliance
                                    employees' dues such as provident               with license conditions
                                    funds, various allowances, and
                                    reimbursement of expenses
                            ·       Adherence to relevant codes and
                            ·       licensing conditions



III.   Customer Interfacing Activities
          Activities                 Areas Vulnerable to Corruption                               Red Flags

New connection,                 ·     Information on procedure not clear        ·     Undue delays in giving connections
additional load                       or not available                          ·     Lack of periodic data reconciliation
                                ·     Harassment by utility staff                     between new connections,
                                                                                      meter-reading book, and consumer
                                                                                      ledger

Meter reading                   ·     Poor quality of meters                    ·     Meters that are tampered with
                                ·     Irregular meter reading                   ·     Meters not tested according to norms
                                                                                ·     Wide variations in consumption by
                                                                                      similarly placed consumers
                                                                                ·     High electricity losses in some feeder
                                                                                      lines
                                                                                ·     High incidence of broken meter seals

Payment and correction of bill ·      Errors in bill                            ·     High incidence of billing disputes or
                               ·      Collusion between utility staff and             bill corrections
                                      consumer                                  ·     Fall in collection while consumption
                                ·     Billing based on factors other than             remains the same
                                      actual use (such as average
                                      consumption or load factor)
86     Appendix 8



 Repair service, fuse call      ·    Supply interruptions caused by      ·   Poor maintenance of complaints
                                     accidents                               record
                                ·    Routine maintenance work            ·   Undue delay in attending to
                                                                             complaints
                                                                         ·   Frequent burning of transformers

 Meter installation, replacement ·   Inadequate protection for meters    ·   High volume of complaints regarding
 of defective meters             ·   Delay in issuing and installing         quality of service
                                     meters                              ·   High incidence of burnt meters of
                                                                             large consumers (who may be
                                                                             charged a flat rate for consumption
                                                                             during the period the meter is not
                                                                             replaced)

 Disconnection                  ·    Nonpayment of bill                  ·   High level of receivables
                                ·    Delay in receipt of bill            ·   Frequency and amount of defaults in
                                ·    Pilferage by consumer                   bill payments.


 Reconnection                   ·    Delay even after rectification of   ·   High incidence of deviation from
                                     cause of disconnection                  normative standards of service



IV.      Theft of Electricity
           Activities                         Mode of Theft                    Beneficiaries of Corruption
 Generation                      ·   Theft of fuel camouflaged as        ·   Staff of the generation plant
                                     auxiliary consumption in thermal    ·   Labor union leaders
                                     generation plant
                                 ·   Unauthorized use in the homes of
                                     generation plant staff
 Transmission                    ·   Tapping of overhead transmission    ·   Large consumers
                                     lines by large consumers            ·   Politicians
                                 ·   Defective meters                    ·   Bureaucrats
                                                                         ·   Utility managers
                                                                         ·   Transmission line staff
 Distribution                    ·   Tapping of distribution lines       ·
                                                                         Consumers
                                                                         ·
                                                                         Distribution utility staff
                                ·   Unauthorized supply of electricity   ·
                                                                         Consumers
                                                                         ·
                                                                         Utility managers
                                                                         ·
                                                                         Distribution line staff
                                ·   Organized resistance to paying for   ·
                                                                         Labor union leaders
                                    electricity                          ·
                                                                         Politicians
                                                                         ·
                                                                         Groups of consumers acting in
                                                                         concert (farmers, industries,
                                                                         residential areas, and the like)
                                                                       · Local mafia with political protection
                                ·   Nonbilling and underbilling for    · Consumers
                                    electricity                        · Billing staff
                                                                       · Consumers
                                ·   Tampering with bypassing meters
                                                                       · Linemen
                                                                       · Consumers
                                ·   Billing consumers at a lower rate
                                                                       · Billing staff
                                                                       · Utility managers
Source: World Bank. 2007. J. Edgardo Campos and Sanjay Pradhan, Many Faces of Corruption. Washington D.C.
                                                                                                       Appendix 8        87


                         Box A8.1: Anticorruption Efforts in the Indian Energy Sector
                Forms of Theft and Actions Taken by the State Electricity Regulators Commissions
    Generation. Corruption arose in cases where ownership of generating companies was in the private sector and
    the power was sold to the Licensees (public sector). Money paid by the Licensee was, in some cases, for power
    not supplied. There was collusion between the generator and the person in charge of recording the supply. No
    supervision of the recording of power received was made, nor was there any energy audit. This was taking
    place largely in cases of smaller, unconventional energy generators. Similarly, power was purchased without
    reference to the variable cost and frequency. The Regulatory Commission directed the Transmission Licensee
    to (i) fix 0.2 accuracy class meters at the interface points between generation company and transmission
    company and between transmission company and distribution company, (ii) conduct regular and thorough
    energy audits and furnish information in the format provided by the commission, and (iii) develop a
    comprehensive procedure for merit order dispatch in consultation with all stakeholders and then file it with the
    Commission for approval.
    Agriculture Sector. There was often no metering in the agriculture sector. Agriculture consumption was
    charged based on the capacity (in horsepower) of the pump set used--the higher the horsepower, the higher
    the tariff. There were about 2.3 million agricultural connections. Corruption could take place in recording the
    horsepower of the pump set. Based on a number of cases, the horsepower of the pump set was higher than
    what was incorporated in the records of the Licensee. There was collusion between the farmer and the lineman,
    or the farmer had upgraded the capacity clandestinely. Secondly, a large number of farmers were taking power
    without authorized connections. The Commission directed that billing should be based on the actual capacity of
    pump sets, and that unauthorized connections must be either regularized or disconnected and all new
    connections must have meters.
    Domestic and Commercial Sectors. In the domestic and commercial sectors, theft arose from (i) nonmetering
    because of lack of meters, resulting in arbitrary assessment of consumption; (ii) tampering with meters; (iii)
    incorrect recording of meter readings to keep the consumption at a lower level and escape billing at higher rates
    in a non-telescopic tariff system; (iv) ad hoc billing in case of stuck and faulty meters; (v) billing without reading
    meters; (vi) supply of power through fictitious connections bypassing the meter; (vii) supply of power without
    bringing it to utility records; (viii) having multiple meters in the same household or commercial establishment to
    keep the consumption at lower tariffs; (ix) continuing to supply power although power supply was recorded as
    disconnected for nonpayment of bills; (x) billing made at a lower level than the actual meter reading in collusion
    with the billing staff; and (xi) some consumers used domestic premises for commercial use in order to pay the
    domestic tariff instead of the commercial rate.
    Industrial Sector. Large-scale theft was taking place, especially in power-intensive industries--with and without
    collusion from the utility staff. Commercial incentives to steal electricity were high since industrial tariffs were
    very high because of cross-subsidies to the domestic and agricultural sectors. Theft involved (i) simple
    bypassing of the meter or tampering with the meter to make it run slowly, (ii) tampering with the components
    within the meter to record lower consumption, (iii) manipulating the multiplication factor on the meter in cases of
    high power consumption industries (in collusion with the meter installer), and (iv) laying underground bypass
    cables. Solutions include demand meters for consumers with intermediate connected load; for high tension
    consumers, metering should be provided on the high tension side. There were also cases where industrial units
    had their own captive generation sets and a standby connection to supply power from the Licensee. The
    Licensee was actually drawing power from the high tension connection, bypassing the meter without operating
    the captive generating set. Commissions are directing utilities to launch special drives to detect theft in all cases
    of industrial units with captive generation sets and to intensify surprise checks in the industrial establishments
    with vigilant staff and remotely monitoring their consumption.

    Source: Operations Evaluation Department.



4.      Despite the application of standard governance and anticorruption requirements in the
loan agreements for energy projects, some attempts to circumvent procurement processes were
detected. As of July 2006, ADB's Integrity Division3 had identified 49 cases involving energy
projects with allegations of corruption. Of the 49 cases, 44 were loan projects and 5 were TA
grants. The cases were spread among 11 developing member countries (Table A8.2). Based on
the investigations, these cases can be summarized as (i) irregularities in the bid evaluation

3
    Available: http://www.adb.org/Integrity.
88   Appendix 8



process, (ii) submission of falsified certificates of consultants and performance certificates of
firms, (iii) procurement discrepancies and irregularities, (iv) collusion of consultants and
contractors, (v) collusion in the bid process, (vi) corruption of officials in procurement and
administrative matters, (vii) payoffs from participating firms to get the contract awards, and (viii)
bribery. Allegation of corruption was the most prominent (37%) complaint, followed by charges
on fraudulent practices (26%), misrepresentation (12%), abuse of position (6%), collusion (6%),
bribery and extortion (4%), and others (8%). There were no substantiated cases of corruption in
India, however, and this suggests that the governance measures for procurement in
ADB-funded projects are having their desired effect.

                   Table 8.2: Allegations of Corruption in the Energy Sector
                                       (as of 21 July 2006)
        Country                                                   Number of Cases          Percent
                                                                                             (%)
        Bangladesh                                                          24                49
        Cambodia                                                             1                 2
        People's Republic of China                                           3                 6
        India                                                                5                10
        Lao People's Democratic Republic                                     1                 2
        Nepal                                                                7                14
        Pakistan                                                             1                 2
        Philippines                                                          1                 2
        Samoa                                                                1                 2
        Sri Lanka                                                            2                 4
        Tajikistan                                                           3                 6
                 Total                                                      49               100
      Source: Asian Development Bank. Office of the Auditor General, Integrity Division.
                                                                                                           Appendix 10       89

                                       TABLE A9.1 PROJECT PERFORMANCE RATINGS

                                                                                                                                   Source
 Loan                                                                                                                    Overall   of
 No.      Title                         Relevance Efficacy                   Efficiency    Sustainability    Impact      Rating    Rating
 Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)

    798   North Madras Thermal Power                  3             4             3               4              4         S       PPAR
          Unchahar Thermal Power
   907    Extension                                   3             5             2               6              6          S      PCR
   988    Rayalaseema Thermal Power                   3             4             3               4              3         GS      PPAR
  1117    Gandhar Field Development                   3             4             3               6              3          S      PCR
          Second North Madras
  1029    Thermal Power                               3             4             2               4              4         S       PCR
  1148    Hydrocarbon Sector Program                  2             2             1               2              0         PS      PPAR
  1222    Gas Flaring Reduction                       3             4             2               5              3         GS      PCR
  1285    Gas Rehabilitation                          3             4             2               5              3         S       PPAR
  1591    LPG Pipeline                                3             6             3               6              6         HS      PCR
 Energy Sector Development
          Energy Conservation and
  1212    Environment Improvement                     3             2             2               4              3         PS      PCR
  1343    Industrial Energy Efficiency                2             2             1               2              2         PS      PPAR
          Gujarat Power Sector
  1804    Development                                 3             6             3               6              6         HS      OEM
          Madhya Pradesh Power
  1869    Sector Development                          3             6             2               5              5         S       OEM
          Assam Power Sector
  2037    Development                                 3             5             2               5              4         S       OEM
 Renewable Energy Generation
          Renewable Energy
  1465    Development                                 3             6             2               6              5         S        PCR
 Transmission and Distribution
  1161    Power Efficiency                            2             2             1               2              2         PS       PCR
  1405    Power Transmission                          3             5             2               6              5         S        PCR
          Madhya Pradesh Power
  1868    Sector Development                          3             4             2               4              4         S       OEM
          Gujarat Power Sector
  1803    Development                                 3             6             2               6              6        S-HS     OEM
          Assam Power Sector
  2036    Development                                 3             4             1               4              5         S       OEM
          Average Rating                             2.9           4.3           2.1             4.7            4.0
GS = generally satisfactory, HS = highly satisfactory, OEM = operation evaluation mission, PCR = project completion report, PPAR
= project performance audit report, PS = partial satisfactory, S = satisfactory.
90     Appendix 10

                           Table A9.2: Private Project Performance Ratings
                                                             Overall     Source of Rating
                                   Project                   Rating
                     LNG Terminal                             HS                 PPER
                     Transmission And Distribution             S                 PPAR
                     Generation                                S                 PPAR
                     Transmission                              S                  SES
                  HS = highly satisfactory, PPAR = project performance audit report, PPER =
                  project performance evaluation report, S = satisfactory, SES = special
                  evaluation study, LNG = liquefied natural gas.

                                  Table A9.3 TA Performance Ratings
Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)                     TCR           TPAR     OEM
  1228      APSEB Operational Improvement Support                                         PS
            National Program for Environmental Management
  1229      for Coal-Fired Power Generation                                               PS
  1837      Natural Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion
  2008      Regulatory Framework for the Gas Industry                       GS
            Preparation of Natural Gas Development Master
  2702      Plan                                                            GS
  2752      Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal                                  GS                S
            Hydrocarbon Exploration and Production Database
  2775      and Archive System                                              GS
Energy Sector Development
  1119      Power Sector Loan
            Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Operational
  1365      Improvement                                                     GS            GS
  1366      Environment Monitoring and Pollution Control                    GS            GS
            Environmental Improvement and Sustainable
            Development of the Agra-Mathura-Ferozabad
  2474      Trapezium in Uttar Pradesh                                      US
            Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs
  2490      in Andra Pradesh                                                                       S
            Preparation of a Power System Master Plan for the
  2738      State of Gujarat                                                GS                     S
            Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs
  2739      in Gujarat                                                      GS                     S
            Review of Electricity Legislation and Regulations in
  2740      Gujarat                                                         GS                     S
            Financial Management Support to Kheda and
            Rajkot Distribution Centers of the Gujarat Electricity
  2741      Board                                                           GS
  2980      Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development                         S                      S
  3305      Support to the Power Finance Corporation                        GS
  3573      Reorganization Plan for Gujarat Electricity Board               GS                     S
  3885      Energy Efficiency Enhancement Project                                                 HS
  3953      Assam Power Sector Development Program                                                 S
            Building the Capacity of Assam Electricity
  4083      Regulatory Commission                                                                 HS
  4241      Reorganization of Assam State Electricity Board                                       S
  4243      Policy and Legal Support for Power Sector Reforms                                     S
Renewable Energy Generation
  1953      Renewable Energy Development                                                           S
                                                                                                                                Appendix 10   91

             Institutional Strengthening of Indian Renewable
    2648     Energy Development Agency, Ltd.                                                                        GS
 Transmission and Distribution
             Study of Bulk Power and Transmission Tariffs and
    1756     Transmission Regulations                                                                               GS          GS
             Private Sector Participation in Electricity
    3380     Transmission                                                                                           GS
GS = generally satisfactory, HS = highly satisfactory, OEM = operation evaluation mission, TCR = technical assistance
completion report, TPAR = technical assistance performance audit report, PS = partial satisfactory, S = satisfactory.

                                                                               Figure A9.1: EIRRs
                                                                 All Energy Sector Projects in India
                                                                 EIRR (%) at RRP and at PCR/PPAR
                                                  75.0
                      PCR/PPAR estimates




                                                  55.0




                                                  35.0




                                                  15.0
                                                      15.0     25.0            35.0     45.0       55.0          65.0    75.0

                                                                                      RRP estimates

                      FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance
                     audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to
                     the Board of Directors.
                     Source: Asian Development Bank database.

                                                                               Figure A9.2: FIRRs
                                                                      Figure 5.4: All Energy Projects in India
                                                                         FIRR (%) at RRP and at PCR/PPAR
                                                  20.0
                             PCR/PPAR Estimates




                                                  15.0


                                                  10.0


                                                   5.0


                                                   0.0
                                                         0.0             5.0             10.0             15.0           20.0

                                                                                  RRP Estimates

                     FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance audit
                     report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board
                     of Directors.
                     Source: Asian Development Bank database.
92      Appendix 10

                                    FUEL SUPPLY ISSUES

1.    The following section is a brief discussion about the fuel constraints which are impeding
power generation growth.

A.        Hydropower

2.     Hydropower has declined in the power mix from about 46% in 1966 to its current level of
26%. The lack of hydropower has increased the need for thermal-fired plant to take over a
considerable portion of the peaking role, traditionally the role of hydropower. This has
contributed to suboptimal use of resources in the power sector. Growth in the hydropower
sector has been hampered by the large capital costs, cost overruns, poor planning, inter-state
disputes, and the lack of complementary infrastructure and land.

3.      India has identified over 150,000 megawatts (MW) of hydropower potential. Of that,
50,000 MW is included in a scheduled Hydropower Initiative, with a 2017 target completion date.
Some 33,000 MW of capacity has undergone preliminary feasibility studies, and full planning is
now underway with a view to progressing these to commercial projects. The Government of
India is making a concerted effort to reduce planning and development times for these projects,
including by taking a more managed approach to environmental concerns, land tenure,
compensation, and interstate coordination. However, the largest hurdle will be to attract long-
term finance for projects having 40-year life spans plus planning and construction periods in
excess of 8 years. In addition, there is close scrutiny from nongovernment organizations and the
ensuing transaction cost if there is significant localized political opposition.

B.        Coal

4.      Coal is currently the most important and abundant fossil fuel in India and provides for
66% of India's energy. It has an advantage in its relatively low production costs. However,
mobilizing capital for generation plant and supply chain investment has been a critical constraint
on coal's playing an even larger role. The underdeveloped coal market has also been a
constraint prolonging project development and placing the burden on the generation asset
developers to manage fuel supply chain risks. Generation losses were estimated at 1.512 billion
kWh during FY2004­2005 and hampered the growth of thermal generation.54

5.      Legal and policy frameworks, monopolistic industry structures, and a restrictive market
have deterred serious investment in the coal sector. The Government controls almost all coal
production. Private mines are allowed only if they are captive operations that feed a power plant
or factory. While the country has considerable supplies, it faces two major hurdles: the expected
quality of coal is gradually declining and the lead time to bring new mines on line is about 8
years. India will need to import additional supplies in the near term and resolve its fuel security
concerns in the midterm.

6.      India possesses the fourth largest reserve of coal in the world (after the U.S., Russia,
and the People's Republic of China respectively). The energy potential offered by the reserves
of indigenous Indian coal is 9 times higher than that of oil and gas combined. India's indigenous
extractable coal reserves offer 14.285 billion tons of oil equivalent that is expected to last 80
years at the current extraction rates.55 Moreover, only 45% of India's coal-bearing area has
been surveyed, and the total proven reserve is estimated at 40 billion tons of oil equivalent.


54
     PriceWaterhouseCoopers.
55
     PriceWaterhouseCoopers.
                                                                                  Appendix 10     93

7.      Coal production during the Eighth and early part of the Ninth Plan period met the
production targets. Production during FY1996­1997 was 286 million tons and this grew to
nearly 400 million tons in FY2005­2006. With this production growth, India now ranks as the
third largest coal producer in the world behind the People's Republic of China and the U.S.
Despite this growth, there has been a shortage that has been met through imports. By the end
of the Tenth Plan period, a deficit of 43 million tons is anticipated.

8.     The Government's response to the fuel supply constraints has been to divert additional
supplies of coal to the power sector and gas supplies away from the power sector. As coal is
also a primary fuel source in the cement and steel industries, the existing and continuing
constraints on gas and coal supplies impede economic growth.

9.        Coal deposits have not been sufficiently identified, making it difficult to plan extraction
in the medium to long term. Investments in exploration to prove the probable reserves have not
been adequate. The quality of coal is not very good, and ash contents are high enough to
mandate washing even for power generation. Such processing may impact the economics of
power generation from coal and tilt the balance in favor of imported coal. The locations of coal
reserves also partially determine the placement of power plants. Better quality coal is at greater
depths and requires underground mining methods for its exploitation. Historically, however,
underground coal mines have had very low productivity. Legal and administrative procedures to
obtain mining leases involve both central and state government agencies. These procedural
complexities, which lead to delays, have been major reasons for the small number of new mine
openings in the last decade despite the sector's being opened to the private sector. Among the
important constraints affecting the coal sector are the following:
        (i)     Environmental aspects do not favor mining companies, and there are delays in
                obtaining permissions. Standards are not always properly understood and hence
                there is failure to comply with them. That is a cause of delays in commissioning
                new mines.
        (ii)    Because pollution control boards are state agencies, they do not respond
                favorably to proposals for compensatory forestation that may be in other states.
        (iii)   Practical difficulties of land acquisition and project initiation have been major
                reasons for project implementation delays. The relocation and rehabilitation of
                affected people are generally not properly planned, and ad hoc implementation
                leads to protests that cause delays. Such unplanned processes are also
                observed to have severe cost overruns.
        (iv)    There is a lack of technology that could make extraction more efficient and
                prevent waste. The output per miner per shift in Indian coal mines is much below
                the levels achieved in, for example, Australian mines. Geological differences
                exist, but technological backwardness is also one of the reasons.

10.    Machinery utilization is extremely poor in the coal industry. 56 When costly equipment
remains unutilized, it adds to the cost of production and results in inefficient running of the
enterprise. Machines are not properly maintained, resulting in frequent breakdowns. Availability
of machines is poor due to breakdowns and long periods in repair.

11.    While the coal reserves may be sufficient for the next few decades, and even though the
coal mining companies meet their targets, the gap between demand and supply has continued.
This has been due to the coal mining companies' very conservative estimates of coal demand
from the power sector.



56
     M.K. Padhye. 2005. What Ails Coal Industry. People's Democracy, XXIX:42.
94   Appendix 10

12.    As coal mining will remain the main feeder sector for power generation, policies and
procedures in relation to it need to be rationalized. Also needed are investments for
technological improvements. Some steps that could be taken to give the industry its needed
boost are discussed below:
       (i)     There should be rationalization of the procedure for allocating mining leases. The
               process should be administered through a group comprising competent
               authorities from both the central and concerned state governments.
       (ii)    The mining companies should be assisted in land acquisition after all the aspects,
               including those of rehabilitation,.
       (iii)   An appropriate regulatory body should formulate standards for mineral appraisal
               and for the accounting aspects of reserves and their depletion.
       (iv)    Modernization of the underground mines has lagged since nationalization. The
               Government should create conditions conducive to investments into new coal
               mining technologies that would boost productivity and safety. Power generation
               would benefit as a result.
       (v)     Coal production is expensive when compared to imported coal. Transportation of
               coal is one of the biggest infrastructure challenges. Better transportation facilities
               need to be developed. To make power generation from coal cost-effective and
               efficient, dedicated rail tracks for coal transport must lead from mine heads to
               power plants.
       (vi)    The current provisions for captive coal mines do not allow the sale of surplus coal
               in open markets. This provision discourages greater mining efficiencies. Doing
               away with this provision would be a step forward in ensuring the better financial
               health of captive coal mines.
       (vii)   Waste at various stages needs to be controlled, as this raises the unit cost of
               producing coal. Audits of coal production will check wastages and help enhance
               the efficiency of mining and lower the cost of the coal feed to power stations.
       (viii) Trade unionism has been often described as one of the key reasons for low
               productivity in coal mines.
       (ix)    There is a clear lack of corporate governance.

C.     Gas

13.    As a result of gas supply shortages, 38 gas-based power stations with a total capacity of
9,536 MW had to operate at a load factor of only 58% during FY2004-2005.

14.     The Government's optimism with respect to the role of natural gas in the country's power
mix can be perceived from the fact that gas-based capacity additions during the Tenth Plan
were revised upward from 4,749 MW to 6,395 MW in the midterm review. However the
anticipated additions during the Plan period are expected to be only 4,665 MW. This target will
be missed primarily because committed gas supply agreements could not be signed and the
affordability of gas was uncertain for several plants in the pipeline.

        1.     Domestic Gas

15.     As they have started to deplete, production from existing fields will trend downward. The
share of private players in the Indian gas market is expected to rise, however, and especially
after the commencement of gas supply from the RIL-KG Basin field by FY2008­2009. This giant
deepwater gas discovery is the biggest gas find in India in three decades, and it was among the
world's largest gas discoveries in 2002. Another major gas find in the KG Basin was announced
by Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation jointly with two private partners in 2005. This gas find
could be substantially larger than the Reliance find. However, this find has not yet been certified
and the recoverable reserves remain uncertain.
                                                                                             Appendix 10       95


16.     The Government has also shown a keen interest in developing India's 1.5 trillion cubic
meters of coal bed methane (CBM). Under CBM-I and II, 13 blocks have already been awarded
to public and private companies. Oil and Natural Gas Company is projected to begin the first
commercial CBM production of 2 million standard cubic meters per day (MMSCMD) by
FY2007­FY2008. By FY2009­FY2010, CBM will contribute up to 5 MMSCMD of gas. As a
result, gas production from indigenous sources is expected to increase to 167.4 MMSCMD by
2012, an increase of over 130% over the 5-year period.

           2.      Imported Gas

17.     Liquefied natural gas (LNG) is India's only source of imported gas at this time and it has
two LNG terminals. The Petronet LNG Limited terminal at Dahej has a capacity of 5 million tons
annually, and the Shell-operated terminal at Hazira can handle 2.5 million tons. A number of
projects for setting up LNG terminals have been approved by the Government and are due to
become operational in the next few years. The Dabhol and Kochi Terminals are likely to add to
the country's gas supply by 2007 and 2010, respectively. However, the fate of many other
terminals is uncertain, as statutory clearances have not been granted, additional agreements
and/or guarantees are needed, and, most critically, it is difficult to sign on anchor customers at
the prevailing delivered price of gas. Major end users, such as power plants and fertilizer
producers, have been reluctant to sign supply contracts because of uncertainty over the pricing
of LNG and its competitiveness relative to domestic gas and other fuels. Hence, although India
has a strong potential to grow its gas use, the projected import potential of 59.4 MMSCMD by
FY2011­FY2012 depends upon the development of LNG terminals, gas pipelines and gas-fired
power plants as well as resolving the issues of LNG pricing.

18.     Gas supply shortages will continue to remain in the power sector, although the situation
will improve as New Exploration Licensing Policy gas production enters the market and LNG
import facilities are augmented. Most natural gas demand projections for the power sector have
been based on assumptions of gas prices that are unrealistic in today's situation. With the share
of regulated gas falling, the era of subsidized gas seems to be coming to an end for the Indian
power sector.

19.     The figure below shows the capacity available and the likely demand for gas. Based on
the anticipated gas-based capacity additions during the Eleventh Plan, the extent of unmet gas
demand from existing plants, limited gas infrastructure, and increasing gas prices, the
demand-supply gap will persist in India's power sector. Relative to the projected capacity in the
Eleventh Plan, however, more fuel is likely to be available. The Plan envisages only 1,890 MW
of gas-generating plant, and, considering that an additional 20 MMSCMD is required to meet the
demand of the existing plants, it is expected that the available supply will be able to support an
additional 12,000 MW of capacity. The key factor to determine whether this capacity
materializes is the price at which this fuel will be available. Given the existing gas-based
capacity and the anticipated capacity additions under the Eleventh Plan, demand for natural gas
in the power sector is expected to rise to 106.33 MMSCMD by 2007 and further increase to
133.66 MMSCMD by 2012.57




57
     These numbers are arrived at by assuming that 40 percent of all indigenous gas continue to be consumed by the
     power sector and power plants are the preferred customers for LNG importers.
96      Appendix 10


                                      Figure A10.1: Gas Supply Deficiencies

 Demand Supply Gap in Power Sector

     FY 2012                                                                        116.82
                                                                                                   133.66
     FY 2011                                                            99.51
                                                                                                 129.97
     FY 2010                                                    88.21
                                                                                           124.60
     FY 2009                                            67.35
                                                                                        117.89
     FY 2008                                            66.41
                                                                                  112.12
     FY 2007                                    55.48
                                                                               106.33

                                             Total Demand       Availability

     Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2006.



          3.      Gas Transmission

20.     The National Gas Pipeline Policy was formulated to promote investment, from both
public and private sectors, in natural gas transmission pipelines. The objective of the policy is to
ensure equitable access to, and equitable distribution of, natural gas by increasing the gas
supply, broad-basing the transmission and distribution network, promoting competition, and
recognizing consumers' interests. While the Pipeline Policy has set out general guidelines,
there are many issues about which it is ambiguous and some others have not been
addressed at all. With respect to some issues the Policy has significant implications, as
discussed below:
        (i)     The Policy clearly excludes upstream pipelines forming parts of exploration and
                production projects from the regulator's purview. It brings all other pipelines
                within the regulatory framework, including local pipeline networks, but with the
                exception of captive consumption pipelines.
        (ii)    It is not clear whether LNG terminals are included or not.
        (iii)   The Policy has not clearly spelled out the role of private sector participants.
        (iv)    By including sales under regulation, the Policy has raised the specter of supply
                allocation.
        (v)     Some have contested the choice of a common carrier regime as they say it
                requires a high degree of regulation and is more suitable for developed markets.
        (vi)    The details of the tariff determination methodology (i.e., the rate of return
                methodology) have not been spelled out.
21.     The establishment of an independent and stable regulatory body that would have
the power to settle disputes and prevent unfair practices is of prime concern to all
players. Clarity on the scope of regulation, procedures for identifying common carrier
pipelines, use of excess capacity, and clear demarcation of the central and state
governments' jurisdictions have also been sought. Moreover, players are demanding provisions
to ensure efficient operations and unbundling of GAIL (India) Limited's (formerly Gas Authority
of India Limited) marketing and transportation businesses.
                                                                                    Appendix 10      97

        4.     Gas: Conclusions

22.    Renewing the emphasis on regional pipelines to provide access to gas and
simultaneously encouraging domestic exploration should be very high priorities. Regulations
around gas pricing and distribution need urgent attention

D.      Nuclear

23.    India has only 0.8% of the world's uranium reserves, most of which are low grade and,
when extracted fully, can fuel only 10,000 MW. Moreover, India at present utilizes only 0.1% of
its known uranium compared to world extraction levels of 12­14%. For these reasons, Indian
nuclear fuel is 3-4 times costlier than international supplies.

24.     India has one of the largest reserves of the nuclear fuel thorium (32% of all known
reserves). Until commercial production of power based on this fuel becomes feasible, however,
the nuclear energy program will be uranium based. India has successfully developed a 30-
kilowatt-hour prototype thorium-based advance heavy water reactor, and efforts are being made
to apply this technology for commercial power generation.

25.     On 18 July 2005 President Bush and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh reached a
landmark agreement on civilian nuclear energy cooperation. The deal, which marks a notable
warming of US-India relations, would lift the US moratorium on nuclear trade with India, provide
US assistance to India's civilian nuclear energy program, and expand US-Indian cooperation in
energy and satellite technology. Once the deal is finalized, India would be eligible to buy dual-
use nuclear technology, including materials and equipment that could be used to enrich uranium
or reprocess plutonium. Of particular interest in the Indian context is technology that could make
use of thorium, which is abundantly available in India and does not have the same proliferation
and environmental concerns as has uranium technology. An additional benefit for India would
be the ability to access the Nuclear Supplier Group and thereby to procure imported fuel for its
reactors.

26.     The agreement is not without its share of criticism and political pressures, however. The
new agreement put restrictions on India's nuclear research program, and it also would cause
India to incur huge costs in separating military and civilian nuclear installations. Further, by
committing to the deal, India would voluntarily commit itself to placing its civilian nuclear facilities
under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, signing and adhering to an additional
protocol with respect to civilian nuclear facilities, continuing the unilateral moratorium on nuclear
testing, working with the US to help conclude a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty, continuing with
stringent nonproliferation export controls, and harmonizing with and adhering to the guidelines
of the Missile Technology Control Regime and the Nuclear Supplier Group.

27.     The need for producing nuclear power must also be seen against the backdrop of the
fact that oil resources are becoming scarce and coal reserves in India are projected to last 80­
140 years. Higher coal, oil, and gas prices would quickly undermine its competitiveness, while
nuclear power generation costs are quite stable over a wide range of fuel price scenarios. It has
been established that nuclear power is particularly advantageous in those parts of the country
(including the southern and western parts) where hydropower sources are scarce and which are
far away from the coal fields.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE SECTOR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM EVALUATION
   FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR IN INDIA ­ BUILDING ON SUCCESS FOR MORE
                              RESULTS



         On 18 October 2007, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.     General Comments

       1.     We welcome OED's Sector Assistance Program Evaluation (SAPE) for
       the Energy Sector in India. We find it comprehensive and balanced. The SAPE is
       timely and will provide valuable input in the preparation of our new Country
       Partnership Strategy for India.

       2.     We note the overall positive assessment of the SAPE: (i) the performance
       of ADB assistance to the energy sector in India was successful; (ii) the sector
       assistance program was aligned with the development goals outlined in the
       Government's development plans and was consistent with ADB's energy policy
       and country strategies, and (iii) ADB assistance, particularly at the state level,
       has been highly effective in the areas of energy supply and sector governance.

       3.      We note that the India energy sector strategy and assistance program for
       2007­2010 (Energy Sector Program) will (i) continue to support state level
       reforms and investments to improve efficiency in the delivery of power; (ii)
       support national agencies in capacity (generation and transmission) expansion in
       an environmentally sustainable manner; and (iii) support clean energy and
       energy efficiency initiatives at the national and state level. Our assistance will
       provide the required long-term financing, introduce best practices, improve sector
       and corporate governance, build capacity and ensure sound environmental and
       social safeguard practices.

       4.    We agree with the SAPE recommendations, which are fully consistent
       and supportive of the Energy Sector Program.

       II.    Comments on Specific Recommendations

       5.      Expand the current focus of operations to balance supply and
       demand. We agree with the SAPE suggestion that subject to the Government's
       agreement, we continue and expand the current focus on state electricity sector
       restructuring and system expansion to balance supply and demand.

       6.     We note that the SAPE suggestion is fully consistent with our Energy
       Sector Program in India. Under the Energy Sector Program, we will (i) continue
       to support state level reforms and investments to improve efficiency in delivery of
       power, and (ii) support national agencies in capacity (generation and
       transmission) expansion in an environmentally sustainable manner. Over the
       next 3 years, building on our experience in the states of Madhya Pradesh,
       Assam, Gujarat and Uttaranchal, we plan to expand our assistance to the states
       of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir.
7.      Integrate energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives into
lending programs at both central and state levels. We support this SAPE
suggestion. Under the Energy Sector Program, we plan to support low carbon,
clean energy and energy efficiency initiatives at the national and state levels. Our
assistance will cover both demand and supply side management with
interventions, including (i) renovation and modernization of existing power
generation plants, (ii) replacement of inefficient power plants to enhance energy
efficiency, (iii) renewable and clean energy development, (iv) loss reduction of
transmission and distribution systems, and (v) mainstreaming demand side
management.

8.       We also note that our Energy Efficiency Initiative and Carbon Market
Initiatives should be used to facilitate such interventions allowing promotion of
energy efficiency, renewable energy, and other forms of low carbon energy
development utilization.

9.       Tailor products and services to meet clients' evolving needs. We
agree with the SAPE suggestion that we tailor our products and services to meet
clients' needs. We believe this is being done. We are working closely with the
energy sector agencies and states to provide assistance in a timely and relevant
manner by utilizing the full range of lending modalities such as multitranche
financing facility, public-private partnerships, risk guarantees and other credit
enhancement vehicles.

10.     Nonsovereign transactions to expand generation and transmission.
We support the SAPE suggestion that nonsovereign lending can take on a larger
role to fund the energy sector and to catalyze private sector funds, particularly
into the transmission and generations. We are discussing with national energy
sector agencies, including National Thermal Power Corporation, Power Grid
Corporation of India Limited and Power Finance Corporation about the prospects
for nonsovereign lending.
                        DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE


           Chair's Summary of the Committee Discussions on 24 October 2007 of the:

   (i)       Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India

   (ii)      Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for the Transport Sector in India ­
             Focusing on Results

   (iii)     Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for the Energy Sector in India ­
             Building on Success for More Results

   (iv)      Special Evaluation Study on ADB Support to Public Resource Management in
             India


Background

1.      In introducing the topic, OED stated that this Country Assistance Program Evaluation
(CAPE) is the first for India and covers the last 20 years (1986 to 2006), although most of the
analysis focused on the last ten years. The main purpose of the study was to provide input to
the preparation of Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India. India is both a major
shareholder and a borrowing member country with substantial influence on ADB's portfolio.
ADB's assistance to India in the last 20 years has been about $17 billion in public sector
lending, $147 million in TA assistance, and $756 million in ADB's private sector operations.
There are three other Sector Assistance Program Evaluation (SAPE) reports supporting this
CAPE: one each on transport sector, energy, and public resource management. This CAPE
takes into account the findings and recommendations of these three studies. Conforming to the
requirements of DEC, this CAPE has also incorporated the views of the Government of India on
its partnership with ADB. Management agrees with the CAPE's overall rating of "successful",
and concurs with the overall conclusions and key recommendations.

Project processing consumes more staff resources than project administration

2.      To a query by a DEC member, OED confirmed that in the case of India, project
processing consumes more staff resources than project administration in terms of mission
travel. Director General (DG) of the South Asia Department (SARD), indicated that more
resources for portfolio management have been allocated in recent years with improved
performance.

Quality of assistance program has improved over time

3.      One DEC member noted the report's finding that the quality of the assistance program
during the latter 10 years of the evaluation period has improved in comparison to the earlier 10
year period. He added that the report observes that ADB has and could continue to scale up its
assistance to India in the coming years.




                                                                                              1
Assistance to Rural Development

4.       Observing that there was a recent focus by ADB in rural development in India, one DEC
member asked how this would fit into the core of the evolving Long-Term Strategic Framework
(LTSF) plan of ADB. He pointed out that the agriculture sector, perhaps with the exception of
irrigation infrastructure, was not playing a dominant role in the evolving LTSF. Another DEC
member observed that rural and agricultural developments are important to India, and to China,
and asked how ordinary capital resources (OCR) funding could be provided to these sectors in
a viable way. Another member, observing that while the agriculture sector is important for
poverty alleviation and while core priorities under Medium Term Strategy (MTS II) of ADB have
already been chosen, asked OED to elaborate their views on this issue. OED responded that
MTS II does include irrigation infrastructure as a priority 1 sector. OED added that evaluation
results show that agriculture is a challenging sector and if ADB were to continue to be involved
in this sector, then it should know how to manage the risks. In addition, quite often, the solution
to poverty does not lie in the rural areas, but elsewhere where jobs are being created and thus
causing migration. OED further noted that if ADB were to get involved in a sector, it should be
there for a long term and there should be strong country commitment. DG, SARD responded
that ADB is supporting India's rural development program to make the growth process more
inclusive. In 2006, it provided a $1 billion program loan for strengthening rural cooperatives and
improving availability of credit in rural areas. Further, ADB will be providing assistance for
strengthening agribusiness and irrigation infrastructure, and improving water resources
management in selected states over the 2008-2010 period.

Safeguard Policies

5.       One DEC member noted that the report observes that ADB's safeguard policies have
created the perverse effect of the client deliberately avoiding ADB projects that have sensitive
environmental or re-settlement issues. He further added that the report appeals to India to
become more open to dialogue with ADB and the Resident Mission (RM), and to update the
Indian safeguard policies. Another DEC member noted that report was pointing out that ADB's
safeguard policies were adding to the transaction costs of borrowing from ADB, and stated that
if a country is trying to develop its own safeguard policies, how can ADB insist on its own
system and not use the country's system of safeguards. Is ADB going to continue to insist on
using its own safeguard policies or move towards using the country system, he asked. One
DEC member asked OED to clarify what it means by its statement in the report, "in the mean
time ADB should harmonize its approach to common safeguard concerns in India." OED
responded that three major evaluations completed by early this year had fed into the ongoing
safeguard review. The safeguard systems in some countries are strong, while in others they are
weak. In China, and in some states of India, these systems are strong. In other countries, it will
be a very long time before ADB can use these countries' systems. OED would recommend
strengthening these systems progressively in a move towards using them. While many DMCs
would encourage ADB using their safeguard system, many NGOs would oppose such a move.
DG, SARD added that while this is an ADB-wide issue, SARD is making all efforts to find ways
of harmonizing among systems of donors and aligning with the safeguard systems of the
institutions whose projects ADB is supporting.

Resident Mission

6.     Noting that the report appeals to strengthen the India Resident Mission (INRM) and
observing that ADB's largest private sector operation is in India, a DEC member asked if OED


                                                                                                 2
had a specific recommendation to strengthen the private sector activities by the RM. Another
DEC member stated that for a country like India with a large pool of highly qualified economists
and management specialists, there is no reason why the RM could not be strengthened with
more and qualified staff. That would help to improve the dialogue with the Central and State
governments. Another member pointed out that without delegation of appropriate level of
authority to the RM, it would not be able to function effectively. Yet another DEC member said
that as the Management had noted in its response, it is a bank-wide issue and consequently
should be addressed in that context and not in isolation. Another DEC member noted that the
government has specifically emphasized the need for further decentralization to the INRM with
adequate staffing and use of country systems, and changes in business processes for
streamlining ADB's operation in India. He added that decisions on these issues should be
finalized before the CPS is finalized. OED responded that it has consistently advocated
strengthening of resident missions and Management has insisted that it is an ADB-wide issue.
OED has found from its studies that when the resident missions are strengthened, the client, its
executing agencies, and NGOs all get better service. He added that this strategy would require
developing an accountability framework, delegating more authority, and allocating more staff. It
would necessitate in ADB changing its business model. This would have major implication for
ADB, and thus he cautioned that this should be preceded by a major feasibility study. DG,
SARD, while acknowledging that this is an ADB-wide issue, said that in the case of India, they
could not wait for the outcome of ADB-wide review of RM policy. He added that SARD has
found ways to provide additional support to INRM by delegating more responsibilities by
requesting Private Sector Operations Department and the Office of General Counsel to redeploy
a professional staff position each to the INRM. The large operation in India makes it possible to
justify one of each of these specialized staff to be redeployed. In addition, one position from one
of the divisions in SARD also has been reassigned to INRM. Further, the number of National
Officers positions has been increased from 11 to 19.

Number and quality of ADB staff for India operation

7.      A DEC member, noting that the report points out the need for strengthening the quality
and number of staff involved in the India operation, said that both the donor and borrowing
countries should form an alliance to push ADB for necessary reform steps. Noting that the
report points out that ADB had not fully exploited its potential to assist India, another DEC
member asked OED to elaborate more on why this was the case. He asked OED if one of the
reasons why perhaps ADB could not give timely support to India was because of lack of
adequately qualified experts in ADB. He wanted to know if there were other reasons for not fully
exploiting ADB's potential in India. Another DEC member, pointing out that the report makes it
clear that there is a need for specialized expertise in economic and sector work to develop new
funding methodology for public-private partnership etc., asked if ADB would be able to deliver in
this respect. He further asked how long it would take ADB to deliver if it is not already in a ready
state to deliver such services. Another DEC member noted that the government expects ADB's
operations in India to expand to $4 billion per year and asked if ADB would be able to allocate
the necessary staff, technical assistance (TA) funds and other resources to rise up to
expectation. DG, SARD responded that it is crucial to help the Government improve the
capacity to promote public-private partnership (PPP), and so, ADB has provided large scale
technical assistance to set up PPP cells in 14 states. These cells are in charge of identifying
and carrying out preliminary assessment of PPP projects. ADB's support to PPP is expected to
be scaled up.




                                                                                                  3
Coordination between Public and Private Sector Operations of ADB

8.      Noting the report's observation that there is potential for improving the coordination
between ADB's public and private sector operations, and pointing out that there is an ADB
proposal to merge the private sector operations within the public sector operations, a DEC
member asked what OED thought of the plan. Another DEC member pointed out that the report
states that there should be synergy between ADB's public and private sector operations, and
asked what ADB is doing about it. Another DEC member, while agreeing with this view,
observed that the coordination between ADB's public and private sector operations has
significantly improved over the last couple of years. OED responded that it had done an
evaluation report on this issue which was discussed by DEC in June. That study proposed two
or three modes for consideration. Responding to the specific question about merging PSOD
with Public Sector Departments, DG, OED said that the implications for such a change would
have to be considered. He noted that since staff in the public sector are used to designing
projects that are backed by government guarantee, they may not be able to fully appreciate the
risks associated with private sector lending. DG, SARD responded that SARD is actively
pursuing projects in which both the public and private sector work together to achieve project
goals and to bring synergy on development impact through their partnership.

Access to Asian Development Fund (ADF)

9.      Pointing out that the report has classified ADB's assistance program to be successful,
but on the low side, one DEC member asked if the low side rating may have been the result of
India's lack of access to ADF. If India had access to ADF, it could have helped India to eradicate
poverty a little more. He asked what OED thought of this lack of access of ADF to India. He
further noted that there are limits on ADB's assistance to any country and that for major
countries like India, and China, ADB's assistance may be even less than one percent of the
amount needed for development, and asked if ADB could have provided more assistance then
that would have made a difference.

More field office resources for improving project implementation

10.    A DEC member commended OED for recommending that more field office resources
should be added to improve project implementation. He added that ADB should also provide
more support for executing agencies (EA) and other local entities in charge of project
implementation.

Knowledge Services

11.     Observing that demand for knowledge services from middle-income countries like India
and China are likely to increase, a DEC member asked if ADB is ready to meet such demands.
OED responded that clearly knowledge management is an area where ADB could do more but
has not been able to. ADB is not as successful as it would like to be. The main reason is the
skills of the staff. ADB tries to outsource through TAs and consultants; these efforts are
sometimes successful and at other times not so.

Regional Cooperation

12.  Noting that India has been active in promoting South Asia Regional Cooperation, a DEC
member asked why the report did not deal extensively with the issue and/or its recommendation


                                                                                                4
for ADB's assistance to India to participate in regional projects to integrate with the regional
economies. OED responded that there has not been much investment projects in the region.
There has been much policy dialogue that ADB supported. Now there are a few projects, but
they are not completed yet. It would be a good topic for the next CAPE to cover. DG, SARD
added that the first investment project in regional cooperation is soon coming to the Board for its
consideration. It is a project in information communication technology. It is small, but there is an
understanding among the four countries about the benefit to be mutually shared.

World Bank versus ADB

13.     A DEC member asked OED what they thought of the relative performance of the World
Bank (WB) vis-à-vis ADB in providing assistance to their members. OED responded that WB
has three times as many staff in their resident mission in India as ADB has in its resident
mission in India. ADB resident mission staff is under stress. The portfolio of WB in India is
similar to that of ADB. Consequently, with a larger staff, WB can generally do things better than
ADB. They do better in knowledge management, macro-economics etc. They certainly do better
on safeguard policies. It is a difficult comparison, but in terms of resources, WB has much larger
resources than ADB in every country across the region. An OED staff added that in general,
ADB fares better in project management and does poorly in knowledge services and policy
dialogue and that perhaps reflect the quality of ADB's staff resources and its reliance on TAs
and consultants.

Financial Sector Operations

14.      Noting that there were many cancellations in financial sector operation due to lack of
demand and other problems, a DEC member asked why this happened and what could be done
to prevent such a thing from happening in the future. OED responded that due to unaddressed
structural impediments, there were not enough private sector infrastructure projects that would
have met the criteria set by ADB for its credit lines that supported infrastructure projects. In the
housing market, there were enough alternative financing resources available locally at better
rates. Initially, ADB's line of credit looked competitive in terms of pricing. But as domestic
interest rate, exchange rate, and guarantee fees of the government changed ADB funds
became unattractive. INRM staff added that one of the reasons for the low demand for the
loans was that ADB was imposing its safeguards, particularly those relating to re-settlement, on
the sub-borrowers. As these would affect profitability, the private sector borrowers were
reluctant to accept these conditions and borrow. Another reason was that there was surplus of
liquidity in the economy, and the interest rates were not favorable.

Viability of Transport Sector Projects

15.     Recollecting that DG, OED had earlier stated in a previous DEC meeting that internal
rate of return (IRR) calculations of transport sector projects are based on overly optimistic
assumptions, and that these projects on average are delayed by a year and a half, thus
rendering these IRR calculations meaningless, DEC member asked when ADB was going to
learn the appropriate lessons and take action to address these issues.

Anchor Expansion and Lending Volume

16.    The report's recommendation 1(iii) asks ADB to "anchor expansion in lending volumes
and the addition of new sectors and states to a country strategy business plan which ensures



                                                                                                  5
that aspirations are matched by adequate resources". A DEC member noted that the
Management has sidestepped the issue of developing a business plan as part of CPS.

Economic and Thematic Sector Work

17.     A DEC member noted that the economic and thematic sector work as a component of
work program should be agreed with the Government of India as part of CPS rather than being
decided on an ad-hoc basis. He invited DEC to take a position on this issue. He further pointed
out that Management appears to be sidestepping the related recommendation on this issue by
OED.

Headroom for Private Sector Lending

18.     Noting the Management view that use of currency swaps will increase headroom for
private sector lending, one DEC member asked how the currency swaps would increase the
headroom. INRM staff responded that exchange risk is often too much for a private sector
borrower to bear and currency swap is one of the mechanism ADB has by which it eliminates
the foreign exchange risk for the borrower.

Procurement from Non-member countries

19.      Noting that the Government of India has specifically suggested relaxing procurement
restriction from non-member countries for the PPP projects as the Government of India system
is based entirely on competition, one DEC member asked SARD and COSO to respond to this
suggestion. Country Director, India, stated that the first stage of implementation of a PPP
project is to select a partner to undertake the PPP. Under the model concession agreement, the
partner will have to establish a company under the Indian Companies Act. Thus, the nationality
of the company that will do the project will be Indian. Consequently, there is a difference
between the traditional way of procuring civil works and supplies. The Government of India is
requesting ADB to reconsider the way it applies the procurement guidelines. Principal Director,
COSO, responded that procurement from non-member country is a restriction imposed by the
ADB Charter. He added that COSO is looking at this issue in a creative way. It is an important
issue, particularly given the magnitude of the investment needs. He agreed with the analysis of
Country Director, INRM and added that this is a financial engineering in a grand way and that it
is not a procurement of civil works for a simple project. He further added that COSO is
consulting with ADB's legal department and he was optimistic about a good outcome.

Is ADB Operating in too many states for it to be effective?

20.    While acknowledging that it is important to be present in states where there is poverty, a
member asked if ADB is involved in too many states for its operation to be effective. Is the span
of control optimal? Country Director, INRM responded that until 2003, ADB operation was
focused on selective states. In most cases, these states were considered to be reform minded.
As a consequence of ADB's success in these states, several of them are performing better. He
cited several examples to support his argument. This has allowed ADB to expand its
geographical coverage, which is also the wish of the government.




                                                                                               6
Conclusions

21.   DEC Chair drew the following conclusions from the discussion:

      (i)      DEC noted the rating of successful on the low side. Some members emphasized
               that the report should give prominence to the recent period within the 20 year
               period the evaluation covered.

      (ii)     For better performance, what is important is knowledge, quantity and quality of
               resources.

      (iii)    DEC endorsed the policy of infrastructure led poverty reduction, but wanted
               Management to carefully analyze the consistency between LTSF and MTSII on
               the one hand, and emphasis on rural development and agriculture on the other.

      (iv)     Safeguards are important, but there is need to harmonize safeguard standards.

      (v)      Some members also encouraged the authorities to consider environmentally
               challenging projects.

      (vi)     The problem of coordination between ADB's public and private sector operations
               was emphasized, so was capacity development.

      (vii)    The need for accelerating regional cooperation in South Asia was emphasized.

      (viii)   The question of strengthening the Resident Mission as well as providing
               adequate financial resources was necessary to be resolved before drawing up
               the forthcoming country partnership strategy.




                                                         ASHOK K. LAHIRI
                                           Chair, Development Effectiveness Committee




                                                                                               7
