                   ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                 Operations Evaluation Department




                      SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY

                                       ON

                        PROJECT COST ESTIMATES

                                   July 2004




In this electronic file, the report is followed by the Management response and the
Chairperson's summary of a discussion of the report by the Board of Directors'
Development Effectiveness Committee.
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                          SST: REG 2004-06
Operations Evaluation Department                           (Final)




                     SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY



                                     ON



                      PROJECT COST ESTIMATES




                                   July 2004
                                      ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB           ­       Asian Development Bank
              BAPPENAS      ­       National Planning Agency
              CEA           ­       Central Electricity Authority
              DFI           ­       development finance institution
              DMC           ­       developing member country
              EA            ­       Executing Agency
              FEC           ­       foreign exchange cost
              IA            ­       Implementing Agency
              ICB           ­       international competitive bidding
              ICEF          ­       international cost escalation factor
              IDC           ­       interest during construction
              Lao PDR       ­       Lao People's Democratic Republic
              LCEF          ­       local cost escalation factor
              LFIS          ­       loan financial information system
              NTPC          ­       National Thermal Power Corporation
              O&M           ­       operation and maintenance
              OCR           ­       ordinary capital resources
              OED           ­       Operations Evaluation Department
              PCR           ­       project completion report
              PIB           ­       Public Investment Board
              PPTA          ­       project preparatory technical assistance
              PRC           ­       People's Republic of China
              RRP           ­       report and recommendation of the President
              SC&IDC        ­       service charges and interest during construction
              SDR           ­       special drawing rights
              SES           ­       special evaluation study
              SF            ­       special funds
              TA            ­       technical assistance
              TEC           ­       Techno-Economic Clearance
              TOR           ­       terms of reference
              WCD           ­       World Commission on Dams


                                            NOTE

                            In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.



Director General, Operations Evaluation Department          :       Eisuke Suzuki
Director, Operations Evaluation Division 1                  :       Graham Walter
Evaluation Team Leader                                      :       Carl B. Amerling
Evaluation Team Members                                     :       Walter A. M. Kolkma
                                                            :       Hong Wang

                        Operations Evaluation Department, SS-60
                                         CONTENTS

                                                                                      Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                        iii

I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                      1

II.    OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE                                                              2
       A.   Study Objectives                                                             2
       B.   Scope                                                                        2
       C.   Approach                                                                     2
       D.   Limitations of the Study                                                     3

III.   LITERATURE REVIEW                                                                 4
       A.    Dam Projects                                                                4
       B.    Power Projects                                                              6
       C.    Health Projects                                                             6
       D.    Mineral Resource Projects                                                   6

IV.    MAJOR FINDINGS                                                                    7
       A.   Study of Historical Data on Projects Cost Overruns and Underruns             7
       B.   Study of 220 Projects Completed Between 1996 and 2002                        8
       C.   Survey of ADB Staff and Consultants                                         22
       D.   Country-Level Reports and Case Studies                                      24
       E.   Comparison with 2002 People's Republic of China Study Findings              33
       F.   Study of Cost Underrun Impacts on Loan Cancellations                        34

V.     CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                  39
       A.   Summary Findings                                                            39
       B.   Conclusions                                                                 41
       C.   Recommendations                                                             43




Carl B. Amerling, principal evaluation specialist, and Walter Kolkma, evaluation specialist,
prepared this report. Hong Wang, evaluation specialist, led the mission to India. Agnes Anabo,
senior evaluation officer, and Maria Rosa Ortega, evaluation officer, supported the study with
research assistance in Manila.
APPENDIXES

1.    Analysis of Completed Projects with PCRs                                 47
2.    Analysis of a Sample of 30 PCRs Issued in 1980 and 1981                  58
3.    Analysis of 220 PCRs Issued After 1998                                   60
4.    Analysis on Cost Escalation Factors, Exchange Rates, and Inflation      111
5.    Correlations Between Cost Variations and Some Project Characteristics   117
6.    Analysis of Cancellations of ADB Loans                                  119




 Attachments:    1. Management Response on the Special Evaluation Study on
                    Project Cost Estimates
                 2. Development Effectiveness Committee
                    Chairperson's Summary of the Committee's Discussion on
                    25 August 2004 of the Special Evaluation Study on
                    Project Cost Estimates
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        The large number of Asian Development Bank (ADB) projects that have had either
significant cost underruns or overruns has been an issue in ADB operations for years. An
analysis of projects completed after 1995 indicates that 35% had major total cost underruns and
9%, overruns. Those terms are defined as a minimum of 20% divergence between loan
appraisal estimates and final actual expenditures.

        Although cost underruns may not fully explain loan cancellations, a review of ADB data
is indicative of the problem. Over the past 5 years (1998­2002), an average of $1.22 billion in
loan proceeds was cancelled annually. Amounts canceled have almost doubled in the past
5 years, from $0.62 billion for 62 loans in 1998 to $1.16 billion for 69 loans in 2002. The ratio of
cancellations to loan amounts for closed loans over the same period has fluctuated significantly,
from a low of 10% in 2000 to 29% in 2001.

        Loan savings and cancellations due to cost underruns have an impact on both
developing member country (DMC) development and ADB operations. For DMCs, loan savings
could have financed additional projects, and for ordinary capital resources (OCR), loans incur
unnecessary commitment fees. For ADB, underruns and overruns indicate an inefficient
allocation of scarce resources.

       Concern about unreliable project cost estimates and the large numbers of projects with
major cost underruns increased after the Asian financial crisis. That resulted in "belt tightening."
Increased constraints on the availability of resources from the Asian Development Fund, and
concern of major borrowers of commitment fees, increased the belt tightening.

Objectives and Scope

        ADB conducted a special evaluation study to (i) determine the major causes of cost
underruns and overruns of ADB projects; (ii) assess the contribution of each major factor to cost
variations, particularly non-robust project cost estimations at loan appraisal; and (iii) recommend
ways to improve the reliability of cost estimates, and to streamline guidelines to address and
share the risk of unpredictable changes in project costs.

         ADB computer databases were quantitatively analyzed to determine country and sector
patterns in cost variations and loan cancellations since ADB began. Both old and new project
completion reports (PCR) were studied to trace the phenomenon over time, and to analyze
relationships among cost variations and several project characteristics. Relevant ADB staff and
consultants were surveyed by questionnaire. Case studies for India, Indonesia, and Pakistan
were conducted as representative projects with large total cost variations in the sectors of
energy, transport, agriculture, and social infrastructure. To examine the differences and
influences of systems and procedures in individual countries, discussions were held with ADB
staff, government, line ministries, domestic experts, and selected executing agencies (EAs) to
clarify related policies, procedures, and requirements on estimating project costs . The study
also reviewed the findings and data from an ADB project cost estimation study carried out by
the People's Republic of China (PRC) Resident Mission in 2002.

Statistical Analysis of Project Databases

       From cost underruns to cost overruns. Significant cost underruns and overruns, over
two distinct time periods, have been incurred since ADB's beginning. Until the early 1980s,
iv


almost three-fourths of the PCRs recorded unweighted overruns averaging 63% of the cost
estimated at appraisal, and about a fourth of the projects had cost underruns, averaging 29%.
After the early 1980s, more than two-thirds of all projects had underruns averaging 26%, and
fewer than a fourth had overruns, averaging 26%. Aggregating all cost variations for the two
periods, the first averaged a 40% overrun per project and the second averaged a 10%
underrun. Projects completed since 1996 had an average cost underrun of as much as 13%.

        Sector and country patterns. A statistical analysis of 220 investment projects for which
ADB issued PCRs from January 1998 to the end of June 2003 showed distinct differences
among sectors. Projects in the three macrosectors--agricultural and natural resources, energy,
and social infrastructure--had larger cost underruns than projects in transport and
communications, and in other (minor) sectors. At a subsector level, the differences were even
larger. There were also distinct differences among countries. Some countries had many more
cost underruns than others, indicating the effect of country-specific factors. Large underruns
occurred in more than half the projects in India, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, and Thailand. On
the other hand, a few countries, particularly the PRC, had a significant portion of projects with
large cost overruns. Despite changes, overall the tendency remains to be underruns. In the
PRC, for example, the number of project cost underruns is increasing, and the PRC is falling
more in line with other countries. In Nepal, on the other hand, the cost underrun phenomenon
may be lessening.

        Cost variations. The study found a relationship between the level of the appraised
project cost and the cost variation: the higher the project cost, the less precise the estimate.
Smaller projects tended to be estimated more accurately. Civil works was the largest base cost
category (50% of base cost and 42% of total appraised cost), followed by goods (22% of total
cost), and other base costs (16%). In addition to the base costs, price contingencies accounted
for an average of about 7%; physical contingencies, 4%; service charges and interest during
construction (service charges and interest during construction, 9%). The analysis showed that
the base costs remained close to the appraisal estimates. Civil works were generally somewhat
underestimated, and other cost categories were generally overestimated (including some that
were overdesigned). The contingencies items, although invoked in practice to supplement the
works component, averaged the same size as the underrun.

        Reasons for cost underruns. Statistically significant positive correlations were found
between the level of cost underruns and the number of scope reductions of a project, the
proportion of local costs in the total cost, the proportion of the local currency component, the
proportion for costs other than civil works, and the proportion reserved for operation and
maintenance. Correlations were not significant between the level of cost variations and other
factors investigated, such as the conduct of a project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA).
PCRs cited exchange rate fluctuations and/or depreciation of the local currency as the main
reason for project cost underruns (44%), plus lower-than-anticipated prices during
implementation (32%). The study assesses that the 1995 change of guidelines for estimating
price contingencies, when applied properly, reduces the influence of exchange rate fluctuations.
(Most projects in the study's sample were designed before 1995.) The new guidelines take into
account both inflation and currency depreciation. But so far, ADB's application of the guidelines
seems to have been inconsistent. An inaccurate estimate of the base cost at appraisal was
mentioned as a reason for cost underruns in almost a third of all PCRs. Price-related reasons
were cited most often (71%), then scope changes (35%), then inaccurate estimation of the base
costs (33%). Other reasons, including natural calamities and peace-and-order problems, were
cited for 38% of all large cost underruns of projects.
                                                                                                   v


        Consequences of cost variations for project success. Sixty-one percent of projects
with large cost underruns were rated successful or highly successful in PCRs, while 76% of
projects with small cost variations, and 80% of projects with large cost overruns, were rated
successful. But the finding that projects with large cost overruns are more successful than
projects with smaller cost variations is relative, because economic and financial internal rates of
return are somewhat lower for projects with large overruns. Cost underruns indicate problems,
rather than efficiencies, with implementation, although for projects in the energy sector, cost
underruns generally indicated higher economy and efficiency.

        Significance of cost underruns. The fiscal consequences of cost underruns as
expressed in dollar value for DMCs may be minor if they are mainly due to depreciation of the
local currency versus the dollar. Apparent gains made due to such windfalls are lost when
repayment of loans starts (usually in appreciated international currency). Cost underruns, when
caused by scope changes requested for by DMCs, may be beneficial from a repayment
perspective. Where cost underruns result from portfolio review decisions to terminate loans (and
thereby, projects) there may be a loss of intended benefits, although other benefits may arise if
the saved loan funds are used for emergency response projects or are reinvested in new
projects in the same country.

Survey of ADB staff and consultants

          ADB staff and consultants ranked the following factors as most important in accounting
for poor estimates of project costs: (i) inadequate information, or information that is difficult to
collect, for accurate estimates of feasibility level costs; (ii) inadequate time and resources given
to ADB staff for detailed review of cost estimates during fact-finding and/or appraisal;
(iii) inadequate resources and time for feasibility studies (PPTA); and (iv) importance attached to
meeting targets for ADB country lending. Staff and consultants were asked to rank a list of
defined factors that contribute to major project cost overruns or underruns. The following
factors, by rank, were (i) poor project cost estimates at feasibility and/or project appraisal;
(ii) inappropriate or poor project design; (iii) major delays in implementation; (iv) because of a
country's programming procedures, relatively fixed loan amounts are often predetermined early
in the project, before enough is known about the optimal size and scope of the project, and
maintained throughout the project processing cycle; (v) a combination of (a) overestimation of
local price contingencies, (b) difficulty in projecting local currency devaluation, and (c) incorrect
estimates of local inflation; and (vi) unforeseen changes in project scope or financing
arrangements, or goods, services, or equipment prices.

Some Country Contexts

        Estimating and budgeting practices for country-specific project costs were found to
impact on the nature of project cost estimates. In India, most feasibility studies are carried out
by EAs and ADB usually does not get involved at this stage. Contingency factors are
government-mandated and different for civil works and equipment. Also of importance may be
the budgetary practice of allowing as much as 50% increase in project costs above the estimate
without further approval, which may de-emphasize the importance of accuracy in initial
estimates. In Pakistan, such allowances do not exceed 15%, but the process for approval of a
revised higher cost is quite lengthy. The governments of both India and Pakistan generally work
with fixed unit prices that, in some cases, are outdated, and can be imprecise with long
distances or in hilly areas. In Indonesia, a three-way system to establish unit rates for all civil
works is widely acknowledged to contribute to systematic overestimation. Contingencies have
usually been set at about 20% of project cost. The decentralization of project preparation
vi


responsibilities to districts with little such capacity, in the late 1990s, is likely to impact on the
quality of cost estimates.

        Other factors played an important role in the level of cost overruns and underruns in the
three countries, illustrating difficulties inherent in cost estimation. In India, local manufacture of
equipment increased over the 1990s, and contributed to a price slump, which led to cost
savings in many projects. This also occurred, to a lesser extent, in Pakistan and Indonesia.
Increasing competition from local construction companies lowered bids more than expected in
all three countries. An international slump in prices of equipment and materials in some sectors,
especially the power sector, also had its effect. In Pakistan, inflation in the early 1990s was
consistently higher than ADB had predicted through its local cost escalation factors, although
few project cost estimates took into account the effects of depreciation of the Pakistan rupee
against the dollar. In combination with the generally high proportion of local costs in the total
project cost, these factors led to large cost underruns. The Asian financial crisis in 1997­98 led
to a large unforeseen depreciation of the rupiah against the dollar, and to declining prices when
expressed in foreign exchange terms.

Effect on Loan Cancellations

        The predominant trend of cost underruns has had a major impact on loan disbursement.
Although cost variations tended to cause an unweighted average underrun of 13%, loan
cancellations averaged about 18% over the past decade. This demonstrates the attempts of
governments to economize on loans rather than on their own funding of projects. In some
cases, other funding sources took over part of the project financing, so portions of the ADB loan
were canceled. Other external agencies played a role, but so did the increasing availability of
alternative financing sources in some DMCs.

Conclusion and Recommendations

        Significant underruns and overruns of actual project costs against the original cost
estimates have occurred throughout ADB's existence. In the initial years, cost overruns
predominated. But since the 1980s, cost underruns have become predominant. Important to the
shift seems to have been (i) the smaller proportion of civil works components in later projects,
(ii) a gradual shift in sector composition of ADB's portfolio and, possibly (iii) ADB staff's
experience with the preparation of supplementary loans. Over the years, capital investment
components in projects have become more standardized and better estimated. Projects have
been designed with larger components for training, institutional development, and operations
and maintenance (O&M), which in practice tended to be overdesigned (as compared with real
demand from executing agencies). Overall, cost estimation is better than in ADB's first 10­15
years, but there appears to have been a tendency to overdesign certain smaller or softer
components, and to overestimate a number of costs. This more than counterbalances the
general underestimation of the cost of civil works. Project designs and project cost estimates
can be improved, but that partly depends on resources. Nevertheless, unforeseeable factors are
important in cost variations, and some degree of cost variation is likely to remain a fact of life.

The main recommendations (see Section V) from this study include

       (i)     To improve estimation processes for project costs, it is essential that adequate
               resources, in both time and money, be allocated by borrowing DMCs and ADB to
               conduct the required analyses. More resources are required, especially for
               preparation of larger projects. Better project design and cost estimates can be
                                                                                         vii


        expected to lead to smoother implementation, fewer loan cancellations, and more
        positive results from loan portfolios.

(ii)    Improvements in estimating project costs are possible with (a) more rigorous
        consideration of inflation and depreciation factors in the estimates (i.e.,
        appropriate application of ADB's guidelines on price contingencies); (b) more
        thorough consideration of sectoral and country experiences with cost variations;
        (c) estimating and carefully verifying the real commitment to training and
        institutional development components; and (d) more realistic estimation (i.e., less
        underestimation) of civil works components of projects, as well as O&M
        components of project budget costs (these are usually overestimated). Better
        estimates may, paradoxically, lead to more projects with cost overruns. This may
        require a simpler and quicker process for preparation of supplementary loans,
        and a more sympathetic ADB attitude toward their approval. One option would be
        two-part loans in each report and recommendation of the President (RRP). The
        first loan would be for the base cost. The supplementary loan would also be
        considered as endorsed up to the full amount of the contingencies, plus a 10%
        cost overrun. Management would approve the supplementary loan, if it were
        necessary after the bidding results in the final cost estimate, and report it to
        ADB's Board. But it must be recognized that unforeseen developments cannot
        always be avoided, and that flexibility in project implementation is generally good
        for improved outcomes.

(iii)   Problems during implementation due to poor management are at least as
        important factors as poor cost estimating in explaining cost variations. Increasing
        implementation efficiency and avoiding delays (in other words, paying more
        attention to project administration) will reduce cost underruns and overruns.
        Projects mired in implementation problems should be reviewed early, with a view
        to possible cancellation of part of the loan. The interests of executing agencies to
        avoid such cancellations should be weighed against the borrowers' interests in
        reducing the debt burden. Savings can then be used for purposes that yield a
        return, rather than being tied up nonproductively. For OCR loans, this will also
        reduce the burden of commitment fees.

(iv)    Savings in contingencies could be reduced by providing an option to the
        government/executing agency not to borrow for contingencies (in some projects,
        the government has exercised such an option). This option should be given only
        when the borrowing DMC has demonstrated its capacity and commitment to
        finance contingencies when they arise. For DMCs that lack the capacity to
        finance contingencies, the guidelines on supplemental financing could be usefully
        reviewed, with a view to providing a straightforward and standard procedure for
        ADB management to approve supplemental financing up to the amounts
        estimated for contingencies.

(v)     While some variation due to the nature of each project is understandable, it is
        suggested that the format for presenting project costs in the RRPs be better
        standardized to facilitate monitoring, updating, and subsequent analysis. The
        format for presenting contract packages in the RRPs should enable clear linkage
        to the cost components in the detailed cost table.
viii


       (vi)    A review of the format in which financial information is presented in the PCRs is
               recommended. Statements of costs in US dollars can be misleading during times
               of strong depreciation of domestic currency.

       (vii)   Periodic updating of cost estimates will help in timely assessment of loan
               savings. Consistent with ADB's new thrust toward results-based management,
               standard operating loan administration procedures should require the EAs to
               annually update project cost estimates, which ADB would review thoroughly. This
               would probably require dedicated resources of qualified ADB staff and
               consultants. The use of standard formats to prepare such updates is also
               suggested. There is also a need for the EAs to maintain accurate data on
               package-wise costs.




                                                           Eisuke Suzuki
                                                           Director General
                                                           Operations Evaluation Department
                                            I.       INTRODUCTION

1.      The large number of Asian Development Bank (ADB) projects with either significant cost
underruns or overruns has been a problem in ADB operations for years. For all projects with
project completion reports (PCRs) circulated from 1965 to mid-2003, about 57% (516 projects)
reported an average cost underrun of 26% of total project cost. During the same time, cost
overruns were a problem in 39% of the projects (347 projects), with an average overrun of
39%.1 More recently, based on PCRs issued from 1998 to mid-2003, 73% of all projects (166)
had cost underruns that averaged 25%, and 24% of the projects had average cost overruns of
16% (Appendix 1, Tables A1.1 and A1.2). Thus, a trend toward project cost underruns has
clearly emerged,2 while cost overrun problems have lessened.

2.      Cost underruns and overruns are defined as the difference, or variation, in the estimate
of costs upon which loan approval is based, and the final project cost at completion. Costs are
estimated as part of the preparation of a project, which will be initiated by executing agencies
(EAs). ADB helps these agencies if the project is to be funded or co-funded by an ADB loan.
The costing then goes through a process that first includes a feasibility study, which the EAs
can then finance and conduct, or that ADB can finance from grant funds and have conducted by
consultants. If the project is feasible, ADB will appraise it to ensure that it is technically,
financially, and economically viable, and to determine required financing by the government,
ADB, and/or other sources. ADB has specific practices, rules, and guidelines for project costing
to ensure systematic approaches.

3.      Although cost underruns may not fully explain loan cancellations,3 a review of ADB data
is indicative of the problem (Appendix 1, Tables A1.3 and A1.4). Over the past 5 years (1998­
2002), an average of $1.22 billion in loan proceeds was canceled annually (that includes
ongoing loans). The amounts canceled have almost doubled in the past 5 years, from
$0.62 billion for 62 loans in 1998 to $1.16 billion for 69 loans in 2002. The ratio of cancellations
to loan amounts for closed loans over the same period has fluctuated significantly, from a low of
10% in 2000 to 29% in 2001, with a weighted 4 annual average of 18% ($840 million).

4.       Loan cancellations due to cost underruns impact both developing member country
(DMC) development and ADB operations. For the DMCs, smaller original loan amounts due to
lower cost estimates could have financed additional projects. Also, ordinary capital resources
(OCR) loans with cancellations have involved the financial burden of commitment charges and
front-end fees on the canceled portions of the loans. For ADB, loan cancellations indicate an
inefficient allocation of scarce resources. Projects with cost overruns may lead to uneconomic or
lower-than-projected returns.




1
    Figures exclude development finance institution (DFI) projects and program loans. Average percentage cost
    overruns and underruns are unweighted (i.e., not corrected for differences in appraised cost of projects).
2
    Exceptionally, for 49 projects in the transport sector from 1998 to 2002, 59.2% averaged 20.2% cost underruns,
    and 40.8% averaged 21.1% overruns, on an unweighted basis.
3
    Loan savings at the end of projects are usually canceled and thus, are included with loan cancellations.
4
    This means that loan size is taken into account. The weighted average is the sum of all canceled amounts divided
    by the sum of all loan amounts. The unweighted average is the average of all percentages canceled of all loans.
2


                                     II.      OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

A.        Study Objectives

5.       The main objectives of the Special Evaluation Study (SES) were to (i) determine the
major causes of ADB-financed project cost underruns and overruns; (ii) assess the contribution
of each major factor to cost variations, particularly the non-robust project cost estimates at loan
appraisal; and (iii) recommend ways to improve the reliability of cost estimation, and share the
risk of unpredictable changes in project costs.

B.        Scope

6.      The SES generally focused on projects where the phenomena are concentrated: the
agriculture and natural resources, energy, transport and communications, and social
infrastructure sectors. Excluded were projects with program loans, credit lines, and development
finance institution (DFI) loans, because variations in cost estimates involve other unrelated
issues and would obscure the relevant issues with normal project loans. Projects in India,
Indonesia, and Pakistan were the primary foci of the Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
SES in coordination with relevant EAs.5 A country perspective was deemed important in
determining whether country-specific systemic factors play a special role in cost estimation.
Projects with overruns or underruns of more than 20% in energy, transport, agriculture, and
social infrastructure sectors6 were selected for detailed review and analysis.

C.        Approach

7.      The SES used primary data from project feasibility studies and detailed design studies,
and secondary data from ADB and government sources in the selected countries. Concerned
departments in ADB and DMC EAs helped the SES in reviewing project records and collecting
project cost data and other information. Discussions were held with concerned ADB staff,
government, line ministries, domestic experts, and selected EAs to clarify related policies,
procedures, and requirements on estimating project costs, including contingencies and
reallocation of loan proceeds in improving project cost estimates. Surveys and/or interviews of
relevant ADB staff and DMC officials in the three case study countries were completed by
September 2003.

8.      A quantitative study of ADB computer databases was made to determine country and
sector patterns in terms of the prevalence and nature of cost overruns and underruns. A study
of ADB's project evaluation information system was made to determine broad patterns over the
years. This was followed by a project file study based on a sample of 30 investment projects
completed before 1980, and 220 investment projects completed after 1995, to deepen the
understanding of patterns found. ADB's Loan Financial Information system (LFIS) database was
also studied to determine patterns of loan cancellations over the years.

9.      Case studies in each of the three countries were carried out for representative projects
with large total cost variations (overruns or underruns) in the energy, transport, agriculture, and
social infrastructure sectors. Documents reviewed included feasibility studies, detail design
5
    Although cost underruns has been a significant issue in ADB's lending program for the People's Republic of China
    (PRC), the PRC Resident Mission completed an independent country study on this in 2002.
6
    Projects approved after December 1991 that have PCRs. Projects with major cost variation that have been
    completed (but without PCRs), or almost-completed projects, were also considered if adequate data were
    available.
                                                                                                 3


studies, project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA) final reports, project appraisal
documents, loan documents, reports and recommendations of the President (RRPs), back-to-
office reports, project performance reports, PCRs, and project performance audit reports
(PPARs). The SES attempted to analyze in detail data that had been collected to determine the
impacts of various factors on cost underruns and overruns, make comparative analyses
between estimated and actual costs through desk reviews, determine key reasons for loan
savings and canc ellations, and assess systems and procedures for project cost monitoring by
ADB and EAs during project implementation.

10.      The SES also reviews findings and data from an ADB project cost estimation study
carried out by the People's Republic of China (PRC) Resident Mission in 2002, and incorporates
its findings and recommendations.

D.     Limitations of the SES

11.     To ensure relevance and availability of adequate data, the sample of projects studied
(para. 7) was drawn from those with completed PCRs from 1998 to mid-2003. But loan approval
years for those projects varied from 1986 to 2000, and were concentrated in the period 1990­
1993. The implementation period of most of the projects was from 1991 to 1999. Limited data
were drawn from recently completed or ongoing projects.

12.      The period covered includes the time of the Asian financial crisis and is, therefore,
characterized by highly unusual, and perhaps unforeseeable, changes in local inflation, local
currency devaluations, changes in dollar/special drawing rights (SDR) ratios, and international
inflation and deflation. These conditions may have also induced unusual and unforeseen
reductions in prices of civil works, goods, and service contracts that became common
characteristics of projects with major cost underruns. Perhaps the projects where estimated and
actual costs were close were fortunate, and would have been the subject of the SES under
more normal conditions.

13.     The confidence level on the accuracy of actual project costs is another limitation.
Monitoring of total project costs is often not a main priority of either the borrower's EA or ADB.
Projects carry on for years, often involve multiple components, and are carried out by many
implementing agencies (IAs) based on annual budgets approved in local currency over varying
fiscal year periods. Monitoring exchange rates at the time that thousands of individual project
expenditures occur is usually of little interest to EAs and IAs. Attribution of project costs to EA
and IA budgets, which may be spread over many projects, is difficult. Furthermore, in an
environment where project costs, and corresponding ADB loans, have generally been
overestimated, project cost monitoring becomes even less important because funding for project
completion seems certain. Similarly, neither ADB nor the EAs effectively monitor the actual
percentage of foreign exchange cost (FEC) vs local cost. Percentages are simply assumed to
be those set out in the disbursement schedules in loan agreements.

14.      A number of difficulties were faced in data collection on procurement. Most RRPs do not
have detailed package-wise cost estimates, without which estimated and awarded contract
prices cannot be compared. It was difficult to get this information from project files for past
projects. Cost components in the RRPs varied among projects. There is no unified or mandatory
format for preparing or presenting cost estimates, even for similar type of projects. This makes it
difficult to compare costs across projects. There is no detailed information on contracts for
goods, materials, civil works, or services. EAs often reallocate contracts from one package to
another, but this is difficult to determine. As a result, a project may have many contracts that
4


cannot be identified with the packages envisaged at project appraisal. Some RRPs do not state
all the assumptions (for example, for estimating contingencies). EAs often lack systems for
continuous updating of project cost estimates. So it is difficult to obtain current estimated project
costs on completion. Many EAs have difficulties in understanding the whole project scope as
defined by ADB at appraisal. Often the EAs only regard major subcomponents as the ADB-
financed project and do not include other subcomponents. Sometimes the project scope in the
EA's feasibility study includes only the major subcomponents. This makes it difficult to obtain
the complete cost of a project. Information on bidding to assess the extent of competition is also
hard to obtain, because such information may not be available with the EA in a centralized
place.

15.     The SES proceeds as follows: In section III, the SES reviews literature on cost
estimating for some major and minor types of projects that ADB deals with: dam, power, and
health projects. Also reviewed is one sector--mineral resources--for which ADB does not
normally lend. Main findings are presented in section IV. First, some historical trends are
discussed. Second, findings of statistical analyses of some 220 recently issued PCRs are
discussed. Third is a summary of findings of a questionnaire of ADB staff and consultants,
focusing on their perceptions regarding cost estimating and cost variations. Fourth is a
presentation of relevant findings from case studies in India, Indonesia, and Pakistan. Fifth, the
findings are compared with a 2002 study of loan cancellations from ADB's loan portfolio for the
PRC. Last is a summary of a study of ADB computer databases on loan cancellations. Section
V provides summary findings, conclusions, and recommendations.

                                       III.    LITERATURE REVIEW

A.        Dam Projects

16.     The World Commission on Dams (WCD), in 2001, assessed the effectiveness of actual
practices, and identification of good practices, among the various approaches, methods, and
tools for the financial, economic, and distributional analysis of dams and their alternatives.7
Among findings on the valuation of direct costs of dam projects, the SES showed that dams
often incur substantial cost overruns (not underruns) in construction. Although datasets from the
World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and ADB showed average cost overruns of
20­45% in nominal terms, there was considerable variability in and among the samples.
Resettlement costs were highly variable, depending on site-specific characteristics of the dams
and their environs. There were frequent overruns for reasons such as inadequate survey work
and pull factors that led to immigration following announcement of plans to build dams.

17.    The performance of investment projections is one of the more frequently discussed
aspects of dam projects. A study often cited is that of some 70 World Bank-financed
hydropower projects commissioned from 1965 to 1986, 8,9 in which costs at completion averaged
27% higher than estimated at appraisal. On the other hand, schedule slips were smaller in
hydropower than in other types of projects. The 1996 report of the World Bank Operations



7
    World Commission on Dams. 2001. Financial, Economic and Distributional Analysis. Cape Town.
8
    Bacon, R.W., J. E. Besant-Jones, and J. Heidarian. 1996. Estimating Construction Costs and Schedules:
    Experience with Power Generation Projects in Developing Countries in World Bank Technical Paper 325. World
    Bank.
9
    Bacon, R. W., and J. E. Besant-Jones. 1998. Estimating Construction Costs and Schedules: Experience with
    Power Generation Projects in Developing Countries in Energy Policy 26 (4):317­333. Washington DC: World Bank.
                                                                                                         5


Evaluation Department also calculated cost indicators and selected data for 10 multipurpose
dams; the average cost overruns were 39%.10

18.     Other estimates of cost performance have been gathered or submitted as part of the
WCD process, although none have been analyzed or reviewed as rigorously as those of the
World Bank sample. The Inter-American Development Bank has reviewed its portfolio of dam
projects from 1960 to 1999. Results suggest an average cost overrun of 45%. In a similar
exercise, WCD reviewed the portfolio of large dam construction projects financed by ADB from
1968 to 1999.11 Of 23 completed dam projects, the average cost overrun was 16%. A 1998
review of the African Development Bank's financing of 10 dam projects showed an average cost
overrun of only 2%. McCully 12 submitted a list of dams with cost performance data that show a
247% overrun for 14 projects. Eight projects in India dominated those results, with a 262%
average overrun.

19.     Many reasons cause cost overruns. Bacon et al (footnote 8) group these into three
categories: (i) poor development of estimates and supervision by sponsors, (ii) poor
implementation by suppliers and contractors, and (iii) changes in external conditions (economic
and regulatory). Part of the difficulty in accurately projecting construction costs of large dams is
that the geotechnical conditions at a site (in terms of the quality of rock for foundations of major
structure and tunnels, and for construction materials) cannot be determined precisely until
construction is underway. Discovery during construction of site conditions that are less favorable
than those assumed in the engineering design and construction plans can reveal potentially
large cost overruns. Construction problems encountered also often result in delays in project
commissioning. Among other factors that can lead to commissioning delays are late delivery to
site of essential equipment, unrealistic construction schedules, inefficiencies of contractor and
construction management, labor unrest, and protests and legal challenges by affected groups.
Commissioning delays lead directly to increases in interest on funds borrowed for construction,
and to delays in revenues accruing to owners from the completed project.

20.     The above examples include projects with both cost underruns and cost overruns. For
example, in the ADB dataset, 16 dam projects had cost underruns, averaging 16%. Considering
then that both overruns and underruns occur, the causes of divergence from projected costs
(whether as underruns or overruns) are (i) schedule slip; (ii) divergence of actual inflation rates
from projected inflation for project inputs; (iii) changes in project components
(inclusion/exclusion of projected components); (iv) changes in dam design (due to technical,
social, environmental reasons); (v) geotechnical variations; and (vi) ?natural disasters and civil
disturbances.

21.     Bacon and Besant-Jones (footnote 9) conducted an econometric investigation of factors
that determined cost overruns in the World Bank dataset of hydropower projects. The study
found that half of the hydropower cost variations could be explained by technical characteristics
of the dam, size of the project, and economic factors such as price inflation. The other cost
variations could not be systematically explained, so are attributed to uncertainty. Regarding how
to reduce the difference between estimates of construction costs at project appraisal and actual
costs, the study points out a problem: the samples have a large variance, so the simple
expedient of multiplying the estimated cost by an adjustment factor to overcome bias in cost

10
   Operations Evaluation Department. 1996. World Bank's Experience with Large Dams: A Preliminary Review of
   Impacts, Vol. 1. World Bank: Washington, DC.
11
   Lagman, A. 2000. Notes on Survey of World Bank Practice on Economic Analysis of Large Dams. Cape Town.
12
   McCully, P. 1999. Cost and Time Overruns for Dam Projects. Cape Town.
6


estimation will not significantly improve the reliability of cost estimates. The study concluded that
more sophisticated methods of estimation are required, based on straightforward application of
probability distribution of construction costs for this type of project. But not even these
approaches eliminate a substantial residual uncertainty about the reliability of estimates of the
cost of large dam projects.

B.        Power Projects

22.      A 1996 World Bank paper examined estimates of construction costs and schedules for
64 thermal power plants and 71 hydroelectric plants approved for World Bank financing from
1965 to 1986 (footnote 8). The paper assessed reliability of the estimates and identified factors
that were significantly associated with their bias and uncertainty. The paper's conclusions
included (i) the average estimating error among projects as a whole was too large to be ignored;
(ii) the estimated values were significantly biased below actual values, and the accuracy of
estimated values had a large variance; (iii) the performance of cost estimates was far better for
thermal power projects than for hydropower projects, but schedule estimates were similar for
the two groups; and (iv) the performance of estimated values could be related to a number of
indicator variables through regression analysis, and these regressions could be used to derive
expected values with less uncertainty than the corresponding estimated values.

C.        Health Projects

23.   In 1997, OED prepared an Impact Evaluation Study of Bank Assistance in the Health
and Population Sector in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, and Sri Lanka. The study
was based on seven completed health projects, all approved during the first half of the 1980s.

24.     Implementation of all seven projects was delayed from 1 to 4 years (20­124% time
overrun). Except for the Second Rural Health Services Project in Papua New Guinea (cost
overrun of 4.7 %), the projects, despite substantial delays, were completed at lower costs than
estimated at appraisal. The cost underrun ranged from 3.4% in the Health and Family Planning
Services Project in Bangladesh to 39.6% in the Health and Population Project in Pakistan.
Overall, the average cost underrun for the seven projects was about 24%. The main reasons
cited for the cost underruns were reduction or cancellation of project components, and savings
from devaluation of local currencies, and high provision for contingencies set during appraisal.

25.    The implication of cancellation of project components during implementation is
noteworthy in assessing the impact of ADB assistance. The impact on capacity building would
be lessened by canceling the component on training and related consulting services, as in the
Second Health and Population Project in Pakistan. Similarly, cancellation of the financing of part
of the DDT supplies in the Public Health Program in Bangladesh reduced the effectiveness of
the malaria campaign--malaria subsequently increased (although one could argue that the
cancellation lessened the long-term adverse impacts on the environment and health of those
exposed to DDT).

D.        Mineral Resource Projects

26.     Although not a sector for which ADB lends, a 2000 study 13 analyzed the estimated
capital cost for 21 mineral resource projects located worldwide and compared the feasibility

13
     Pincock, Allen, and Holt. November 2000. Project Development Costs: Estimates vs. Reality. Pincock
     Perspectives, Issue 12. Colorado, United States.
                                                                                                  7


capital cost estimates against the constructed costs. The projects selected ranged in capital
cost from less than $10 million to more than $1.5 billion. Some of the most striking conclusions
were
        (i)    The actual project capital cost is rarely within 10% of the feasibility study capital
               estimate.
        (ii)   The feasibility study rarely overestimates the capital cost (in only three projects).
        (iii)  Working capital, site earthworks, and environmental and permitting costs are
               often underestimated.
        (iv)   Feasibility study cost estimates appear to be more accurately estimated for larger
               than for smaller projects, on a percentage basis.
        (v)    The average cost overrun was 17%.
        (vi)   Independent cost reviews within 1 or 2 years of completion of the feasibility
               studies were from 5 to 20% closer to the constructed costs than the feasibility
               estimates.
        (vii)  Generally, if the project construction period exceeds the schedule established in
               the feasibility study, the constructed costs will be higher than the estimate.

27.      Several basic problem areas that cause underestimation of project capital costs were
identified from within the engineering companies preparing the estimates, as well as within the
client or owner companies. Some of the problems often encountered relate to
         (i)    insufficient basic engineering to provide feasibility-level accuracy,
         (ii)   insufficient cost estimating skills and poor cost databases,
         (iii)  inexperience in preparing new projects (often a project is the owner's first),
         (iv)   inadequate project management by the engineering firm and the project owner,
         (v)    poor definition of the project and lack of accurate design criteria,
         (vi)   improper accounting for exchange rates and rate changes (price contingencies),
                and
         (vii)  low estimates from engineering firms in order to encourage more project work.

                                   IV.     MAJOR FINDINGS

A.     Study of Historical Data on Project Cost Overruns and Underruns

28.     Historical data show significant cost underruns and overruns since implementation of
ADB's first projects. Of the 964 projects for which PCRs had been issued by mid-2003
(excluding DFI projects), 61% had an average of 26% cost underrun per project (as expressed
in dollar equivalents). Thirty-seven percent of the projects had an average of 38% overrun.
Overruns and underruns fell into two distinct periods: there were many cost overruns up until
late 1984, then mainly cost underruns afterward. In the period to 1984, 28% of all PCRs had an
average of 29% underruns. Afterward, 68% of PCRs averaged 26% underruns. Looking at it the
other way, until 1984, 72% of the PCRs reported an average of 63% overruns; afterward, only
22% of all projects had an average of 26% overruns. Table 1 gives the average unweighted
(footnote 4) cost variations over 5-year periods of ADB's existence.
8


                Table 1: Projects with Cost Underruns and Overruns in Six Periods of
                                            PCR Issuance

    Cost Variation Category       1967­        1980­        1985­         1990­    1995­    2000­
                                  1979a        1984         1989          1994     1999     2003

    Projects with PCRs               38          127          169           237     220       173

    Projects with Underruns           6           40          119          164      132      131
    Average % Cost Underrun        37.7         17.2          28.9         28.6     23.6     23.0

    Projects with Overruns           32           87            50           70       81       33
    Average % Cost Overrun         68.3         61.3          44.9         22.6     18.9     18.5

    Projects with No Variation        0             0            0            3        7        9

    Average % Cost Variationb      51.6         36.6          (7.1)       (13.1)    (7.2)   (13.9)

PCR = project completion report.
a
  Only three PCRs were issued in the period from 1967 until late 1974.
b
  Negative value indicates unweighted average project cost underrun.
Source: Asian Development Bank's Project Evaluation Information System.

29.     Study of cost characteristics of a sample of 30 projects with PCRs issued in 1980­1981
(Appendix 2) and their comparison with later projects suggests the following explanations for the
high cost overruns in ADB's early years: (i) a larger focus on ambitious construction projects,
such as irrigation works and power plants, for which prediction of the final cost tended to be
more difficult; (ii) a greater overall focus on capital investment components in projects rather
than human resources or institutional development; (iii) the major rises in oil prices in the early
and late 1970s, coupled with the increasing cost of materials and equipment; (iv) ADB's
increasing experience with project cost estimating, leading to generally lower cost variations that
became noticeable after the early 1980s; and (v) experiences of ADB staff with the preparation
of needed supplementary loans. The reluctance to prepare supplementary loans, partly because
of the amount of work involved and partly because of the difficulty of getting them approved,
may have gradually led to more generous estimation practices, erring on the safe side
(para. 62). The reduction in dollar inflation may also have played a role.

B.         Study of 220 Projects Completed from 1996 to 2002

           1.       Scope and Methodology

30.      In the light of the preponderance of cost underruns over the past 20 years or so, a
statistical analysis focusing on cost underruns was conducted to quantitatively document a
number of characteristics of investment projects completed since 1996, and to investigate their
relationships with cost variations. Of special interest were features such as the projects' size,
duration, sector, country, funding sources, estimated and actual costs by expenditure category,
complexity as measured by numbers of components and scope changes, specific reasons given
for time overruns, loan cancellations and cost underruns, project success ratings, and economic
and financial internal rates of return.

31.     All investment projects completed in the period 1996 through 2002 were included that
(i) had PCRs issued in January 1998­June 2003, and (ii) were typical investment projects or
sector investment projects (program loans and DFIs were excluded) (Appendix 1, Table A1.1).
For all projects with cost underruns or overruns of more than 20%, additional data were entered
                                                                                                                      9


regarding scope changes, reasons for loan cancellations, cost underruns, and time overruns.
The resulting grouping of 220 projects was subjected to standard statistical analysis and is
summarized below. Appendix 3 discusses, in detail, the statistical analysis of sample PCRs, and
explains methodology and limitations.

32.     Project cost estimates ranged from $0.9 million to $2,976 million. The average project
size was $178 million; the median value was far lower, $73.5 million. That means there was a
large group of small projects and a smaller group of large projects. There were also some
striking differences between averages in the various sectors. Figure 1 gives an overview of
project cost appraisal averages by macrosector, including some detail regarding breakdown of
the costs. In ADB's system, costs are usually divided into two parts: (i) the base cost, usually
consisting of works, acquisition of goods, and other cost items;14 and (ii) additional costs,
consisting of price and physical contingencies and service charges and interest during
construction (SC&IDC).
                      Figure 1: Average Appraised Project Cost per Macrosector




             AN = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, OS = other sectors, SC/IDC = service
             charges/interest during construction, SI = social infrastructure, TC = transport and
             communications.




33.     Energy projects had by far the highest appraised cost; social infrastructure-oriented
projects had the lowest appraised cost. Transport and communications projects were the
second-highest in cost. Between the two extremes were other sectors such as multisector
projects, emergency projects, and finance or industrial projects.

14
     Other base costs usually consist of such budget items as (in decreasing average cost) (i) capital goods (although
     used in a few projects); (ii) consulting services; (iii) institutional development and strengthening; (iv) land
     acquisition and right of ways; (v) taxes and duties; (vi) incremental administrative costs; (vii) training and
     fellowships; (viii) survey, investigation, design, and mapping; (ix) implementation assistance; (x) initial working
     capital; (xi) research and development (including extension and demonstration); and (xii) financing of
     nongovernment organizations.
10


           2.                 Appraised and Actual Costs

34.     Figure 2 compares the actual total project costs recorded at project completion with
estimates at appraisal. Only a small category of other sectors, comprising 13 sample projects,
had significant weighted average cost overruns.15 This may be due in part to quick and rough
cost estimating techniques often used, because of necessity, for the many emergency response
projects in this macrosector. All major macrosectors registered weighted average cost
underruns of 9 to 19%; the variation across all sectors averaged a 14% underrun. But the
unweighted average cost variation differed considerably within macrosectors (Figure 3),
because the sample project size was not distributed normally and included a large group of
relatively small-sized projects and a smaller group of far larger projects. The overall unweighted
average of 13% was, however, close to the weighted average of 14%.



                                            Figure 2: Appraised and Actual Costs

                              500
                                                431.5
                              450
                              400
                                                    351.4
                              350
                              300
                  $ million




                              250
                                                                          192.9
                              200                                                 169.3                177.9
                                                                                               145.7           153.2
                              150                                                         119.3
                                                                     `
                                    80.8 73.8               78.1
                              100                                  65.8

                               50
                                0
                                      AN          EN           SI            TC             OS            All
                                                               Macrosectors

                                                   Appraised Cost          Actual Cost

             AN = agriculture and natural res ources, EN = energy, OS = other sectors, SI = social
             infrastructure, TC = transport and communications.




15
     See footnote 4 for an explanation of weighted and unweighted averages.
                                                                                                11


                  Figure 3: Average Cost Variation Against Appraised Cost

            25%
            20%
            15%
            10%
             5%
             0%
            -5%       AN           EN          SI          TC           OS         All
           -10%
           -15%
           -20%
           -25%
           -30%
                                                Macrosectors
                                    Average Weighted Cost Variation (%)
                                    Average Unweighted Cost Variation (%)


         AN = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, OS = other sectors, SI = social
         infrastructure, TC = transport and communications.




35.     Differences between the average weighted and unweighted cost variations were large,
particularly for the transport, agriculture, and other sectors. In the transport sector, the number
of projects with large overruns (defined as projects with overruns >20% of appraised cost) was
almost as large as the number of projects with large underruns (defined as projects with
underruns <20%). In other sectors, there were as many projects with large underruns as with
large overruns. In the agriculture, energy, and social infrastructure sectors, projects with large
cost underruns outnumbered those with large cost overruns. Figure 4 gives an overview of this.
The samplewide proportion of projects with large underruns was 35%; the proportion of projects
with large overruns was 9%. In other words, more than 1 in 3 projects implemented in the 1990s
had a large cost underrun, and 1 in 11 had a large overrun (the remaining 56% of the projects
were roughly within the estimates).
12


                 Figure 4: Projects with Cost Variations > and < 20% of Appraised Cost




                AN = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, OS = other sectors, SI = social
                infrastructure, TC = transport and communications.




           3.       Cost Variations by Category

36.     Works was the largest single cost category in the sample. The average cost for works,
across all sectors, was 50% of the total estimated base cost and 42% of the total cost (Appendix
3, Table A3.2b). Energy, the category with the largest projects, also spent the most on works.
But in relative terms, transport and communications projects spent the largest single proportion
on works (71% of base costs). Goods was the second largest category (23% of base costs),
Other base costs accounted for 27%. Figure 5 shows the proportion of various costs per
category, as well as the volume of contingencies and SC&IDC. Contingencies averaged almost
19% for each project in the sample; 4% for physical contingencies, 6.8% for price contingencies,
and 6.4% for SC&IDC.

37.     In all five macrosectors, including projects with overall cost underruns, the works cost
category generally involved overruns in equivalent dollar terms, indicating systematic design
errors, underestimation, scope changes, or all of those factors jointly. The cost overruns were in
spite of the fact that national companies won most of the works contracts at prices below what
was advertised, and the contracts were paid in local currency, which generally devalued over
the period. Funds to finance these overruns generally came from scope changes, from
reallocations from underspending categories, from contingencies posts, or from a combination
of those factors.16




16
     But such reallocations are not generally documented in PCRs.
                                                                                                         13



                   Figure 5: Appraised and Final Average Cost per Macrosector




                AN = agriculture and natural resources, AC = appraised cost, EN = energy, FC = final
                cost, OS = other sectors, SC/IDC = service charge/interest during construction, SI =
                social infrastructure, TC = transport and communications.




38.    Findings were the opposite in most other cost categories. Although overall final costs in
the goods category remained close to their original estimates, there were underruns rather than
overruns in most cases. Base costs other than works and goods were significantly lower than
appraised, except for sectors other than the four macrosectors.

39.      The total base costs were somewhat higher than the appraisal estimates in the
agriculture and natural resources macrosectors. But in the energy, transport and
communications, and social infrastructure macrosectors, the size of the overall cost underruns
was so large that it implied an underrun even on the appraised base costs (which do not take
inflation into account). On average, the actual base costs incurred stayed in line with the base
costs calculated at appraisal. This was in spite of the fact that, given an average of about 7%
inflation and expected cost escalation, the actual base cost should have been about 107% of
the estimate, without price contingencies. This finding points to (i) modest general
overestimation at appraisal, and (ii) the possibility that the physical contingencies and part of the
price contingency line item for these categories are seldom needed if costs can be reallocated
among other categories.17

40.    Figure 6 indicates the degree of cost overruns in individual cost categories. The
horizontal 100% line indicates an actual cost of 100% of cost estimated at appraisal.
Percentages above the horizontal line indicate cost overruns and percentages below the line,
cost underruns. Several cost categories in different sectors had both underruns and overruns.

17
     An average of about 8­9% overrun on the base cost would be expected, because actual base costs would
     normally use part of the price contingencies to deal with international and, possibly, local inflation.
14


But in all sectors, costs for civil works were higher than the 100% line and could, therefore, be
seen as having been underestimated at appraisal. 18 The cost category of SC&IDC was usually
under the appraisal estimate, and approximately proportional to the underrun on the overall
cost, except for the agriculture and natural resources macrosector, where the actual SC&IDC
cost was far higher.19 Perhaps the higher-than-average delays in projects in this macrosector
contributed to this.

        Figure 6: Actual Cost as % of Appraised Cost per Sector and Cost Category




          AN = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, OS = other sectors, SC/IDC = service
          charge/interest during construction, SI = social infrastructure, TC = transport and
          communications.




41.      The quantitative analysis above shows that projects with large works components were
associated with more cost overruns and lower loan cancellations. This finding is in line with the
literature reviewed in section III of this report regarding projects with large works components
such as dams and power plants. Projects with major cost overruns had a far higher proportion of
civil works than projects with major underruns. These patterns suggest a tendency to
underestimate the cost of works. Conversely, projects with smaller works components had
relatively larger cost underruns and larger loan cancellations. The higher the equipment and
materials or goods component in a project--or consulting services costs, administration, and
other non-works costs--the higher were the loan cancellations. The level of error in estimating
cost of goods was neither higher nor lower than that of other costs. But when the goods were
subdivided into equipment and materials, the latter cost was generally underestimated, although
the equipment cost was overestimated. Similarly, the cost of most of the other categories was

18
   As indicated in footnote 17, a slight overrun of about 4% was to be expected, to account for international and,
   possibly, local inflation. Works averaged 42% of the total cost. But the actual overrun was almost 9%.
19
   The "others" sector also indicates an overrun on SC&IDC, but this may be related to the fact that, on average,
   there were cost overruns.
                                                                                                                   15


overestimated. Such costs are usually far less in ADB-funded projects. Each such cost, when
calculated individually, was less than an average of 8% of the total base costs. An inaccurate
estimate on any component usually had relatively little influence on the final cost Consulting
services in any sector, for example, averaged no more than 6%; training and fellowships
averaged 8%; institutional development, 6%; operation and maintenance (O&M) (recurrent
costs), 7%; land acquisition, 3%; capital goods acquisition, 4%; incremental administrative
costs, 4%; initial working capital, 1%; and taxes and duties, 8%. An overestimate of all these
soft components jointly would, however, make a large difference and render a major cost
underrun more likely.

           4.       The Role of Price Contingencies

42.      Most projects studied were approved before 1995, when price contingencies were
calculated differently than today. The higher contingencies in those estimates, results of
practices used at the time, may have increased the cost underruns and the related loan
cancellations for projects in that period. The calculation of price contingencies within project cost
estimates was not detailed in guidelines until mid-1995. ADB operated more by estimated local
and international price escalation factors for works and goods, rather than by estimates of
effects of possible depreciation of local currencies against the US dollar. Price contingencies
alone accounted for 8.9% of the total project costs appraised before mid-1995 and were high,
regardless of the project sector. The rate at which price contingencies were set in projects
depended largely on (i) ADB's annually recalculated 5-year estimates of price inflation in the
country of the project, and (ii) ADB's estimates for 5-year international price inflation of goods
and works, in dollar values. Price contingencies could be set as high as 25­30% of the total
project cost, especially for countries with projected high inflation and for projects with high local
currency costs. Long gestation projects could worsen overestimates. For countries such as
Pakistan, ADB systematically underestimated local inflation until the mid-1990s. Afterward, ADB
overestimated local inflation, and seldom considered the moderating effects of currency
depreciation against the US dollar. Such circumstances are partly responsible for the relatively
large number of projects started in those years that ended with large cost underruns in 1998 to
mid-2003. Price contingencies were generally lower in countries with more fixed exchange rates
and lower inflation, such as the PRC. Therefore, price contingencies contributed less to cost
underruns. Appendix 4 shows the degree to which ADB's escalation factor approached actual
inflation in India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, and the PRC.20

43.     In June 1995, a new version of ADB's Project Administration Instructions recommended
calculating price contingencies based on the expected inflation and depreciation of the local
currency against the dollar. Although not mandatory, a review of the proportion of price
contingencies in three countries before and after the instruction shows that price contingencies
dropped about 33 to 50% after the instruction. For India, price contingencies went down from an
average of 13.4% before the guideline, to 9.0% afterward. For Pakistan, the respective figures
were 14.6% and 6.2%; and for Indonesia, 10.8% and 6.3%. The new practice should improve
the cost estimate significantly and reduce future average cost underruns by 3­4%, to better fall
into line with lower averages of project cost variations of the World Bank.21 The average cost

20
     Appendix 4 also shows fluctuations in exchange rates between the dollar and special drawing rights (SDR).
21
     For South Asia, the World Bank has an average of 10% underrun; for East Asia and the Pacific, 9%; and Europe
     and Central Asia, 14%. ADB's higher underruns may be attributed to the influence of the price contingency factor,
     plus the usual absence of a budget line for interest during construction (IDC) in World Bank loans. The exact
     reasons for the differences cannot be determined because the World Bank's methodology was not fully reflected in
     the study (World Bank. 2001. 2000 Annual Review of Development Effectiveness: From Strategy to Results.
     Washington DC).
16


variation may go down, with the lower local and international inflation since the late 1990s and
after the millennium, and with lower price escalation factors.

           5.       Reasons for Cost Underruns and Overruns

44.      The statistical analysis also investigated reasons for cost underruns and overruns
quantitatively by (i) categorizing reasons provided by the authors of the PCR narratives, and
(ii) recording characteristics of projects and project processes on a sample basis to determine
which independent variables correlated with the level of cost variation.

45.      Reasons indicated in project completion reports. Reasons given in the PCR were
compiled for a number of projects with large cost underruns (i.e., more than 20% of the average
cost estimate). The main reason was unexpected exchange rate fluctuations and/or
depreciation of the local currency (44%), and the related reason of lower-than-anticipated prices
during implementation (33%). An overestimate of the base cost at appraisal affected almost a
third of such cases. Overall, price-related reasons were mentioned most frequently (71% of the
cases), then scope changes (35%), and inaccurate or over-estimation of the base cost (33%).
Other reasons, such as calamities or non-use of contingencies, were given for 39% of all
projects with large cost underruns.

46.      Correlations between cost variations and project characteristics. Project and
implementation process characteristics were investigated through a Pearson correlation test
(Appendix 5). The main conclusion was that few statistically significant correlations could be
established, and even those were relatively weak. Not surprisingly, the strongest correlation was
between the number of scope changes and the level of cost underrun. The higher the number of
scope reductions reported in the PCR, the higher the chance of a cost underrun. Furthermore, a
positive correlation was found between the proportion of the local cost to the total cost and the
level of cost underrun. This points to the effect of devaluation of the local currency, which has
contributed to smaller loan withdrawals and to computation of lower project costs in dollar
equivalent (although much higher costs in local currency equivalent). 22 Of the individual cost
categories, only works and O&M costs showed definite correlation with cost underruns. The
higher the percentage of appraised civil works costs in the total cost, the smaller the cost
underrun (and the higher the chance of a cost overrun). But when a number of soft costs such
as training, consulting services, and institutional development were combined, a statistically
significant positive correlation was found between cost underruns and the relative size of "soft
components."

47.     Perhaps most notable, the project size had no one-way relation to the proportion of cost
underrun. In fact, the relationship was two-way: smaller projects generally had relatively smaller
cost variations; larger projects had more cases both of cost underruns and overruns, implying
that larger projects are estimated less precisely. Figure 7 illustrates this relationship for three
project categories.




22
     Paradoxically, many projects with cost underruns in dollar terms, had cost overruns in local currency terms.
                                                                                                                       17
                Figure 7: Relation of Appraised Project Cost to Level of Cost Variation


                                  300
                                                                                         $265
                                              $244
                                  250


                      $ million   200


                                  150
                                                                   $122

                                  100


                                   50


                                    0
                                        Cost Underrun >20% Cost Variation <20%   Cost Overrun >20%
                                                     Project Cost Variation Categories




48.     Somewhat counter-intuitive, statistically significant correlations were not established
between cost underruns and factors such as length of the project delay, the number of
extensions, the undertaking of a project preparatory technical assistance before the project,
time that ADB staff invested in preparatory missions, the level of depreciation of the currency,
the complexity as expressed in the number of components, and the absolute amounts of
contingencies of foreign or local exchange costs. This does not mean that such relationships do
not exist, but they may be weak, with large internal variances, and samples may be too small to
establish such relationships with certainty.23

49.     Even in projects without high cost underruns or overruns, big cost variations occurred in
various components. Most projects had at least three components, and overruns on some
components may have been compensated by cost underruns on others. This may also have led
to lower outputs and outcomes than planned. The quality of design and cost estimation is,
therefore, certain to be more variable than is shown by the analyses presented so far. What the
project actually spent and achieved, by component, may differ substantially from what was
planned, even if the project's final cost differs little from the estimate.

           6.        Cost Variations and Project Success Rates

50.    A test was performed with percentage cost underruns and percentage loan cancellations
as independent variables, and some project success variables as dependent variables. Sixty-
one percent of projects with large cost underruns were rated successful or highly successful in
the PCRs. Seventy-six percent of projects with small cost variations, and 80% of projects with
large cost overruns, had such ratings. This indicates that cost underruns are a phenomenon
caused more by implementation inefficiencies than efficiencies. But the finding that projects with

23
     The sample of valid cases was small for the establishment of a statistically significant relation between the level of
     price contingencies and cost underruns. Only 100 of the 220 PCRs distinguished local and foreign price
     contingencies from physical contingencies in the basic data tables. Often, sector projects have no contingencies. In
     some cases, contingencies were subsumed under other line items.
18


large cost overruns are rated more successful than projects with smaller cost variations is only
relative. A study of economic and financial internal rates of return showed that these are
somewhat lower for the large cost overrun category than for the other two project categories. In
fact, projects in agriculture and natural resources, transport and communications, and social
infrastructure have lower-than-average success ratings, indicating negative rather than positive
effect on project outcome from large cost variations (mainly underruns). But for the energy
sector, the relationship is systematically positive, with cost underruns indicating increased
economy and efficiency, and leading to improved efficacy.

           7.      Country Differences

51.     The 220 projects in the sample were in 26 DMCs; 16 DMCs had projects with cost
variations larger than 20% of the appraised cost. Appendix 3 gives the main data and a detailed
analysis of cost variations on a country level, with an outline. Figure 8 shows the patterns of
cost underrun and cost overrun projects in the 10 countries in the sample that had more than
10 projects each. Although most countries conformed to the general pattern discussed earlier
(i.e., more cases of cost underruns than overruns), a few countries had more cost overruns than
underruns. The case of the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) stood out in this
respect, with no case of cost underrun. That is remarkable, considering that the country has had
to deal with a large inflation and depreciation of its currency. On the other hand, the PRC stood
out because of its relatively large proportion of project overruns. Thailand stood out because it
had few projects with no large cost variations, and had both cost underrun and overrun projects.
Sri Lanka and Nepal stood out because they had no projects in the sample with large cost
overruns.24

52.     Figure 9 compares weighted and unweighted average cost variations. Many of the
differences observed were hard to explain, and may have included miscellaneous factors. For
example, Nepal had a large average cost underrun of 26%, but that may change quickly when
PCRs are issued for recently completed projects, many of which have much smaller
percentages of loan cancellations. Conversely, PRC may have a much higher proportion of cost
underruns once a set of PCRs is issued for recently completed projects that had large loan
cancellations. The variety of achievements among A, B, and C category countries (less
developed to more developed) dispels the idea that cost underrun and overrun phenomena may
somehow be related to levels of development. There may be an influence of particular country
contexts on project cost variations, although this could not be studied comprehensively.




24
     Similar differences were found in terms of average project cost variations among countries, varying from an
     average of 27% underrun to 11% overrun. Nepal was the worst case, with an unweighted average proportion of
     -27% cost variation per project; followed by Indonesia, -26%; India, -21%; Pakistan, -19%; Thailand, -19%;
     Bangladesh, -13%; Sri Lanka, -8%; Philippines, -7%; PRC, +1%; and Lao PDR, +11.0%.
                                                                                                       19



                     Figure 8: Percentage of Projects by Cost Variation Category




BAN = Bangladesh, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, NEP = Nepal,
OTH = others, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, SRI = Sri Lanka,
THA = Thailand.




                       Figure 9: Cost Variation Averages for Selected Countries


                     15
                     10
                       5
                       0
                      (5)   BAN IND    INO LAO NEP PAK PHI PRC SRI THA OTH Total
           Percent




                     (10)
                     (15)
                     (20)
                     (25)
                     (30)
                     (35)
                                           Selected Developing Member Countries

                              Weighted Cost Variation (%)   Unweighted Cost Variation (%)


            BAN = Bangladesh, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic
            Republic, NEP = Nepal, OTH = others, PAK = Pakistan, PRC = People's Republic of
            China, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand.
20


53.     Sectoral distribution. Cost variation is, to some extent, related to the project's sector
(paras. 39 and 40). Differences in average cost variations per country may also be partly related
to the nature of those countries' portfolios. Figure 10 shows the distribution of the projects for
the 10 DMCs across macrosectors. The figure shows that although most countries had a mix of
at least four macrosectors, India had only two sectors (transport and energy), and Thailand,
three (mostly energy, but also transport and, to some extent, social infrastructure). The PRC,
another large DMC in terms of projects, had projects in all macrosectors but a large focus on
transport. No obvious relations with sectoral compos itions of portfolios can be discerned.
Countries that had, and did not have, projects in agriculture had large cost underrun averages.
This makes it likely that country-specific circumstances play a role, although not necessarily in
terms of their A, B, or C status.


                  Figure 10: Proportion of Projects by Sector and Country




         BAN = Bangladesh, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic,
         NEP = Nepal, OTH = others, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of
         China, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand.




54.     Estimated and actual project costs. Project costs differed significantly not only
between sectors but also between DMCs (Figure 11). India had the largest projects, followed by
the PRC, then Thailand, whose projects averaged about half the size of those in India. India's
projects have had large cost underruns. The PRC's projects, on the other hand, have had cost
overruns (although mostly modest overruns). In most other DMCs in Figure 11, the average cost
variations tended to cost underruns, except perhaps for the Lao PDR, indicating the pervasive
nature of the cost underrun phenomenon across countries.
                                                                                                   21


                       Figure 11: Appraised and Actual Costs of Projects by Country

                       900
                       800
                       700
                       600
           $ million



                       500
                       400
                       300
                       200
                       100
                         0
                             BAN IND    INO LAO NEP PAK PHI        PRC SRI THA OTH Total
                                           Selected Developing Member Countries


                                       Appraised Total Cost             Actual Cost

        BAN = Bangladesh, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic,
        NEP = Nepal, OTH = others, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of
        China, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand.



55.     Country-specific reasons for cost underruns. Almost all countries with more than
10 projects in the sample mentioned "unpredicted price-related reasons" as an important
explanation for their high levels of cost underruns. Eighty-three percent of the projects in India
were experiencing prices far lower than anticipated during implementation, as well as
unexpectedly competitive pricing by bidders. Exchange rate fluctuations (the depreciation of the
local currency versus the dollar) were mentioned as an important reason for cost underruns,
particularly for projects in Pakistan (69%), and to a lesser extent in India (50%). Figure 12
summarizes the reasons given in the PCRs.

56.     Inaccurate estimates of the base costs were mentioned as reasons for large cost
underruns, particularly in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh. Wrong pricing, lower-than-anticipated bid
prices, and unexpected inflation and depreciation were often mentioned in India, Indonesia,
Pakistan, the PRC, and Thailand. Scope changes, whether additions or reductions, were
secondary reasons in many countries, but were particularly relevant in Pakistan, where 75% of
the projects with large cost underruns had this problem. India, on the other hand, did not
mention change of scope as a reason for large underruns. Similarly, Thailand, in the same
situation with underruns, had only a small proportion: scope changes were mentioned in only
14% of its projects with underruns. Nepal, on the other hand, with seven cases of underruns,
had 43% scope changes. Indonesia, with 17 cases, had 29% scope changes. Other reasons
given for cost underruns, not related to price and scope changes, were of particular relevance to
India (83%). Such reasons included natural calamities or peace-and-order problems. Pakistan
was also affected by such reasons (in 50% of the projects with large cost underruns), and
Indonesia (35%). In Thailand, no case was mentioned where such other factors explained major
cost underruns.
22

                 Figure 12: Projects with Large Cost Underruns: Reasons Given




             BAN = Bangladesh, DMC = developing member country, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO
             = Lao People's Democratic Republic, NEP = Nepal, OTH = others, PAK = Pakistan, PRC =
             People's Republic of China, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand.




C.      Survey of ADB Staff and Consultants

57.      A total of 120 ADB staff and 35 ADB consultants,25 responded to a formal survey
covering (i) project cost estimates and ADB policies and guidelines; (ii) major factors that
account for inaccurate cost estimates and recommendations to improve cost estimates; and
(iii) major factors that cause project cost overruns and underruns, and recommendations for
reducing differences in estimated and actual costs.

        1.        Project Cost Estimates

58.    Combining the responses of ADB staff and consultants, major26 findings of the survey, in
order of importance, were
       (i)     86% of the respondents indicated that over the past 10 years PPTA resources
               that could be devoted to consideration of technical/costing aspects have been
               reduced significantly because the PPTA budgets have remained static, and other
               impact issues have increasingly dominated feasibility team efforts;
       (ii)    77% indicated that PPTA terms of reference (TOR) and resources often are not
               based on actual project study needs, but are influenced more by allocation limits,
               with TORs designed to fit those limits;
       (iii)   73% said ADB seeks more from PPTA TORs than can be delivered;

25
   This represents a response rate of about 19% for professional staff (only staff from relevant departments were
   surveyed), and 39% of ADB consultants who were sent questionnaires. On average, professional staff respondents
   had about 6 years of experience in project processing and 8 years of experience in project administration.
   Consultants had an average of 20 years in project processing in general, and 16 years of processing ADB projects.
26
   Based on "yes or no" responses.
                                                                                                                   23


           (iv)     58% felt constrained in project preparation and cost estimating by indicative loan
                    amounts set at the time of country programming; and
           (v)      56% disagreed with the statement that ADB gives its staff adequate time and
                    resources for project preparation and cost estimation.

59.     On a more positive side, about 69% of respondents indicated that ADB guidelines on
project cost estimating were adequate. But 57% did not think the guidelines were rigorously
followed.

60.     The respondents were asked to rank the importance of a defined list of factors in
contributing to inaccurate project cost estimates. The percentage of respondents indicating that
certain factors were very important or important were:27
        (i)     76%: inadequate or difficult to collect information in DMCs for accurate feasibility
                level cost estimates (i.e., hydrologic, geologic, topographic data; quantity
                estimates; equipment; civil works unit rates, etc.);
        (ii)    67%: inadequate time and resources given to ADB staff for detailed review of
                project cost estimates during fact-finding and/or appraisal;
        (iii)   63%: inadequate resources and time for feasibility studies (PPTAs);
        (iv)    54%: importance attached to meeting ADB country lending targets;
        (v)     33%: lack of use and/or inadequate knowledge of COSTAB 28 by feasibility study
                consultants or ADB staff; and
        (vi)    24%: inadequate ADB guidelines for project cost estimating.

           2.       Project Cost Overruns/Underruns

61.    When asked to rank a defined list of factors accounting for major project cost overruns or
underruns, the respondents indicated that the following factors were very important or important:
       (i)    84%: poor project cost estimates at feasibility and/or project appraisal;
       (ii)   77%: inappropriate/poor project design;
       (iii)  76%: major delays in implementation;
       (iv)   67%: Because of a country's programming procedures, relatively fixed loan
              amounts are often predetermined at a preliminary stage of the project, before
              enough is known about its optimal size and scope. Those loan amounts are then
              maintained throughout the project processing cycle;
       (v)    62%: a combination of (a) overestimation of local price contingencies,
              (b) difficulty in projecting local currency devaluation, and (c) incorrect estimation
              of local inflation;
       (vi)   56%: unforeseen changes in project scope or financing arrangements, or goods,
              services, or equipment prices;
       (vii)  43%: corruption/poor governance issues; and
       (viii) 42%: a lack of total project cost monitoring by the EA or ADB during project
              implementation.

62.        Responses to specific statements on supplementary financing gave the following results:
           (i)   67% of the respondents indicated that ADB guidelines on supplementary
                 financing encourage project processing staff to be conservative (on the high side)
27
     The choices offered were (i) not relevant, (ii) somewhat important, (iii) important, and (iv) very important.
28
     A menu-driven software package to derive detailed project cost estimates, IDC, financing plans, loan allocations,
     and disbursement schedules that the World Bank developed, and was later adapted to ADB guidelines. Most
     financial analysts and project economists received in-house training in COSTAB use in the 1990s. PPTA
     consultants were often encouraged or required to use COSTAB.
24


                    to avoid the possibility of having to seek additional financing during
                    implementation.
           (ii)     65% felt that there is a stigma in seeking supplementary loan financing because
                    of cost overruns.
           (iii)    64%agreed with the statement that flexible interpretation of the policy on use of
                    loan savings can mask projects that would otherwise have major total project
                    cost underruns.29
           (iv)     61% felt that ADB policy on supplemental financing of cost overruns encourages
                    cost underruns.

D.         Country-Level Reports and Case Studies

63.     Studies of estimating projects in country contexts were conducted from September to
October 2003 in India, Indonesia, and Pakistan: among the DMCs with the most projects with
large cost underruns over the past 5 years. The studies were based on field missions that
visited both government oversight agencies and selected agencies that had managed ADB-
cofunded projects with large cost underruns or, in a few cases, overruns. The findings follow.

           1.       India

64.    The case study of India included seven projects with actual costs that varied more than
20% from cost estimates at appraisal. One project had a cost overrun of 22%, while six had
underruns, ranging from 25% to 47% of the appraised cost. All were infrastructure projects; four
were from the energy sector and three, from the transport sector. Four projects were selected
as case studies for detailed review, one each from four subsectors: power, gas, roads, and
railways.30

                    a.       Project Formulation and Cost Estimation Process

65.     The process to formulate and approve projects in India is well defined and consistent
among sectors. The project need is identified by either the principal government agency in the
subsector, or by a beneficiary such as a state. Like with lending operations in the PRC, ADB
rarely finances PPTAs to prepare investment projects at the feasibility level. Rather, the
Government of India approaches ADB to finance projects for which it has already prepared
detailed feasibility studies. ADB generally fields small-scale TAs to review and update the
Indian-financed studies.

66.   For the power subsector, the intended EA, such as the National Thermal Power
Corporation (NTPC), completes a required feasibility study, with the aid of domestic consultants.
NTPC has developed a history of costs from projects with similar machine size and project

29
     "Major" is defined as more than 20% of the total cost estimate at appraisal.
30
     ADB. 1988. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India
     for Unchahar Thermal Power Extension Project. Manila (Loan 907-IND, for $160 million, approved on
     29 September 1988), 46% underrun; ADB. 1993. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
     Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Gas Authority of India Limited for the Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion
     Project and a Technical Assistance Grant to India. Manila (Loan 1285-IND, for $260 million, approved on
     7 December 1993), 44% underrun; ADB. 1990. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
     Directors on a Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance Grants to India for the Second Road Project. Manila (Loan
     1041-IND, for $250 million, approved on 30 October 1990), 22% overrun; and ADB. 1991. Report and
     Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance Grant
     to India for the Second Railways Project. Manila (Loan 1140-IND, for $225 million, approved on 5 December 1991),
     46% underrun.
                                                                                                 25


scope. Contingency factors are applied within government-mandated limits, generally about 1­
3% for equipment, and as much as 10% for civil works. After internal clearance, the proposed
project then goes to the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) for review. CEA issues a techno-
economic clearance (TEC) for the project to proceed. Once the TEC is obtained, the project is
proposed to the Public Investment Board (PIB). Depending on the project, the PIB may require
a public consultation process, and may propose alterations to the project scope. For the
Unchahar Thermal Power Project, PIB required the addition of flue-gas desulphurization or at
least, allowance for its addition. After PIB clearance, a large project may still require cabinet
approval before initiation.

67.     While the EA may discuss a project with possible financiers, ADB only becomes involved
after approval. When a TA is provided, it is usually to transfer the feasibility study information
into a format acceptable to ADB. The ability to alter the cost estimate appears limited once it
has government approval.

68.    The process was similar for the gas subsector project, but that has now changed. The
Gas Authority of India Ltd was given Navaratna status in 1998. That means the company, as a
commercial entity, can make investment decisions without full government oversight. Initially,
there was a ceiling of Rs4 billion, but it has now been removed.

69.    In the transport sector, there is central agency oversight of project cost estimates. The
process for the roads subsector reflects that in the power sector. Projects are reviewed and
approved, if required, by the line ministry, PIB, the Ministry of Finance, and Cabinet. The
approval process for the railways subsector is slightly different. In railways, the rail budget is
separate from the Government of India budget. After approval by the Ministry of Railways, the
Railways Committee clears projects for implementation.

70.     Cost estimates for the transport sector are more indicative than for the energy sector,
with only prefeasibility work required. The justification for this is because transport projects are
less complex. Projects completed to date have usually had large components involving
refurbishment or upgrading of existing facilities, so the project content is well known and the
project scoping risk is low. Road and railways projects also tend to be largely based on basic
commodities and labor costs that are more readily assessed than higher technology
components.

71.    The Government allows as much as 50% increase in project cost above the estimate
without further approval. This allowance, along with consistent implementation delays, de-
emphasizes the importance of accuracy in the initial feasibility study estimate.

               b.      Factors That Impacted on Project Cost Performance

72.     Cost overruns. The road case study project reviewed was the only project identified
with an actual cost of more than 20% higher than that estimated at appraisal. For the second
road project, inadequate project formulation led to massive cost underestimation. The project
cost overrun was 22% higher than the appraised estimate. All contract packages that were
awarded exceeded the estimated costs significantly. The price increases and contract variations
during construction averaged 93% of the original contract amounts. The cost overrun was
mitigated, somewhat, by a 4-year implementation delay and progressive depreciation of the
Indian rupee against the US dollar, from 17.94 at appraisal to 43.32 at completion.
26


73.     The unit rates applied in the feasibility study were inadequate, because they did not
reflect market rates. They were state-based Public Works Department rates that should have
reflected the best available local knowledge when the estimate was prepared. But the large
margins between estimated and actual rates indicate that unit rates were either out of date, or
poorly formulated or applied. The small-scale PPTA31 concentrated on survey of the roads and
assessment of current and predicted traffic volumes. In review, the PCR32 stated that the traffic
volume measurement was incorrect, and the survey insufficient.

74.     Cost underruns. Review of the three case-study projects with cost underruns show
common factors that impacted on the projects and led to more than 40% underruns. The main
factors are interrelated and, in decreasing order of overall impact, are as follows:

75.    Lower-than-expected procurement costs. Low procurement costs, in both domestic
and international contracts, were the main driver for the significant underruns observed. In the
energy sector in particular, procurement for scheduled and contracted amounts was lower than
base cost estimates in real terms. Low procurement costs resulted in unused physical and price
contingencies, and reduced IDC. Delays in implementation and depreciation of the Indian rupee
against the US dollar, magnified impacts of low procurement costs.

76.    Actual costs for some base cost subcomponents increased, but in each case those costs
were more than compensated by lower costs for the remaining subcomponents. The low
procurement prices were not considered a consequence of poor feasibility studies or cost
estimates. The methodology for cost estimation in India adheres rigidly to national standards
oversight by central government departments. Although this could lead to conservatism, the
projects were generally implemented as appraised, with similar quantities and ratings. Overall,
the identification of scope was appropriate for feasibility design. The unit rates utilized available
knowledge, and the process of using government-published rates for local components proved
acceptable.

77.     The three projects shared a common procurem ent period, from 1994 to 1997 when
contracts were let. In discussion with the EAs, the period was viewed as unusual. In the energy
sector, competition was strong internationally, because demand for new plants was low. In the
domestic market, excess manufacturing and civil construction capacity was evident by the low
power plant demand and the power privatization process. Privatization had not resulted in the
number and size of projects expected by the market. These factors meant intense competition
and competitive locally produced goods. In the gas project, steel was a major component and,
against the inflationary trend, steel prices were on a downward trend, affecting bid pricing. In the
transport sector, the second rail project was affected by low bid prices, reported as due to
competition and reduction in procurement scope.

78.     Successive depreciation of the Indian rupee against the US dollar. During the
1990s, depreciation of the rupee reduced the local currency cost in dollar equivalent. This factor
either led to, or strongly impacted on, other factors that caused underruns. Procurement prices
in dollars were cheaper because of depreciation, particularly when procurement was delayed.
Contingency and IDC requirements were reduced, in local currency, by the increased buying
power of US dollar funds. Taxes and duties were reduced in absolute terms when expressed in
dollars.

31
   ADB. 1989. Technical Assistance to India for Second Roads. Manila (TA 1164-IND, for $100,000, approved on
   9 June 1989).
32
   ADB. 2000. Project Completion Report on the Second Road Project in India. Manila.
                                                                                                   27



79.    There is no evidence of allowances made for local rupee depreciation in the project cost
estimates. The price contingency for all projects appears to be what was required to allow for
the constant 8% local escalation assumed during the period; there is no explicit statement of
allowance for variation in exchange rates. Project cost estimates are stated with definite
reference dates and assumed exchange rates.

80.     As PCRs note project costs referenced to the PCR date, the cost details can readily be
reflected to appraisal dates by adjusting local currency costs by the ratio of the known historical
exchange rates. Table 2 shows the estimated impacts of depreciation.

                  Table 2: Adjusted Actual Costs on an Appraisal Year Basis

                   Project                   PCR Reported Actual Cost     Adjusted Actual Cost
                                                 Total    Date of PCR     Total         Date of
                                              ($ million)               ($ million)    Appraisal

    Unchahar Thermal Power Extension             301       Sep 2002        366         Sep 1996
    Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion             560       Dec 2001        608         Aug 1993
    Second Road                                  382       Dec 1999        690         Sep 1990
    Second Railways                              330       Nov 1999        501         Dec 1999

   PCR = project completion report.
   Source: Various project completion reports.

81.    Table 2 shows the profound effect of the depreciation of the rupee on actual project
costs. Depreciation alone reduced project costs by (i) $65 million for the Unchahar Thermal
Power Project, increasing the cost variance from -5 to -46%; (ii) $48 million for the Gas
Rehabilitation   and    Expansion       Project, increasing    the    cost   variance    from
-40% to -44%; (iii) $308 million for the Second Road Project, reducing the cost variance from
+120% to +22%; and (iv) $170 million for the Second Railways Project, increasing the cost
variance from -19% to -46%.

82.     Unused physical and price contingencies. For the three underrun case study
projects, total savings through unused contingencies totaled $352 million, or 16% of the total
estimated cost of about $2,189 million. Contingency savings were significant, despite a
tendency for overrun subcomponents to be reallocated from the base cost totals (with excess
funds), rather than indicated as overruns as funded from contingencies. Even allowing for
incorrect reporting, contingency savings were significant. When projects underran,
contingencies were seen to magnify the effects of base cost savings.

83.     Physical contingencies were not required because generally, there were few scope
alterations to these infrastructure projects. Where project designs varied, in scope, quantities, or
conditions, unexpectedly low bids and consequently, underrun base costs, provided excess for
contingencies. The allowance for physical contingency was generally considered high for Indian
conditions. The ADB guidelines on allowances for physical contingences indicate rates of 5­
10%, whereas Indian practice is to allow 1­3% for internal projects. But balanced against this
low domestic allowance for contingencies, the Government accepts cost overruns, effectively
providing excess contingency funds. In energy projects, as much as 15% overrun is allowed,
without additional approval. In transport projects, the allowance is 50%. Overall, contingency
allowances of as much as 10% for civil works and 5% for equipment are considered appropriate
for ADB projects in India, subject to assessment by the appraisal engineer.
28


84.      Price contingencies were generally not used in the projects reviewed due to underruns in
the base component costs. Price contingencies allow for domestic and foreign inflation, and for
currency exchange variation. The local cost escalation factors (LCEF) that ADB used from 1990
to 1999 were generally consistent with domestic inflation in India, which remained stable at 6­
8% during the period (Appendix 4). Therefore, real local market costs were stable when viewed
from the domestic currency perspective. But when viewed from the dollar perspective, domestic
deflation occurred as the impact of successive depreciation exceeded those caused by actual
inflation. Depreciation had profound effects on local cost components of the case study projects.

85.    Reduced interest during construction. Like for physical and price contingencies,
reduced base costs in underrun projects led to significant IDC savings. For the three underrun
projects, IDC savings were $73.6 million: 39% of the allowance and 3.3% of estimated project
costs. The IDC savings were also partly through reduced domestic interest rates during the
1990s, an effect compounded by reporting of domestic IDC in dollars as the Indian rupee
depreciated. For the gas project, IDC was saved through drawing down of cofinance funds after
commissioning.

86.     Delays in implementation. Implementation delays were not a major factor in energy
projects; the projects were implemented close to schedule. In one project there was a delay of
5 years from loan signing to effectiveness, but the project estimate was reconsidered and the
budget adjusted. Delays are a regular part of transport sector projects, and seem to be largely a
consequence of government policy. In rail and road subsectors, project cost variations of as
much as 50% are permissible. This appears to lead to a situation where projects that run
overtime, in both time and costs, take funds from projects approved in any current year's
budget. This delays startup of new projects, and results in perpetuation of the delay/cost
problem. ADB-funded projects are considered part of the overall program, and are impacted by
the overall environment, ongoing projects, and new projects in the budget. Implementation of
the road project was delayed 4 years and the rail project, 3 years at loan closure. As the rate of
depreciation of the Indian rupee exceeded inflation and allowances made, both transport sector
projects became cheaper over time, when viewed from the US dollar perspective.

87.     Other factors. Reductions in project scope and lower-than-estimated FECs were minor
factors, but still caused cost reduction. Competitiveness and capacity in the domestic market
generally led to a shift toward local procurement. The extent is difficult to quantify due to the
strong depreciation of the Indian rupee during the 1990s, which tends to mask the increased
proportion of local procurement. But each of the EAs indicated that the competitiveness of local
products and substitution of what was seen as expensive international products were features.
Some elements to be procured were removed from the project scope and procured locally or
from non-ADB member countries. Besides reducing prices, this also reduced the administrative
overhead. EAs had some difficulty in meeting ADB requirements for procurement.

           2.       Pakistan

88.     Given the trend toward projects with cost underruns, six case studies of completed or
almost-completed projects with major cost underruns were selected and reviewed in detail for
the case study of Pakistan.33 Two projects were from the agriculture and natural resource
sector, three were from the social infrastructure sector, and one was from the power sector.

33
     ADB. 1990. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
     Technical Assistance to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Sindh Forestry Development Project. Manila (Loan
     1076-PAK[SF], for $41.6 million, approved on 24 January 1991), 50% underrun; ADB. 1991. Report and
                                                                                                              29



                 a.       General Findings

89.     Of the sample of 220 projects with PCRs issued from 1998 to mid-2003, Pakistan had
24, of which 13 (54%) had cost underruns greater than 20% and 1 had an overrun of more than
20%. The proportion of projects with underruns was 35% and of overruns, 9%. The average
unweighted cost underrun for the 24 projects was 19%; the average for all 220 projects sampled
was 12.9%. It is evident that country specific factors have an influence. The analysis points to
three distinguishing factors that may have particular impact: (i) the steady depreciation of the
Pakistan rupee against the SDR and dollar; (ii) a more adverse project implementation context,
leading for example, to greater-than-average problems with project startups; and (iii) more
problems than usual with provision of government/counterpart funds, which slowed project
progress.

90.     Several project case studies with a cost underrun in dollar value had a cost overrun in
Pakistan rupees. Thus, the perception regarding project cost, on the Pakistani side, is quite
different.

91.     During the period 1990­97, ADB projects were prepared using a 6% annual LCEF for
local goods and services (close to the Pakistan Government-approved 6.5% for its own funded
projects), and an international cost escalation factor (ICEF) for international goods and services
that decreased from 4.9% in 1990 to 2.7% in 1994 (Appendix 4). 34 Actual compound wholesale
price inflation, however, was 8.6% per year over the same period, whereas the Pakistan rupee
depreciated against the dollar at a similar compound rate of 8.6% (until 2002 when it
appreciated 5% upward). The ICEF, on the other hand, was underestimated in the first half of
the 1990s, and overestimated in the last half, compared with the actual inflation rate over the
period (taken from the manufacturers' unit value index). The rise in dollar value against the SDR
in 1995­97, then in 1998­2001, also played a role in the frequent loan cancellations for projects
implemented over these periods.

92.    In Pakistan, bids awarded to contractors for civil works and equipment were generally
from 5 to 50% lower than the detailed design estimate (although sometimes, reportedly, as
much as 100% higher). The average was about 10­15% lower. From this factor alone,
substantial cost underruns would generally have to be expected for projects that rely mainly on
contracting of works. In the second half of the 1990s, fewer government-funded projects were


   Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loans to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
   for the Water and Power Development Authority Twelfth Power (Sector) Project. Manila (Loans 1143-PAK and
   1144-PAK[SF], for $250 million, approved on 13 December 1991), 24% overrun on the two components selected at
   loan negotiation, although compared with appraisal which had seven components a 45% underrun; ADB. 1992.
   Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Islamic
   Republic of Pakistan for the Teacher Training Project (Loan 1210-PAK[SF], for $52.1 million, approved on
   15 December 1992), 63% underrun; ADB. 1994. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
   Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Punjab Rural Water Supply and
   Sanitation (Sector) Project. Manila (Loan 1349-PAK[SF], for $46 million, approved on 31 January 1995), 21%
   underrun; ADB. 1993. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan
   to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project. Manila (Loan 1260-
   PAK[SF], for $72 million, approved on 4 November 1993), a likely 55% underrun; and ADB. 1995. Report and
   Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Islamic Republic of
   Pakistan for the Forestry Sector Project. Manila (Loan 1403-PAK[SF], for $42.6 million, approved on 9 November
   1995), a likely 46% underrun.
34
   Individual adjustments were sometimes made in some projects. The Water and Power Development Authority
   Twelfth Power Project assumed 6.5%.
30


approved than before. This may have resulted in more fierce competition among contractors
and lower prices for contracted civil works than in the first half of the 1990s.

93.    As experienced in a growing number of projects in India and the PRC, equipment and
materials for projects are increasingly made in Pakistan, and sell for lower prices. The possible
increasing proportion of ICB contracts for equipment and materials awarded to Pakistani
companies and their payment in Pakistan rupees rather than dollars, combined with the steady
depreciation of the Pakistan rupee, has lowered the dollar value of these contracts, and caused
cost underruns and loan cancellations. The case studies found some evidence of lower-quality
outputs due to the purchase of cheaper Pakistan-made or -assembled goods and equipment. 35

94.     Because of increased local procurement and depreciating local currency, direct FEC has
been overestimated at appraisal in many projects. Projects with a large component of direct
FEC would be affected less by the depreciation of the Pakistan rupee than those with a small
component. Projects with a small component of direct FEC, but with a large component of
indirect FEC, would be more prone to loan cancellations.

95.    Projects with large components for institutional strengthening seemed more prone to
cost underruns and loan cancellations.

96.     ADB's Pakistan Resident Mission indicated that it had taken a more serious view of
proposals for loan extensions in the past 3 years. In the case studies, certain projects had
components that were curtailed or cut off due to their closing after several extensions, even
though their objectives had not been fully achieved. In such cases, cost underruns were related
to early closing of the projects. "Spring cleaning" exercises, to identify likely loan savings in
order to generate funds for emergency response projects and other new projects, may also
have contributed to the closing of loans before full project completion.

97.    Some senior officers mentioned that the recent increase in need for accountability in
Pakistan since the new government took over may have had an unintended negative effect on
behavior of government and project staff. The threat of "audit paragraphs" for projects may have
led to a more rigid, risk-avoiding behavior, less initiative, and concomitant slower progress.
Those factors may have ultimately led to cost underruns, due to ADB's policy of curtailing loan
extensions.

98.     Reasons that the Government gave for cost underruns and loan cancellations were
(i) depreciation of the Pakistan rupee; (ii) delays in startup, in combination with ADB's premature
closing of projects (even after several extensions); (iii) difficult selection of consultants because
of ADB procedures; (iv) too many covenants, which led to delays and cancellation of project
components; (v) a large number of projects that included combinations of policy reforms and
physical outputs; and (vi) bad design, or cost estimations that did not take into account, for
instance, the willingness of communities to contribute to, or pay for part of, the project.

99.     Findings about the financial impact of cost underruns and loan cancellations were
inconclusive. Most of ADB's program in Pakistan was funded through the Asian Development
Fund. Government officers interviewed generally regarded concessional loan allocations that
were not spent and not diverted to other projects as a loss to the country. The Economic Affairs
Division of the Ministry of Finance recommended establishment of a number of standby projects

35
     Locally made water pump used in the Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (Sector) Project would probably
     not meet international standards.
                                                                                                                   31


that could rapidly absorb unspent allocations. On the other hand, it was argued that reduced
loans would lead to less liabilities in the future, although repayment would probably have to be
at higher exchange rates. Cost underruns due to depreciation of the Pakistan rupee were,
therefore, ultimately seen as budget-neutral.

                    b.       Conclusions

100. Depreciation of the Pakistan rupee seems the single most important factor explaining
cost underruns in the sample of projects investigated. The currency depreciation, combined with
increasing reliance on domestic contractors for works and equipment purchase (i.e., growth in
domestic capacity) during the period led to higher-than-anticipated expenditures in local
currency (i.e., less than anticipated direct FEC). Contracts were often awarded at 10­20% lower
than the estimated value, so this also had a distinct impact on overall project costs.36
Uncertainties and design estimates for base costs at the feasibility/appraisal stage were another
important factor, as shown in the above examples. A fourth factor was the slow progress of
projects in Pakistan due to implementation problems, which generally increased costs but, more
important, led ADB to sometimes close loans before all project subcomponents were fully
implemented, and all available funds spent.

           3.       Indonesia

101. During the review period, Indonesia had 17 projects with 20% or more total cost
variation. All projects had major cost underruns, ranging from 22 to 77%. Six projects were
selected for detailed case study: two from the social infrastructure sector, two from the power
sector, and one each from transport and education. 37

                    a.       Overall Project Formulation and Estimation of Costs

102. The National Planning agency (BAPPENAS), as Indonesia's single central planning
agency, is responsible for receiving, screening, and approval of all proposals, from all sectors
and line agencies, for funding through bilateral and multilateral agencies. Proposals submitted
by various agencies were required to include indicative costs, which were scrutinized and listed
in line with development priorities set by the Government. BAPPENAS then negotiated with the
funding agencies and assigned appropriate donors for projects. BAPPENAS indicated that it


36
     This does not apply to sector projects. Windfalls due to low contract costs would allow additional subprojects.
37
     ADB. 1991. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and a
     Technical Assistance Grant to the Republic of Indonesia for the Bogor and Palembang Urban Development
     Project. Manila (Loan 1111-INO, for $140 million, approved on 31 October 1991), 24% underrun; ADB. 1992.
     Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Republic of
     Indonesia for the Central Java and D.I.Yogyakarta Urban Development (Sector) Project. Manila (Loan 1198-INO,
     for $150 million, approved on 26 November 1992), 22% underrun; ADB. 1991. Report and Recommendation of the
     President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance to the Republic of Indonesia for
     the Power XXI Project. Manila (Loan 1092-INO, for $300 million, approved on 25 July 1991), 39% underrun; ADB.
     1992. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and Technical
     Assistance Grant to the Republic of Indonesia for the Power XXII Project. Manila (Loan 1172-INO, for $350 million,
     approved on 4 August 1992), 23% underrun; ADB. 1993. Report and Recommendation of the President to the
     Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Republic of Indonesia for the Third Local Roads Project. Manila
     (Loan 1232-INO, for $200 million, approved on 25 May 1993), 29% underrun; and ADB. 1995. Report and
     Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Republic of Indonesia for
     the Senior Secondary Education Project. Manila (Loan 1360-INO, for $110 million, approved on 18 July 1995),
     41% underrun.
32


was undergoing a transition process. BAPPENAS still maintains its core capability in all sectors
of development, and has professionals in most sectors.

103. Despite the goal of regional autonomy, loan-funded projects are still processed through
BAPPENAS. All loans are sovereign and made to the government, not directly to the districts.

104. Responsibility for project formulation is now being shifted to the district level. But the
districts have not historically had this responsibility, and often cannot cope with it. Their
institutional capacity and ability to prepare proposals and projects is limited and will remain so in
the near future. Institutional capacity for preparation of proposals and projects at the district
level should be initiated on a massive scale.

105. Costs for all civil works for projects in Indonesia are established using what is locally
known as the "three-way system":
      (i)     The Journal of Building Construction and Interior Prices, published by the
              Department of Public Works, gives the primary basis for unit costs of all civil
              works, and is widely used for preparation of EA estimates. The journal is
              published every 3 months and gives current local unit costs for civil works,
              materials, and equipment in various regions and provinces.
      (ii)    Feasibility study consultants establish current local cost rates through market
              surveys, which are then applied.
      (iii)   Consideration is then given to prices in preceding contracts for similar projects.

106. Government and other key informants indicated that, due to time constraints, consultants
usually pay minimum attention to unit prices for cost estimation, and adopt the Public Works
guidelines. The prices and base costs are finalized using the "three-way system." Various
handbooks are used in the establishment of escalation factors, and a final project cost estimate
is reached. If there is substantial discrepancy between the unit prices from these three sources,
then the consultants and the EA meet to decide which prices to adopt.

107. Use of the three-way system is widely acknowledged to contribute to overestimation in
Indonesia. Due to historic reasons of the past two decades, the unit prices in the journal are
said to be about 20% higher than the actual prices. When competitive bid prices come in far
lower than the estimated prices at appraisal, this "cushion" of 20% allows for flexibility for
additional expenditures and disbursements and even then, contributes to a net savings at
closure.

108. The standard inclusion of both price and physical contingencies, usually accounting for
about 20% of total cost, has been another significant contributing factor to cost underruns.

109. Major factors in cost underruns. Based on the case study analyses, the following
major factors are considered responsible for significant project cost overruns:
       (i)     Depreciation of the Indonesian rupiah against the dollar. This affected most
               projects in this study strongly because they were implemented during periods of
               heavy depreciation.
       (ii)    Non-use of physical and price contingencies.
       (iii)   Delays in project start up, which often means little physical progress and
               consequently, low levels of disbursement during the first 2 years. Even with
               extensions, this results in cancellation of components.
       (iv)    In the power sector projects, a global downturn in demand for major components
               resulted in price slumps at procurement.
                                                                                                                   33


         (v)      Reduction in scope. In the Power XXI loan, a major item--the South Bandung-
                  Ungaran transmission line--was canceled.
         (vi)     Strongly competitive ICB and local contract bids resulting in prices far lower than
                  anticipated.
         (vii)    The continuing practice of using the "three-way system" in cost estimation, which
                  has a built-in "cushion" of around 20%. That results in savings because the
                  contract prices tend to be much lower.

                  b.       Conclusions

110. A main cause of major cost underruns was the significant and unanticipated devaluation
of the Indonesian rupiah during the financial crisis. This resulted in massive savings in local cost
items in dollar terms. A global downturn in demand for heavy equipment and machinery in the
power sector during implementation resulted in highly discounted bid prices, compared with loan
appraisal estimates, and consequent underspending in these major procurement items.

E.       Comparison with 2002 People's Republic of China Study Findings

111. In 2000 and 2001, about $700 million was canceled from the PRC loan portfolio. About
80% of cancellations were from energy, transport, and social infrastructure projects. Another
loan savings of about $160 million was utilized through reallocation. In late 2002, a joint working
group of ADB38 and PRC government staff prepared a study to (i) review the status of loan
savings in the ongoing and completed projects, particularly in the energy, transport, and social
infrastructure sectors, and determine the reasons; (ii) determine the main factors that contribute
to loan savings; (iii) identify ways to minimize loan savings; and (iv) recommend improvements
in the methodology for estimating project costs that would minimize loan savings.39

112. The main reasons given for loan cancellations were (i) cancellation of subcomponents
and contract packages (17% of canceled amounts), (ii) changes to alternate financing (17%),
(iii) reduction in actual costs during implementation (38%), and (iv) cancellation of IDC and
contingencies (28%).

113.     Factors responsible for actual cost reductions included
         (i)    The PRC government guidelines, which are the basis for preparation of
                feasibility-level cost estimates. The feasibility studies are always financed by EAs
                and completed by local specialists. Specifications have been developed based
                on past experiences and modified to reflect market prices in the recent past, but
                are not updated often to reflect changes in market prices.
         (ii)   Market prices for raw materials dropped significantly after the Asian financial
                crisis.
         (iii)  Competition was vigorous in the international bidding process.
         (iv)   Competition was even more intensive when PRC domestic manufacturers were
                qualified for bidding.
         (v)    Domestic bidders won all civil works contracts, as few international contractors
                were interested in bidding. The number of domestic bidders is typically high, and
                it is not unusual to receive bids as low as 60% of the engineer's cost estimates.
38
   Comprised of professional staff and national officers from the PRC Resident Mission and operations divisions of
   the East and Central Asia Department.
39
   Twenty-five sample projects were selected for detailed analysis, including three projects with expected large loan
   cancellations. The approved loans for these 25 projects amounted to about $4.0 billion. By late June 2002, the total
   loan cancellations for these projects was almost $850 million, or about 85% of the PRC's total loan cancellations.
34



114. Cancellation of subcomponents was usually due to changes in technical design.
Substitution of other financing sources occurred particularly after 1996 when the PRC
Government greatly softened terms of its domestic commercial loans. Domestic loan rates were
reduced from about 13% before 1996 to about 8% in 1997, then to about 6.5% in 2001.
Financial sector reforms also facilitated EA access to domestic loans. Social infrastructure
projects, for example, are eligible for state bonds, which have even more favorable terms.
Substitution of financing sources also occurs when EAs felt ADB's procurement procedures
were too slow or rigid. Cancellation in the "unallocated" category was exacerbated by imposition
of higher physical and price contingencies during ADB loan processing than typically used in
locally prepared feasibility studies.

F.      Study of Cost Underrun Impacts on Loan Cancellations

115. Among the more direct and important consequences of project cost variations are loan
savings and loan supplements. Loan savings and cancellations (together called cancellations,
below) often occur in the case of cost underruns. Supplementary loans may become necessary,
particularly in the case of cost overruns. Appendix 6 gives a quantitative analysis of ADB loan
cancellations. Like cost underruns, loan cancellations have been a significant and widespread
phenomenon, particularly since the end of the 1970s. Cancellations have been far more
widespread than fully spent loans for projects that required loan supplementations (i.e.,
supplementary loans). Of the 1,388 effective loans that have been closed since ADB operations
began, 1,097 loans (76%) had cancellations. Meanwhile, only 41 (3%) of the projects connected
with these loans received ADB supplementary financing, and that was mostly before 1985.
Since then, there have been few supplementary loans.40

116. For all closed loans, the average unweighted cancellation has been about 18% of the
original loan amounts, within a broad band of about 15% and 25% per year across the last two
decades. The average cancellation for loans approved in ADB's first period, until 1975, was
somewhat smaller: about 12%. This should be weighted against a much higher 23%
cancellation for loans approved from 1975 to 1984. The average cancellation has been 17%
both for loans approved from 1985 to 1994, and for loans approved from 1995 to 2003. 41

117. All in all, of the $98.7 billion in approved and effective loans since 1968, $13.4 billion has
been cancelled. This includes amounts canceled from 454 ongoing loans that are likely to have
further cancellations, based on recent trends. If these are excluded, then of the $67.8 billion
approved for loans since 1968 that are now closed, $11.3 billion was cancelled, or 16.7%. Of all
loans closed after 1995, approved for $35.2 billion, some $6.9 billion, or 16.7%, was canceled.
Six countries accounted for 82% of the cancellations. Indonesia topped the list, with
$1,926 million in cancellations. India was second, with $1,176 million canceled; followed by the
PRC, $817 million; the Philippines, $578 million; Pakistan, $563 million; and Thailand,
$560 million.

118. There are some variations in patterns among types of loans, notably project loans,
sector project loans, program loans, and supplementary project loans. Project loans have
comprised about 81% of all loans, sector project loans and program loans about 9% each, and
40
   The questionnaire survey indicated that many ADB staff avoid seeking additional financing during implementation
   (para. 62). It can be assumed that negative experiences deter ADB project staff from preparing supplementary loan
   proposals.
41
   But the remaining loans approved, but not yet closed, over this period could possibly increase the average
   percentage of loan cancellations.
                                                                                                             35


supplementary loans, 2%. Over the last three decades, project loans and sector project loans
have had cancellations from 13.2% to 26.7%, with no consistent differences between the two
types. The more recent sector project loans may have had somewhat fewer cancellations than
the average project loan. Program loans, an increasing modality in ADB, have had much lower
cancellations (only pertaining to second and third tranches), averaging from 5.5% to 10.3%.

119. Perhaps not surprisingly, given the higher costs for DMCs associated with OCR loans,
these loans have historically had larger cancellations than special funds (SF) loans. For loans
approved from 1985 to 1996, the difference was smallest: an average of 17.9% for OCR loans
and 15.9% for SF loans. Notably, for loans approved from 1995 onward, the difference is far
greater: 90 OCR loans closed since 1995 had an average cancellation of 27.3%, and 83 SF
loans had only 6.7% cancellation. 42 Again, one must caution that a large number of SF loans
are still open, for which substantial cancellations are expected.

120. The main reasons for loan cancellations were investigated through quantitative analysis
of 220 PCRs issued from 1998 to mid-2003 (Appendix 3). Ac cording to the PCRs, the reasons
for cancellations for those projects with large cost underruns were mainly related to lower-than-
anticipated cost of works (55%) and lower prices of equipment and materials (41%). The
cheaper equipment and materials was possibly caused by an international slump in prices in
several sectors in the 1990s. Another factor might be increased local production of equipment,
which could be bought with local currency (although the equipment may sometimes have been
of lower quality). Cancellation of subcomponents and contract packages, partly because of
scope changes, was mentioned in 56% of the cases with large cost underruns. In 21% of the
cases in the sample with large cost underruns, a change to alternate financing sources was
mentioned as a reason for the loan cancellations.

           1.      Sectoral Composition

121. A broad sector breakdown of loans shows that average cancellations vary from 14% to
27% in most sectors (Table 3). In the past 20 years, the agriculture and natural resources and
the transport and communications sectors had the largest proportions. Cancellations in
agriculture went down from 26.7% for loans approved 1995­1994 to 19.4% for 1995­2001.
Cancellations in transport worsened considerably, from 9.7% to 26.8%. Other main sectors such
as social infrastructure, energy, and finance have been consistently around the average or
slightly lower. Small sectors such as industry and non-fuel and multisectoral projects did
somewhat better.

122. Figures are more dramatic at the subsector level, although a fair element of randomness
is involved, given that some subsectors did not have many loans in every period. Findings for
the four decades are in Appendix 6, Table A6.5. For loans approved over the last two decades
(1985­1994 and 1995­2003), the subsectors with most cancellations are in the agriculture
sector: (i) industrial crops and agricultural products (48.5% and 54.9% of loan amounts
canceled for the two periods, respectively), (ii) livestock (30% and 44%), and (iii) forestry and
irrigation (20.2% and 28.9%). Findings are less dramatic in other sectors except, perhaps, the
transport sector. Loans for telecommunications have, over time been affected consistently by
large cancellations, averaging 24.1% in 1985­1994 and 26.2% for the two loans closed
approved from 1995 to 2003. Large cancellations for loans approved from 1995 onward are a

42
     The sample of 220 PCRs issued from 1998 to mid-2003 indicates that the 31 projects approved since 1995 with
     PCRs had an average cost underrun of 24% for OCR-funded projects and 8% for Asian Development Fund-
     financed projects.
36


feature of all subsectors of the transport and communications sector. In the social sectors, the
water supply and sanitation subsector seems to be the worst case (between 19.7% and,
recently, 25.8% of loan amounts canceled).

 Table 3: Average Loan Cancellation/Saving as Proportion of Original ADB Loan Amount
                                      (by period)a

Item                             1968­1974            1975­1984            1985­1994            1995­2003
                              Loans    Mean        Loans    Mean        Loans    Mean        Loans    Mean
                               (no.)    (%)         (no.)    (%)         (no.)    (%)         (no.)    (%)

Total Effective Loans          211       11.7       509        22.8       536       16.8      173      17.4

Type of Loan
Project                        202       11.6       449        23.3       426       17.9      107      23.2
Sector Project                   0        0.0        21        26.7        61       17.7       12      13.2
Supplementary Project            9       12.5        25        15.9         6       12.1        1       0.0
Program                          0        0.0        14        10.3        43        5.5       53       7.0

Type of Funding
OCR                            126       13.7       275        25.8       243       17.9       90      27.3
SF                              85        8.6       234        19.2       293       15.9       83       6.7

Sector
ANR                              59       9.1       187        26.7       187       26.7       24      19.4
Energy                           48       7.4        96        22.4        80       14.2       23      16.6
Finance                          25       8.1        54        16.1        40       12.8       26      15.2
Industry and Non-Fuel            10      39.1        17        16.2        18        7.4        7      14.1
Social Infrastructure            21       2.9        84        22.2       109       16.5       47      15.7
Transport and Comm.              42      17.3        59        20.4        84        9.7       24      26.8
Multisector                       0       0.0        10        13.2        24        8.0        9       4.8
Others                            6      32.1         2        48.0        14       24.2       13      19.1


ADB = Asian Development Bank, ANR = agriculture and natural resources, OCR = ordinary capital resources, SF =
special funds.
a
  For 1,906 loans approved from 1968 to late August 2003. This includes active loans.
Source: ADB's Loan Financial Information System.

        2.       Country Composition

123. As with the smaller subsectors, random factors can heavily influence the average
proportions of loan cancellations for the smaller DMCs when associated with small numbers of
loans. The patterns for the DMCs with larger loan portfolios indicate that both A, B, and C
country categories have had large loan cancellations: Malaysia and Thailand, for example, had
large cancellation averages; so did countries like India and Nepal. The phenomenon has been
growing in the PRC, Indonesia, and Pakistan. Comprehensive portfolio reviews, started after the
mid-1990s, contributed to larger number of cancellations of portions of slow-disbursing loans in
some countries, to create funds for new projects, such as in Indonesia (see box below). Of the
smaller DMCs in loan terms, Bhutan stands out in terms of the size of loan cancellations. On the
other hand, DMCs such as the Lao PDR and Mongolia, and some Pacific countries, stand out
because they average few loan cancellations (Table 4).

124. Reasons for loan cancellations. Cancellations of subcomponents and contract
packages were mentioned as dominant explanations for projects, mainly in the Philippines (80%
of projects) and South Asia (67%, including India [63%] and Pakistan [64%]).
                                                                                                                37




                                 Spring Cleaning Exercises in Indonesia

Many comprehensive portfolio reviews, aptly referred to as spring cleaning exercises, have been
undertaken since the Report of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality recommended an in-
depth review of ADB operations, with special attention to project quality and impact. These
exercises were led by the former programs and departments under special initiatives that were not
always part of the country portfolio and program review missions. Large-scale spring cleaning
exercises were carried out in 1998 and 1999, particularly in Indonesia and Thailand, to confirm the
relevance and priorities of ongoing ADB-assisted projects in light of the Asian financial crisis. The
exercises provided a good opportunity to revise project scopes, identify surplus loan proceeds and
potential loan cancellations, and reduce the financial burden of the two governments. The two
annual exercises resulted in cancellation of about $1.0 billion in 1998, and $0.5 billion in 1999, from
about 26 ongoing loans.

Of the 18 Indonesian loans with more than 20% total cost underrun, 10 had varying amounts
canceled or identified for use on other projects as a result of the 1998 and 1999 exercises (see
table).
                         Impact of 1998 and 1999 Spring Cleaning Missions in Indonesia

  Loan            Project Name                                       Amount
  No.                                                               ($ million)
                                          Net Loan Currency    Non-     Total    Possible              Loan
                                                   Savings a Currency Savings Future Use            Cancellation
                                                             Savings            of Savings          1998 1999

  1089    Inland Waterways                   39.6        0.0        9.3        9.3         6.2        3.1     0.0
  1092    Power XXI                         210.0        0.0       12.2       12.2         3.2        9.0     0.0
  1111    Bogor and Palembang Urban         140.0        0.0        1.9        1.9         0.0        1.9     0.0
              Development
  1157    Telecommunication                  99.3        0.0       21.3       21.3        1.3        20.1    0.0
  1172    Power XXII                        350.0        0.0       90.7       90.7       64.7        26.0   32.9
  1198    Central Java and D.I.             150.0        2.8        0.0        2.8        0.0         2.8    0.0
              Yogyakarta Urban Devt.
  1232    Third Local Roads                 175.2        0.0       18.1       18.1        0.0        18.1    0.0
  1233    Second Telecommunications         102.9        0.0       24.7       24.7       11.3        13.4    0.0
  1360    Senior Secondary Education        110.0       10.2        3.8       14.0        2.0        12.0    3.5
  1433    Industrial Technology and          80.0       14.0        0.0       14.0        0.0        14.0   49.1
              Human Resource Devt.
                       Total              1,457.0       27.0      182.0      209.0       88.7       120.4   85.5

  a
   Currency savings are those savings arising from rupiah devaluation, while non-currency savings are those arising
   from reduction of scopes of work.
 Source: ADB. 1994. Report of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality. Manila.
    38

                       Table 4: Loan Amounts Approved and Cancelled by Country
                                       (for loans closed after 1995)

Country                       No. of    Average ($ million)         %            Total ($ million)      %
                              Loans    Approved Cancelled        Cancelled    Approved Cancelled     Cancelled

Bangladesh                     39          61.2         7.3            15.9    2,388.2     285.4        12.0
Bhutan                          7           6.7         0.4             5.3       46.8       2.6         5.6
Cambodia                        7          26.7         0.2             0.9      186.9       1.1         0.6
China, People's Rep. of        50         117.5        16.4            13.8    5,874.6     817.9        13.9
Cook Islands                    5           2.3         0.2            15.8       11.6       1.0         8.8
Fiji Islands                    2          13.8         0.0             0.0       27.6       0.0         0.0
India                          40         156.3        29.4            23.0    6,252.0   1,176.0        18.8
Indonesia                      69         121.4        27.9            28.1    8,373.6   1,925.9        23.0
Kazakhstan                     10          37.2         1.7             5.8      371.7      17.0         4.6
Kiribati                        1           1.0         0.1             5.8        1.0       0.1         5.8
Korea                           3       1,359.3       106.6            25.0    4,077.8     319.7         7.8
Kyrgyz                         10          24.9         0.1             6.9      249.4       1.5         0.6
Lao People's Dem. Rep.         18          23.8         0.6             3.0      428.6      10.5         2.4
Malaysia                       11          50.6        12.0            32.4      556.3     132.0        23.7
Maldives                        2           9.4         0.9             9.6       18.8       1.8         9.4
Marshall Islands                6           6.8         0.6             9.6       40.7       3.9         9.5
Micronesia                      2          11.9         0.5             8.5       23.9       1.1         4.4
Mongolia                       16          17.3         0.2             1.9      276.6       2.7         1.0
Myanmar                         1          46.0        46.0           100.0       46.0      46.0       100.0
Nauru                           1           5.0         2.7            54.0        5.0       2.7        54.0
Nepal                          30          24.2         4.5            21.9      726.2     135.9        18.7
Pakistan                       52          83.2        10.8            19.7    4,327.5     563.3        13.0
Papua New Guinea               13          17.8         4.2            17.2      231.0      54.0        23.4
Philippines                    40          74.6        14.4            22.1    2,984.4     577.7        19.4
Samoa                           2           8.1         0.0             0.6       16.1       0.1         0.6
Solomon Islands                 1          25.4         9.7            38.3       25.4       9.7        38.3
Sri Lanka                      23          36.9         4.1            11.1      847.7      94.4        11.1
Tajikistan                      2          11.8         0.0             0.0       23.7       0.0         0.0
Thailand                       22         124.7        25.4            22.7    2,744.4     559.9        20.4
Tonga                           7           4.6         0.3             5.9       32.2       1.9         5.9
Tuvalu                          1           4.0         0.0             0.0        4.0       0.0         0.0
Uzbekistan                      2          50.0        26.9            53.8      100.0      53.8        53.8
Vanuatu                         5           7.9         0.4             7.8       39.5       2.1         5.2
Viet Nam                       12          63.4         4.6             7.2      760.5      55.3         7.3

          Total               512          82.3         13.4           17.7   42,119.9   6,856.9        16.3

Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.
                                                                                                39


125. Lower-than-anticipated costs of works during implementation were experienced,
particularly in projects in India (63%), Pakistan (57%), and other parts of South Asia (47%), and,
outside of South Asia, in Indonesia (82%). This factor was less in evidence in other countries
and country groups.

126. Prices of equipment and materials were lower than anticipated, particularly in India
(100% of projects) and Indonesia (72%), and to a lesser extent, in Pakistan (36%), Thailand
(25%), and the PRC (25%). These are countries where purchase of goods was often a large
component of the loans. In the projects in India and the PRC in particular, about 50% of the
base cost was planned to be for equipment and materials. In countries other than those
mentioned, the price slump factor was far less evident, perhaps illustrative of the smaller
changes in these countries in terms of growth in their own supply markets for equipment and
materials over the period.

127. Unexpectedly vigorous competition in the project bidding processes was viewed as
particularly relevant for India (86% of projects) and the PRC (40%).

128. Changes to alternate financing sources were significant explanatory factors, particularly
in Pakistan (21%), India (25%), Bangladesh (33%), and Nepal (37%). That may indicate the
force of local financing sources (in India), and other external agencies in other South Asian
countries (for example, taking over part of the project financing through grants). The inclusion or
exclusion of foreign aid in cost estimates can play a major role in generating loan cancellations
or loan supplements, even if cost estimates per se are not affected. Within the six case studies
of projects in Pakistan, for example, two projects were affected by this. In one project, the
materialization of a large grant by a donor agency, which was already anticipated in the RRP
but was not reflected in the financing plan, immediately led to a loan cancellation of the same
size. In another case, the assumption of funding by another donor of a necessary component of
the project as reflected in the RRP did not materialize, and ADB's subsequent takeover led to
higher ADB financing.

                     V.      CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Summary Findings

129. This SES reviewed some international literature in Section III, presented historical data
on cost variations in ADB in Section IV-A, analyzed extensive statistical data on more recent
cost variations in section IV-B, summarized findings from a questionnaire survey among staff
and consultants in section IV-C, gave findings from country case studies in sections IV-D and
IV-E, and presented data on loan cancellations in IV-F. The main findings are summarized
below.

130. Literature on cost variations (Section III) makes it evident that project cost overruns and
underruns have been widespread phenomena, both inside and outside ADB. The costs of
projects with large civil works components have historically been underestimated. But careful
analyses have sometimes concluded that some important parts of cost variations cannot be
systematically explained and should, therefore, be attributed to uncertainty.

131. In ADB's existence until the early 1980s, the average project cost variation tended to be
a major overrun of about 40%. Since then, cost variations have been significantly smaller,
averaging about 10­15% cost underrun. Projects completed after 1995 have had an average
unweighted cost underrun of 13%. In the past 10 years, more than a third of all projects
40


completed had underruns of more than 20%, only 1 in 11 projects experienced a major cost
overrun, larger than 20% (section IV-A).

132. This study focused on cost experience of projects completed between 1996 and 2002,
during which time cost underruns have been predominant (section IV-B). Projects in the three
macrosectors of agricultural and natural resources, energy, and social infrastructure had larger
cost underruns than projects in transport and communications, and in other (minor) sectors. In
the transport and communications sector, there were relatively more cases of overruns. At a
subsector level, the differences were sometimes larger. There were also large differences
between countries over the period studied. Some countries had many more cases of cost
underruns (or overruns) than others, indicating the effect of country specific factors. In spite of
these systematic factors, there were also significant contingent factors at play.

133. Civil works was the largest base cost category in ADB-funded projects over this period
(50% of base cost and 42% of total appraised cost), followed by goods (19% of total costs), and
other base costs (22%). Besides the base costs, an average of about 7% was taken up by price
contingencies, 4% by physical contingencies, and 9% by SC&IDC. The analysis showed that
the base costs incurred remained, on average, about 7%--close to the appraisal estimates,
meaning a systematic overestimate of project costs. That was the average expected inflation
rate. But civil works were still generally underestimated, whereas other costs were generally
overestimated. The contingency items, although invoked in practice to supplement the works
component, averaged equivalent to the average underrun.

134. Statistically significant positive correlations were observed between the level of cost
underruns and the number of scope reductions of a project, the proportion of local costs in the
total cost, the proportion of the local exchange component, the proportion of line items other
than civil works, and the proportion reserved for O&M. Conversely, the higher the proportion of
civil works in the project, the higher the chance of a cost overrun. Correlations were not found
significant between the level of cost variations and some other cost categories, and other
factors, such as the conduct of a PPTA, or the level of inflation or depreciation of a country's
currency. For the latter, there was a relation mainly if inflation or, particularly, currency
depreciation, were inaccurately predicted or if inflation did not match devaluation of the
currency.

135. Narrative text in PCRs pointed to exchange rate fluctuations and/or depreciation of the
local currency, unaccounted for by price contingency line items, as the main reasons for project
cost underruns. A related reason is lower-than-anticipated prices during implementation. Based
on a small special study looking at recent RRPs (section IV-B.4), one can assume that the 1995
change of guidelines on estimation of price contingencies, if applied properly, will reduce the
influence of exchange rate fluctuations on cost variations. (Most projects in the sample were
designed before the 1995 change.) But so far, application of the guidelines seems not to have
been consistent across ADB. An inaccurate estimate of the base cost at appraisal was
mentioned as a reason for cost underruns in almost a third of all PCRs. Price-related reasons
were mentioned most as reasons for underruns, then scope changes, then inaccurate
estimations of base costs. Other more mis cellaneous reasons, such as natural calamities and
peace and order events, were also given as reasons for many projects with large cost
underruns.

136. The statistical analysis showed that project cost underruns should not be regarded as a
sign of economy and efficiency, except perhaps for energy sector projects. PCRs showed fewer
success ratings for projects with large cost underruns in other sectors. Such cost underruns
                                                                                                41


indicated implementation problems more than implementation efficiencies. In some cases,
savings on, for example, equipment costs went at the expense of quality. Projects with large
cost overruns were rated more successful than projects with large cost underruns, or even
projects with no major variations. But economic and financial internal rates of return were
somewhat lower for projects with large overruns than for the other two categories. Cost
underruns generally indicated increased economy, efficiency, and efficacy only for projects in
the energy sector.

137. Explanations of inaccurate cost estimates by ADB staff and consultants were surveyed
through a questionnaire that focused on (i) n     i adequate information, or information that was
difficult to collect, in DMCs for accurate cost estimates; (ii) inadequate time and resources given
to ADB staff to review, in detail, project cost estimates during fact-finding and/or appraisal;
(iii) inadequate resources and time for feasibility studies (PPTA); and (iv) the importance of
meeting ADB country lending targets. These factors seem to cause more project cost variations.
Many staff indicated that ADB guidelines on supplementary financing encourage overestimation,
and that a stigma is attached to supplementary loan financing (section IV-C).

138. Country specific project cost estimating, as well as budgeting practices, was found to
impact on the nature of project cost estimates produced. This was studied particularly in India,
Indonesia, Pakistan (section IV-D), and the PRC (section IV-E). Other more contingent factors
also played a role in the level of cost overruns and underruns in the four countries over the
period. These included price slumps for locally manufactured equipment, unpredicted inflation
and depreciation of local currencies, ADB's increasing use of portfolio review exercises in some
countries, natural and man-made calamities, and peace and order events.

139. A strong correlation was found between the level of cost underruns and loan
cancellations (section IV-F). From 1968 until August 2003, of the $98.7 billion in 1,906 loans,
$13.4 billion has been canceled, including the amounts canceled from 454 ongoing loans.
Further cancellations are possible. Although project expenditures tended to an average
unweighted underrun of 13%, loan disbursements tended to an average underrun of 18%. This
illustrates the attempts of governments to economize on loans where possible. In some cases,
other funding sources took over part of project financing, so portions of the ADB loans were
canceled. In other cases, portions of o  l ans were canceled to finance emergency response
projects.

B.     Conclusions

140. Significant underruns and overruns of actual project costs against the original cost
estimates have occurred throughout ADB's existence, but cost overruns were predominant in
the initial years. But since the 1980s, cost underruns have been predominant. The main reason
for the shift seems to be the greater focus on physical infrastructure projects in the early years,
and less focus on social, environmental, governance, and financial sectors, which tend to have
smaller civil works components and larger components for human resources and institutional
development, for which there are often underruns. Another reason may have been the major
increases in oil prices in the 1970s, coupled with the increasing cost of materials and equipment
on the international market. Meanwhile, in the 1980s, ADB project staff gained discouraging
experience with the major project cost underruns. Processing of supplementary loans required
as much time as processing new loans, and the supplementary loans were scrutinized
rigorously. That caused ADB staff to estimate loans more cautiously, to avoid the need for
supplementary loans.
42


141. The shift to more social infrastructure and financial sector projects over the years, and
the increasing attention to "soft" or reform-oriented components in even the physical
infrastructure projects, meant an overall reduction in the civil works components from 66% to
today's 50% of base costs. Even now, projects with large civil works components often have
large cost overruns. Over the years, capital investment components in projects have become
more standardized and better estimated. Projects have increasingly been designed with larger
components for training, institutional development, and O&M. In practice, projects have tended
to be overdesigned (as compared with actual demand from EAs). Overall, cost estimation is
now better than in ADB's first 15 years of ADB, but there still seems to be still a tendency to
overdesign certain smaller and softer components, and to overestimate a number of costs.

142. This SES has attempted to relate the current predominance of cost underruns of projects
on the one hand, to factors of project design and project cost estimation. On the other hand, the
study has tried to relate underruns to factors that can occur during implementation such as
unforeseen price developments, the Asian financial crisis, natural and man-made calamities,
desired scope changes, and increasing ADB closures of loans for slow-moving projects before
full completion. The SES found such unforeseeable factors quite important to explaining the still
seemingly large number of cost variations. Thus, some cost variation will probably remain a fact
of life.

143. Nevertheless, as the SES also shows, project cost estimating practices help explain the
persistence of large cost underruns (and some cases, cost overruns). This is perhaps best
illustrated by the finding that estimates for larger projects have been less precise. Larger
projects have had more cases of both large cost underruns and cost overruns; smaller projects
have tended to be estimated somewhat more accurately. This suggests that more resources
should be devoted to the preparation of larger projects. Base costs other than civil works tended
to be overdesigned or overestimated. Price contingencies also tended to be overestimated, due
partly to inaccurate estimation practices.

144. It can be hypothesized that the fiscal consequences of cost underruns (as expressed in
dollar value) for DMCs may be minor if they are mainly due to depreciation of the local currency
vs the dollar. Apparent gains made due to the availability of more local currency against an
allocation in dollars are lost when repayment of loans starts (usually in appreciated international
currency). Cost underruns, when caused by scope changes that DMCs request, may be
beneficial from a repayment perspective. But when cost underruns are caused by ADB portfolio
review decisions to terminate loans (and thus, projects), intended benefits may be lost. But if
such saved loan funds are plowed back into new projects in the same country, or are used for
emergencies, there may be new benefits that more than compensate for the losses. An
important problem of projects with cost underruns is that they are not accompanied by time
gains; such projects usually take even longer to complete because of underlying implementation
problems. Slow-moving projects tie up committed loan funds, which are lost for other potentially
beneficial uses. Besides loss of benefits due to scope reductions or lower quality of works or
goods, this may be the main significance of cost underruns.

145. The ADB Board of Directors has been concerned about the apparent excess payment of
commitment charges by DMCs for OCR loans for projects that ultimately have major cost
underruns. This SES has established that cost estimates have broadly improved after the first
15 years of ADB`s history. But the SES also established that important but unpredictable factors
lead to cost underruns and concomitant loan cancellations. The SES offers some
recommendations, below, to help improve project cost estimates.
                                                                                                 43


C.     Recommendations

       1.      General

146. To achieve and implement improved project design and cost estimation, it is essential
that borrowing DMCs and ADB allocate adequate resources, in both time and money, to
conducting the required engineering, environmental, financial, economic, social and multi-
criteria analyses. More resources are required, especially for preparing larger projects. Cost
estimation groups should be established, and adequately staffed with persons who are skilled in
cost engineering. Better project design and cost estimates can lead to smoother
implementation, fewer loan cancellations, and more positive results from any loan portfolio.

147. Project cost estimation can be further improved by (i) more rigorous consideration of
inflation and depreciation factors (i.e., appropriate application of ADB's guidelines on price
contingencies, and using purchasing power parities); (ii) more thorough consideration of
sectoral and country experiences with cost variations; (iii) careful verification of the real demand
for training and institutional development components; and (iv) more realistic estimation (i.e.,
less underestimation) of civil works components, as well as O&M components, of project budget
costs (these are usually overestimated). Better estimation may, paradoxically, lead to a
somewhat larger proportion of cost-overrun projects. Thus, this may require a simpler and
quicker process for preparation of supplementary loans, and a more sympathetic ADB attitude
toward their approval. One option would be two-part loans in each RRP. The first loan would be
for the base cost. The supplementary loan would be considered as endorsed up to the full
amount of the contingencies, plus as much as a 10% cost overrun. Management would approve
the supplementary loan, should it be necessary after the bidding results in the final cost
estimate, and report it to ADB's Board. But it must be recognized that unforeseen developments
are always possible, so flexibility in project implementation is needed for improved outcomes.

148. Problems during implementation due to poor management are at least as important as
poor cost estimating in explaining cost variations. Increasing the efficiency of implementation
and avoiding delays will reduce cost underruns and overruns (in other words, concentrating
more on project administration). Projects mired in implementation problems should be reviewed
early, with consideration of possible cancellation of part of the loan. EAs' interest in avoiding
such cancellations as long as possible should be weighed against the Borrowers' interest in
reducing the debt burden. Savings can then be used for purposes that yield a return, rather than
tied up nonproductively. For OCR loans, this will also reduce the burden of commitment fees.

149. ADB, in cooperation with other development partners and borrowing DMCs, should
develop and maintain country-specific cost indexes based on procurement documentation from
major development partners, private sector construction and equipment associations, and other
information sources. PPTA teams and ADB project teams should make increased use of LFIS,
which includes information on actual contract award prices for each contract package. The LFIS
should be modified to facilitate easier access.

150. Loan and TA resources are growing more scarce, there is a trend toward more
technically complex projects (and the additional uncertainty that entails), and it is generally
acknowledged that feasibility-level design can only achieve a limited level of accuracy in project
cost estimates. Therefore, guidelines should be prepared to determine the requirement for use
of engineering loans for large or complex engineering projects, or that would require detailed
designs before the ADB Board considers a loan.
44


151. ADB should increase tis support to appraisal staff for review of estimates of base
components. Although staff consultants are hired to provide expert assistance to missions, they
may not have full details of equipment pricing from recent international procurements. ADB is in
a strong position to assemble details of unit prices and historical trends for major plants through
databases of ICB procurement. Should rates be provided for use of staff only, mission leaders
would have sufficient information for "sensibility checks" on information received from domestic
and international consultants. This would also provide information for later bid acceptance. A bid
price that is far lower than recent rates should indicate problems and a need for further review.
Presently, such bids could potentially be accepted, imperiling the project because of lack of
experience among ADB project staff.

152. Considering that the government cost estimates are most of the basis for ADB's
appraisal estimates (particularly for the PRC and India), there is a need for relevant and line
ministries to review internal guidelines and procedures for project cost estimates and civil work
contracting. The guidelines should allow (i) flexibility in applying the methodology and norms for
estimating project costs, and (ii) greater use of market prices. ADB and the government should
work to harmonize the establishment of project costs. The use of International Federation of
Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) standards and policies should be investigated. ADB should
consider advisory TA to help borrowing DMCs in these efforts.

153. In major DMCs such as India and the PRC, domestic market prices should be used to
estimate costs of civil works. Domestic contractors usually win civil works contracts, even under
ICB. Similarly, to improve estimates for equipment and materials costs, recent domestic market
prices should be given greater weight, particularly in countries that have strong capability to
manufacture essential equipment and materials 43 and, therefore, have good chances of winning
contracts.

154. Savings in contingencies could be reduced by discussing more seriously with the
governments and EAs the option not to borrow for contingencies (the government exercises
such options in some projects). But this option should be used mainly when the borrowing DMC
has demonstrated capacity and commitment to finance contingencies as they arise. For DMCs
without capacity to finance contingencies, the guidelines on supplemental financing should be
reviewed, with an objective of providing a straightforward and standard procedure for ADB
management to approve supplemental financing up to the amounts estimated for contingencies.

           2.       Contingencies

155. Savings and cancellations in the "unallocated" loan category have partly been caused by
changes in base costs. Therefore, improvement in base cost estimates will reduce unallocated
amounts. But there is still a large variation, because actual contingencies are less than
estimates.

156. Estimating price contingencies for internationally and locally procured goods and
services is always difficult, because it involves medium- to long-term projections for project
implementation durations of as long as 7 years. Furthermore, those projections are linked to
local and international inflation rates and currency fluctuations. ADB's annual 5-year projections
during the period under review, particularly for local costs in many DMCs, often varied

43
     Domestic manufacturers supplied most of the turbine-generator units up to 500 megawatts in unit size in a
     hydropower project, boilers up to 300 megawatts in coal-fired power plants, conductors, 220-kilovolt transformers,
     220-kilovolt switchgears in a transmission project, and cement and steel for civil works.
                                                                                              45


substantially from actual changes. ADB guidelines since 1995 have given procedures to
recognize projected fluctuations in local currency. Project cost estimates do not universally
follow these procedures, which often result in significant overestimates of local price
contingencies expressed in dollars. Increased cooperative efforts with development partners
and borrowing DMC governments are needed to improve price contingency forecasts, and more
rigorous review is needed on price contingency amounts used in cost estimates.

157. The physical contingency is provided to account for changes in project scope and
variations in quantities of equipment and civil works during project implementation. The
assumptions for physical contingency should take into account the reliability and completeness
of site investigation, and the depth of engineering design. But close analysis of assumptions for
past projects will help arrive at a more realistic assumption for current projects.

158. The methodology for assessment of physical and price contingencies should remain
unchanged for the present. The preparation of country-specific cost escalation factors may need
to be reviewed. It is prudent to allow for unforeseen events, and the rates used rely on the
assessment of the estimating engineer. There should be stronger oversight of the rates applied
during appraisal, on the basis of past performance of similar projects.

       3.     Standardization in Preparation and Presentation

159. During the study, it was often difficult to collect, analyze, and present comparative data
because no uniform format has been adopted to present such project cost data. The format
used in the RRP not only varies from sector to sector, but also among projects in the same
sector. Although some variation is understandable, due to the nature of projects, it is suggested
that the format for presenting project costs in the RRPs be more standardized to facilitate
monitoring, updating, and subsequent analysis of project costs. The format for presenting
contract packages in the RRPs should enable clear linkage to the cost components in the
detailed cost table. ADB should first conduct a pilot test.

160. Variability was found in how price contingencies are presented in projects reviewed. The
project summary cost by components table should refer to the local cost escalation factors
applied, by year, to record the assumptions in the buildup of the price contingency. Either the
allowance for exchange rate variation should be given as a separate line entry or, if it has been
assumed that there will be no change in exchange rates. this should be explicitly stated. The
allowance for exchange rate variation could well be negative, anticipating depreciation. This was
not seen in any of the appraisal reports, even though in some cases appraisal took place in
periods when domestic currencies were weakening and such trends should have been
apparent.

161. A review is recommended of the format in which financial information is presented in the
PCRs. Statements of costs in US dollars can be misleading during times of strong depreciation
of domestic currency. For example, the Second Roads Project in India recorded a project
variance of +22% in US dollars, but a variance of +120% when viewed in domestic currency.
Conclusions about the project could vary greatly, depending on the currency viewpoint. For
unforeseen factors such as depreciation, cost information should continue to be presented in
US dollars, but also as a separate table in US dollars and domestic currency.
46


       4.      Periodic Updating

162. During the study, it was difficult to obtain project cost data for ongoing projects. Periodic
updating of cost estimates will help in timely assessment of loan savings. Consistent with ADB's
new thrust toward results-based management, standard operating loan administration
procedures should require the EAs to annually update project cost estimates, which ADB would
review thoroughly. Dedicated resources of qualified ADB staff and staff consultants would
probably be required. Use of standard formats to prepare such updates is also suggested
(during the study, data formats have been designed that could be used as the basis for
designing the standard formats). EAs should also maintain accurate data on package-wise
costs.
                                                                  ANALYSIS OF COMPLETED PROJECTS WITH PCRs
                                                                            January 1998 - June 2003

                                                        Table A1.1: Summary of Completed Projects with PCR by Borrower

                                                           Project Cost ($ million)                            Loan Data ($ million)                       Cancellation ($ million)
     Loan               Project               Sector Estimated Actual         Percent       ADF       OCR      Total   Availablea Cancelled    Percent       ADF         OCR
      No.                                                                  Over/(Under)                                                       Unutilized

Bangladesh
  1    868 Brahmaputra Basin Gas               EN         104.0        95.1         8.6       74.0      0.0       74.0       79.6      13.3         16.7         13.3          0.0
           Transmission and Distribution
  2    908 Rural Infrastructure Development    TC         110.9        96.4        13.0      100.8      0.0      100.8      109.1      21.7         19.9         21.7          0.0
  3    942 Dhaka Urban Infrastructure          SI          29.5        23.8        19.3       24.2      0.0       24.2       25.9       3.7         14.4          3.7          0.0
           Improvement
  4    963 Eighth Power Project                EN         348.7       384.0       (10.1)    165.0       0.0     165.0      186.0       3.0          1.6           3.0          0.0
  5 1026 Primary Education Sector              SI          81.6        62.4         23.5      68.3      0.0       68.3       72.9      18.8         25.8         18.8          0.0
  6 1059 Secondary Towns Infrastructure        SI          53.4        51.5          3.6      43.0      0.0       43.0       42.6       0.0          0.1          0.0          0.0
           Development
  7 1066 Rural Training                        SI          19.4        16.9        12.5       16.3      0.0       16.3       15.9       5.4         34.2          5.4          0.0
  8 1067 Rural Women Employment                AN          11.5        11.6        (0.6)       8.0      0.0        8.0        8.2       0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0
           Creation
  9 1074 Second Health and Family               SI         60.0        54.8         8.7       51.0      0.0       51.0       50.6       9.4         18.6          9.4          0.0
           Planning Services
 10 1123 Higher Secondary Education            SI          49.2        36.6         25.6      49.2      0.0       49.2       50.7      14.1         27.8         14.1          0.0
 11 1124 Dhaka Integrated Flood Protection     TC         119.8       159.6       (33.2)      96.1      0.0       96.1       94.0       5.0          5.3          5.0          0.0
 12 1125 Northeast Minor Irrigation            AN          93.1        24.5         73.7      73.0      0.0       73.0       77.4      54.8         70.8         54.8          0.0
 13 1159 Second Bhola Irrigation               AN          48.0        37.6         21.7      39.8      0.0       39.8       41.9      10.7         25.6         10.7          0.0
 14 1173 Bangladesh Open University            SI          43.0        41.2          4.3      34.3      0.0       34.3       34.2       1.4          4.2          1.4          0.0
 15 1202 Secondary Towns Integrated Flood      SI          70.0        70.0          0.1      55.0      0.0       55.0       53.4       1.4          2.7          1.4          0.0
           Protection
 16 1213 Rural Poor Cooperative                AN          37.4        30.9        17.5       30.0      0.0       30.0       30.6       7.2         23.4          7.2          0.0
 17 1215 Second Rural Infrastructure           SI         104.2        99.6         4.4       83.4      0.0       83.4       83.8       0.9          1.1          0.9          0.0
           Development
 18 1287 Road Overlay and Improvement           SI        105.5       108.1        (2.5)      68.0      0.0       68.0       68.1       0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0
 19 1291 Southwest Area Water Resources         SI          4.5         1.3        71.1        3.2      0.0        3.2        3.2       2.3         70.8          2.3          0.0
           Development
 20 1298 Jamuna Bridge                         TC         696.0        753.7       (8.3)      200.0      0.0      200.0      209.3      2.3          1.1          2.3          0.0
 21 1666 Flood Damage Rehabilitation           MS         129.8        118.2         8.9     104.0       0.0     104.0       99.5      4.1          4.1           4.1          0.0
           Total (Bangladesh)                          2,319.5      2,277.8          1.8   1,386.6      0.0    1,386.6    1,436.7    179.8          12.5        179.8          0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 1
Bhutan
 22 1035 Technical and Vocation Education       SI          9.0          6.6       26.0         7.1     0.0        7.1        7.1       2.5         35.8          2.5          0.0
         and Training
 23 1265 East-West Highway Maintenance         TC           6.5         6.5        (0.1)       6.5      0.0        6.5        5.2       0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0
 24 1375 Rural Electrification                 EN           9.5         8.2        13.6        7.5      0.0        7.5        6.7       0.1          0.8          0.1          0.0
         Total (Bhutan)                                    25.0        21.4        14.5       21.1      0.0       21.1       19.0       2.6         13.6          2.6          0.0
                                                                                                                                                           Continued on next page




                                                                                                                                                                                      47
                                                                                                                                                                                          48
                                                                                Table A1.1--Continued
                                                            Project Cost ($ million)                               Loan Data ($ million)                       Cancellation ($ million)
    Loan              Project                  Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR        Total              a
                                                                                                                           Available Cancelled     Percent       ADF         OCR
     No.                                                                    Over/(Under)                                                          Unutilized
Cambodia




                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 1
 25 1345 Power Rehabilitation                   EN          35.3       31.4          11.0       28.2         0.0      28.2      26.1        0.2          0.7          0.2           0.0
 26 1446 Basic Education Textbook Project       SI          29.3       27.9           4.7      20.0         0.0      20.0      18.4        0.2          0.8          0.2           0.0
         Total (Cambodia)                                   64.6       59.3           8.2       48.2         0.0      48.2      44.5        0.3          0.8          0.3           0.0

China , People's Republic of (PRC)
 27 1145 Ports Development                      TC         259.7     249.6             3.9       0.0       88.8       88.8      88.8       0.3           0.4         0.0           0.3
 28 1162 Laiwu Iron and Steel Company           IN         328.0     518.4          (58.0)       0.0      133.0      133.0     133.0       1.2           0.9         0.0           1.2
            Modernization
 29 1167 Guang-Mei-Shan Railway                 TC         533.0     732.6          (37.4)       0.0      200.0      200.0     200.0       0.0           0.0         0.0           0.0
 30 1168 Shenyang-Benxi Highway                 TC         166.0     201.4          (21.3)       0.0       50.0       50.0      50.0       0.0           0.0         0.0           0.0
 31 1175 Guangdong Tropical Crops               AN         109.7     127.3          (16.1)       0.0       55.0       55.0      55.0       0.0           0.0         0.0           0.0
            Development
 32 1178 Industrial Energy Conservation and     EN         233.7     215.3            7.9        0.0      107.0      107.0     107.0      30.6          28.6         0.0          30.6
            Environment
 33 1205 Qingdao Environment                    AN         219.0     222.4           (1.6)       0.0      103.0      103.0     103.0      10.2           9.9         0.0          10.2
            Improvement
 34 1221 Hefei-Jiujiang Railway                 TC         378.0     349.8            7.5        0.0      110.0      110.0     110.0       0.0           0.0         0.0           0.0
 35 1242 Guangzhou Pumped Storage               EN         455.8     423.6            7.1        0.0      200.0      200.0     200.0      34.9          17.4         0.0          34.9
            Stage II
 36 1243 Telecommunications                     TC         175.0     148.3            15.3       0.0      100.0      100.0     100.0      24.4          24.4         0.0          24.4
 37 1248 Fertilizer Industry Restructuring      AN         576.8     791.7          (37.3)       0.0      250.0      250.0     250.0       0.1           0.0         0.0           0.1
 38 1261 Hunan Expressway                       TC         201.8     182.6             9.5       0.0       74.0       74.0      74.0       0.0           0.0         0.0           0.0
 39 1262 Jilin Expressway                       TC         423.5     291.0            31.3       0.0      126.0      126.0     126.0       0.0           0.0         0.0           0.0
 40 1270 Tangshan and Chengde                   AN         237.0     291.9          (23.1)       0.0      140.0      140.0     140.0      15.1          10.8         0.0          15.1
            Environmental Improvement
 41 1305 Jing-Jiu Railway Technical             TC         532.0     552.5           (3.9)       0.0      200.0      200.0     200.0       6.1           3.0         0.0           6.1
            Enhancement
 42 1313 Dalian Water Supply                    SI         408.4     308.3            24.5       0.0      160.0      160.0     160.0      33.0          20.6         0.0          33.0
 43 1324 Heilongjiang Expressway                TC         330.0     309.2             6.3       0.0      142.0      142.0     142.0       0.5           0.3         0.0           0.5
 44 1382 Second Telecommunications              TC         324.0     175.2            45.9       0.0      100.0      100.0     100.0      34.5          34.5         0.0          34.5
 45 1386 Fujian Soil Conservation               AN         163.0     159.4             2.2       0.0      65.0       65.0      65.0       4.7           7.2          0.0           4.7
 46 1388 Liaoning Expressway                    TC         292.2     288.1             1.4       0.0      100.0      100.0     100.0       0.1           0.1         0.0           0.1
 47 1427 Fangcheng Port Development             TC         135.0      97.5            27.8       0.0       52.0       52.0      52.0      11.7          22.6         0.0          11.7
 48 1483 Shenyang-Jinzhou Expressway            TC         585.0     729.0          (24.6)       0.0      200.0      200.0     200.0       0.7           0.4         0.0           0.7
 49 1490 Anhui Environmental Improvement        AN          70.0      61.3            12.4       0.0      28.0       28.0      28.0       1.5           5.5          0.0          1.5
            Project for Municipal Wastewater
            Treatment
            Total (PRC)                                  7,066.5   7,365.0           (4.2)      0.0     2,755.8    2,755.8   2,755.8     208.0           7.5         0.0        209.6

Cook Islands
 50 1309 Pearl Industry Development             AN           1.0       0.6           37.6       0.8         0.0        0.8       0.8       0.3         39.0          0.3             0
 51 1317 Education Development                  SI           3.4       3.3             2.1      2.7         0.0        2.7       2.5       0.0          0.8          0.0             0
 52 1588 Cyclone Emergency Rehabilitation       MS           0.9       0.9           (4.0)      0.8         0.0        0.8       0.8       0.1         18.7          0.1             0
            Total (Cook Islands)                             5.3       4.9            7.9       4.3         0.0        4.3       4.1       0.5         11.5          0.5           0.0
                                                                                                                                                               Continued on next page
                                                                                   Table A1.1--Continued
                                                               Project Cost ($ million)                              Loan Data ($ million)                       Cancellation ($ million)
        Loan                 Project              Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR       Total              a
                                                                                                                             Available Cancelled     Percent       ADF         OCR
         No.                                                                   Over/(Under)                                                         Unutilized
Fiji Islands
  53 1164 Second Road Upgrading                    TC          78.0     114.5          (46.8)       0.0      18.0       18.0      18.0       0.0           0.0          0.0          0.0
             Total (Fiji Islands)                              78.0     114.5          (46.8)       0.0      18.0       18.0      18.0       0.0           0.0          0.0          0.0

Federated States of Micronesia (FSM)
  54 1257 Fisheries Development                    AN           7.5        6.5          13.8        6.5        0.0       6.5       6.2       1.1          17.0          1.1          0.0
           Total (FSM)                                          7.5        6.5          13.8        6.5        0.0       6.5       6.2       1.1          17.0          1.1          0.0

India
  55     798   North Madras Thermal Power          EN        627.5      522.8           16.7        0.0    150.0      150.0     150.0       39.6         26.4           0.0        39.6
  56     857   Railways Project                    TC        400.0      229.5           42.6        0.0    190.0      190.0     190.0       12.2          6.4           0.0        12.2
  57     907   Unchahar Thermal Power              EN        564.9      300.7           46.8        0.0    160.0      160.0     160.0       33.3         20.8           0.0        33.3
  58     918   Road Improvement                    TC        253.5      233.6            7.9        0.0    198.0      198.0     198.0       25.1         12.7           0.0        25.1
  59    1029   Second North Madras Thermal         EN        428.2      281.9           34.2        0.0    200.0      200.0     200.0       49.7         24.8           0.0        49.7
               Power
  60    1041   Second Road Project                 TC         313.0     381.9          (22.0)       0.0     250.0     250.0      250.0        0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0
  61    1117   Gandhar Field Development           EN         710.0     533.9            24.8       0.0     267.0     267.0      267.0      68.4         25.6           0.0        68.4
  62    1140   Second Railways                     TC         617.5     330.9            46.4       0.0     225.0     225.0      225.0     120.2         53.4           0.0       120.2
  63    1222   Gas Flaring Reduction               EN       2,976.0   2,145.2            27.9       0.0     300.0     300.0      300.0      59.0         19.7           0.0        59.0
  64    1285   Gas Rehabilitation and Expansion    EN       1,008.0     560.4            44.4       0.0     260.0     260.0      260.0     102.5         39.4           0.0       102.5
               Total (India)                                7,898.6   5,520.8            30.1       0.0    2,200.0   2,200.0    2,200.0     510.0        23.2           0.0        510.0

Indonesia
  65   959 Second Brackishwater Aquaculture        AN          63.4       15.7          75.2        0.0      38.0       38.0      38.0      28.3          74.4         0.0         28.3
            Development
  66   983/ Secondary Cities Urban                  SI        150.2     166.9          (11.1)      50.0      70.0      120.0     125.8       3.0           2.4         1.5           1.5
       984 Development (Sector)
  67 1000 Timber Plantation                        AN          55.5      28.7           48.3        0.0      33.3       33.3      33.3      16.0          48.0         0.0         16.0
  68 1013 Six Universities Development and         SI         142.5     133.5            6.3        0.0     114.0      114.0     114.0      13.0          11.4         0.0         13.0
            Rehabilitation
  69 1017/ Integrated Irrigation Sector            AN         264.0     250.1            5.3       30.0     170.0      200.0     203.2       5.2           2.6         2.6           2.6
      1018
  70 1032 Power XX                                 EN         450.0     472.3           (5.0)       0.0     235.0      235.0     235.0       6.4           2.7         0.0           6.4
  71 1050 Agricultural Technology Schools          SI         119.5      86.8           27.4        0.0      85.0       85.0      85.0       7.8           9.2         0.0           7.8
  72 1077 Botabek Urban Development                SI         111.6     101.9             8.7       0.0      80.0       80.0      80.0       3.9           4.9         0.0           3.9
            Project




                                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 1
  73 1078 Bandar Lampung Urban                      SI         47.1       50.0          (6.0)       0.0      33.0       33.0      33.0       2.2           6.8         0.0           2.2
            Development
  74 1089 Inland Waterways                         SI          75.2      49.6           34.0        0.0      45.0       45.0      45.0      11.6          25.7         0.0         11.6
  75 1092 Power XXI                                EN         420.0     256.0           39.1        0.0     300.0      300.0     300.0     104.4          34.8         0.0        104.4
  76 1099 Second Land Resource Evaluation          AN          95.0      83.8           11.8        0.0      57.0       57.0      57.0       4.6           8.1         0.0          4.6
            and Planning
  77 1100 Technical Education Development           SI        166.7     142.5           14.5        0.0     100.0      100.0     100.0      11.7          11.7         0.0         11.7




                                                                                                                                                                                            49
                                                                                                                                                                 Continued on next page
                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                              Table A1.1--Continued
                                                          Project Cost ($ million)                              Loan Data ($ million)                     Cancellation ($ million)
    Loan               Project               Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR       Total              a
                                                                                                                        Available Cancelled  Percent        ADF         OCR
     No.                                                                  Over/(Under)                                                      Unutilized
 78 1111 Bogor and Palembang Urban             SI        234.7     178.9            23.8        0.0    140.0      140.0     140.0      13.5         9.7         0.0         13.5




                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 1
         Development
 79 1115 Eleventh Road (Sector)               TC          250.0      216.0         13.6        0.0     150.0      150.0     150.0      19.2       12.8          0.0         19.2
 80 1157 Telecommunications                   TC          318.4      191.8         39.8        0.0     185.0      185.0     185.0     112.0       60.6          0.0        112.0
 81 1158 Water Pollution Control              SI           14.0       10.0         28.9        0.0       8.4        8.4       8.4       1.0       12.1          0.0          1.0
 82 1172 Power XXII Project                   EN       2,360.5    1,820.1          22.9        0.0     350.0      350.0     350.0      62.5       17.9          0.0         62.5
 83 1187 Biodiversity Conservation Project    AN           40.8        9.2         77.4       24.5       0.0       24.5      23.2      16.0       69.0         16.0          0.0
 84 1194 Junior Secondary Education           SI          174.9      168.2          3.9        0.0     105.0      105.0     105.0       6.9        6.6          0.0          6.9
 85 1198 Central Java and D.I. Yogyakarta     SI          250.0      193.8         19.5        0.0     150.0      150.0     150.0      24.2       16.1          0.0         24.2
         Urban Dev
 86 1203 Marine Resource Evaluation and       AN          56.0       48.3          13.8        0.0      33.0       33.0      33.0       7.8       23.5          0.0           7.8
         Planning
 87 1232 Third Local Roads                    TC         466.0      329.2          29.4        0.0     200.0      200.0     200.0      48.9       24.5          0.0         48.9
 88 1233 Second Telecommunications            TC         610.0      285.3          53.2        0.0     200.0      200.0     200.0     124.6       62.3          0.0        124.6
 89 1241 Flores Emergency Reconstruction      OT          43.7       37.8          13.5       26.0                 26.0      26.9       6.2       23.2          6.2          0.0
 90 1253 Higher Education Project             SI         235.0      161.9          31.1        0.0     140.0      140.0     140.0      37.4       26.7          0.0         37.4
 91 1299 Rural Health and Population          SI          66.7       41.3          38.1        0.0      40.0       40.0      40.0      10.7       26.9          0.0         10.7
 92 1319 Vocational and Technical             SI         142.4       91.7          35.6        0.0      85.0       85.0      85.0      25.0       29.4          0.0         25.0
         Education
 93 1321 West Lampung Emergency               MS          30.0       27.0           9.9       18.0        0.0      18.0      18.1       1.9       10.8          1.9           0.0
         Reconstruction
 94 1360 Senior Secondary Education            SI        198.6      116.3          41.4        0.0    110.0      110.0     110.0       37.5       34.1          0.0         37.5
         Project
 95 1433 Industrial Technology and Human       IN        104.0       23.4          77.5        0.0      80.0       80.0      80.0      62.2       77.8          0.0         62.2
         Resource Development
         Total (Indonesia)                             7,756.4    5,788.0          25.4      148.5    3,336.7   3,485.2    3,493.8    835.6       23.9          28.3        807.4

Kazakhstan
 96 1337/ Special Assistance                  MS          60.0       59.6           0.7       20.0      40.0       60.0      58.9       0.0        0.0           0.0          0.0
      1338
 97 1420 Educational Rehabilitation and        SI         29.4       25.0          15.0       20.0        0.0      20.0      18.0       0.2        0.8           0.2          0.0
           Management Improvement
           Total (Kazakhstan)                             89.4       84.6           5.4       40.0      40.0       80.0      76.9       0.2        0.2           0.2          0.0

Kyrgyz Republic
 98 1342 Special Assistance                   MS          40.0       40.1          (0.3)      40.0        0.0      40.0      39.9       0.1        0.3           0.1          0.0
 99 1444 Road Rehabilitation                  TC          86.0       76.0          11.6       50.0        0.0      50.0      46.7       0.6        1.2           0.6          0.0
           Total (Kyrgyz Republic)                       126.0      116.1            7.9      90.0        0.0      90.0      86.6       0.7        0.8           0.7           0.0

Lao People's Dem. Rep. (Lao PDR)
 100   928/ Nam Ngum-Luang Prabang Power      EN          12.7       20.3         (60.0)      15.0        0.0      15.0      15.7       0.2        1.0           0.2          0.0
      1308 Transmission
 101 1009 Fourth Road Improvement             TC          42.8       48.8         (14.1)      39.0        0.0      39.0      44.7       0.0        0.0           0.0         0.0
                                                                                                                                                          Continued on next page
                                                                              Table A1.1--Continued
                                                          Project Cost ($ million)                             Loan Data ($ million)                     Cancellation ($ million)
    Loan               Project               Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR      Total              a
                                                                                                                       Available Cancelled  Percent        ADF         OCR
     No.                                                                  Over/(Under)                                                     Unutilized
102 1103 Education Quality Improvement         SI        18.4       17.1             7.1       13.3      0.0      13.3      13.8       1.2         8.8          1.2          0.0
103 1108 Fifth Road Improvement               TC         37.7       37.1             1.5       34.0      0.0      34.0      36.0       0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0
104 1122 Southern Provincial Towns Water       SI        12.0       11.0             8.0        9.6      0.0       9.6      10.3       1.2       11.8           1.2          0.0
         Supply
105 1190 Rehabilitation and Upgrading of       SI         31.2       41.2         (32.0)       9.5       0.0       9.5       9.7       0.0        0.0           0.0          0.0
         Vientiane Water Supply
106 1234 Sixth Road Improvement Project       TC          33.0       31.4            4.9     26.0        0.0     26.0      25.2        0.0        0.1           0.0          0.0
107 1266 Airports Improvement                 TC          44.8       89.9        (100.7)      15.0       0.0      15.0      14.6        0.2        1.5          0.2          0.0
108 1267 Northern Provincial Towns Water      SI          16.3       15.9            2.5      13.0       0.0      13.0      12.7        0.0        0.1          0.0          0.0
         Supply and Sanitation
109 1329 Theun-Hinboun Hydropower             EN         270.0     240.2           11.0       60.0       0.0      60.0      57.7       0.0        0.0           0.0          0.0
110 1348 Primary Health Care                  SI           6.3       5.3           14.9        5.0       0.0       5.0       4.7       0.2        4.6           0.2          0.0
111 1362 Vientiane Integrated Urban           SI          27.7      27.7            0.1       20.0       0.0      20.0      17.2       0.1        0.4           0.1          0.0
         Development
112 1369 Champassak Road Improvement          TC          60.1      51.9           13.6       48.0       0.0      48.0      42.2        0.0       0.0           0.0          0.0
113 1456 Nam Leuk Hydropower                  EN         112.6     107.7             4.4      52.0       0.0      52.0      49.0        0.0       0.0           0.0          0.0
         Total (Lao PDR)                                 725.5     745.6           (2.8)    359.4       0.0     359.4     353.5        3.1        0.9          3.1           0.0

Malaysia
114     713 Sungai Piah Hydropower            EN         141.6     131.2            7.4        0.0      64.2      64.2      64.2      28.4       44.2          0.0          28.4
115     921 Second Compensatory Forestry      AN          69.0      19.1           72.3        0.0      29.5      29.5      29.5      22.0       74.5          0.0          22.0
            Sector
116     980 Third Health (Sector)             SI         231.2     261.8          (13.2)       0.0     105.0     105.0     105.0       0.0        0.0          0.0           0.0
117     992 Semerak Rural Development         AN          95.2      88.8             6.7       0.0      33.2      33.2      33.2       1.3        3.9          0.0           1.3
118 1068 Northern Terengganu Rural            AN          54.7      49.1            10.1       0.0      15.0      15.0      15.0       1.7       11.5          0.0           1.7
            Development
119 1086 Industrial Technology Development     IN         95.5       59.0          38.3        0.0      53.0      53.0      53.0      10.9       20.5          0.0          10.9
            and Management
120 1120 National Coastal Erosion Control     AN          92.1       64.8          29.6        0.0      43.0      43.0      43.0      13.7       31.8          0.0          13.7
            Sector
121 1197 Rehabilitation and Upgrading of       SI        208.0     213.9           (2.8)       0.0     105.0     105.0     105.0      15.9       15.2          0.0          15.9
            Water Supply Systems
122 1238 Second Pahang Barat Integrated       AN          86.5       46.2          46.6        0.0      28.5      28.5      28.5      12.5       43.9          0.0          12.5
            Agriculture
            Total (Malaysia)                           1,073.8     933.9           13.0        0.0     476.4     476.4     476.4     106.4       22.3           0.0        106.4




                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 1
Maldives
123 1121 Second Power System                  EN          10.3       10.5          (2.3)       9.2       0.0       9.2       9.7       0.5        5.3           0.5          0.0
         Development
124 1226 Second Male Port Development         TC          10.4       10.2            2.1       9.2       0.0       9.2       9.1       1.3       13.9           1.3          0.0
         Total (Maldives)                                 20.7       20.7          (0.1)      18.4       0.0      18.4      18.8       1.8        9.4           1.8           0.0

Marshall Islands, Republic of (RMI)
125 1249 Basic Education Development           SI         11.6       11.2           3.0        8.0       0.0       8.0       7.8       0.0        0.6           0.0         0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                    51
126 1316 Health and Population                 SI          7.1        5.9          17.1        5.7       0.0       5.7       5.3       0.1        1.3           0.1         0.0
             Total (RMI)                                  18.7       17.1           8.4       13.7       0.0      13.7      13.1       0.1        0.9           0.1          0.0
                                                                                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                                                                                                                                                                            52
                                                                                    Table A1.1--Continued
                                                                Project Cost ($ million)                             Loan Data ($ million)                       Cancellation ($ million)
    Loan                    Project                Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR      Total              a
                                                                                                                             Available Cancelled     Percent       ADF         OCR
     No.                                                                        Over/(Under)                                                        Unutilized
Mongolia




                                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 1
127 1256     Ulaanbaatar Airport                    TC          49.0       57.5         (17.3)      36.0       0.0      36.0      37.3       0.0           0.0          0.0          0.0
128 1300     Telecommunications                     TC          48.6       49.1          (1.0)      24.5       0.0      24.5      24.1       0.1           0.4          0.1          0.0
129 1334     Power Rehabilitation                   EN          58.0       56.5            2.6      40.0       0.0      40.0      37.8       0.3           0.8          0.3          0.0
130 1364     Roads Development                      TC          31.5       27.4           13.1      25.0       0.0      25.0      22.1       0.6           2.6          0.6          0.0
131 1370     National Air Navigation                TC          32.5       29.2           10.2      24.0       0.0      24.0      21.0       0.3           1.4          0.3          0.0
             Development
132     1492 Energy Conservation                    EN          13.2        9.7          26.8       10.0       0.0      10.0        9.3       0.7          7.7          0.7          0.0
133     1560 Provincial Towns Basic Urban           SI           8.5        7.7           9.4       6.8        0.0      6.8        6.5       0.2          2.9          0.2           0.0
             Services Project
             Total (Mongolia)                                  241.3     237.0            1.8      166.3       0.0     166.3     158.1       2.2           1.4          2.2          0.0

Nepal
 134     859   Hill Fruit Development Project       AN          17.8        3.2          82.0       11.8       0.0      11.8      13.1      10.7          81.5         10.7          0.0
 135     867   East Rapti Irrigation                AN          38.0       12.3          67.6       30.4       0.0      30.4      33.6      23.7          70.4         23.7          0.0
 136     923   Irrigation Sector                    AN          47.4       35.9          24.3       36.3       0.0      36.3      40.0      13.3          33.3         13.3          0.0
 137     964   Secondary Crops Development          AN          15.1        6.2          59.2       13.1       0.0      13.1      13.1       7.8          59.3          7.8          0.0
 138     974   Technical Education and              SI          21.6       19.3          10.6       11.8       0.0      11.8      13.4       0.8           6.0          0.8          0.0
               Vocational Training Development
139      982   Second Road Improvement              TC          58.0       59.4          (2.3)      56.1       0.0      56.1      55.5       3.8           6.8          3.8          0.0
140      987   Special Assistance for Oil Supply    EN          33.8       11.9          64.9       31.5       0.0      31.5      34.5      23.5          68.2         23.5          0.0
141     1011   Seventh Power                        EN          64.0       64.4          (0.6)      51.0       0.0      51.0      57.5       2.4           4.2          2.4          0.0
142     1141   Primary Education Development        SI          24.4       15.8          35.2       19.5       0.0      19.5      19.5       5.9          30.3          5.9          0.0
143     1156   Tourism Infrastructure               OT          14.6        8.9          38.8       10.4       0.0      10.4      10.9       2.8          25.8          2.8          0.0
               Development
144     1165   Third Water Supply and Sanitation     SI         25.0       27.8         (11.2)      20.0       0.0      20.0      20.8       0.3           1.5          0.3          0.0
               Sector
145     1196   Secondary Education Development      SI          15.8        8.6          45.6       12.6       0.0      12.6      12.1        5.6         46.1          5.6          0.0
146     1240   Kathmandu Urban Development          SI          16.0       16.7          (4.4)      12.0       0.0      12.0      12.0        4.5         37.6          4.5          0.0
147     1377   Third Road Improvement               TC          50.0       48.5            2.9     40.0        0.0     40.0      34.9        0.0          0.0          0.0           0.0
148     1512   Tribhuvan International Airport      TC          27.0       22.5          16.6       27.0       0.0      27.0      24.6        2.8         11.3          2.8          0.0
               Improvement
               Total (Nepal)                                   468.5     361.4           22.9      383.5       0.0     383.5     395.6     107.9          27.3        107.8          0.0

Pakistan
 149    700 Left Bank Outfall Drain Project          SI        654.8     844.1          (28.9)     122.0       0.0     122.0     172.5       3.1           1.8          3.1          0.0
            (Stage I)
 150    791 Cotton Development                      AN          82.9       54.1          34.7       66.1       0.0      66.1      77.8      35.6          45.7         35.6          0.0
 151    800 Balochistan Groundwater and             AN          15.8        8.3          47.5       12.6       0.0      12.6      14.9       8.7          58.3          8.7          0.0
            Trickle Irrigation
 152    837 Flood Protection Sector                 AN         160.4     149.5             6.8     115.0       0.0     115.0     128.7       5.1           3.9          5.1          0.0
 153    838 Chitral Area Development                AN          39.1      30.6           21.8       23.5       0.0      23.5      26.2       8.5          32.4          8.5          0.0
 154    901 Khushab Salinity Control and            SI          65.9      68.6           (4.0)      53.0       0.0      53.0      58.4       6.3          10.8          6.3          0.0
            Reclamation
 155    925 KESC Fifth Power (Sector Loan)          EN         389.8     277.4           28.8        0.0     100.0     100.0     100.0       1.6           1.6          0.0          1.6
                                                                                                                                                                 Continued on next page
                                                                                 Table A1.1--Continued
                                                             Project Cost ($ million)                             Loan Data ($ million)                      Cancellation ($ million)
      Loan                  Project             Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR      Total              a
                                                                                                                          Available Cancelled   Percent        ADF         OCR
       No.                                                                   Over/(Under)                                                      Unutilized
156     929/ Third Pirkoh Gas Development        EN         230.4     183.3            19.4       45.0     65.4     110.4      111.6       0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0
        930
157     973 Livestock Development                AN          55.0       30.6          44.4       43.0       0.0      43.0       47.7     23.8        50.0          23.8          0.0
158     977 Primary Education (Girls) Sector     SI          80.5       52.9          34.4       64.2       0.0      64.2       74.4     31.8        42.7          31.8          0.0
159   1001/ Karachi Sewerage                     SI         110.2      101.5           7.9       51.0      34.0      85.0       90.9     10.7        11.8          10.7          0.0
       1002
160    1012 Second Barani Area Development       AN          59.9       51.3          14.4       25.0       0.0      25.0       26.5       3.7       13.9           3.7          0.0
161    1073 WAPDA Eleventh Power                 EN         396.4      323.0          18.5        0.0     215.0     215.0      215.0       7.9        3.7           0.0           7.9
162    1076 Sindh Forestry Development           AN          52.0       26.2          49.6      41.6       0.0      41.6       39.6      16.9       42.5          16.9           0.0
             Project
163    1094 Second Oil and Gas Development       EN          88.0       66.7          24.2         0.0     52.0      52.0       52.0     23.8        45.9           0.0         23.8
164    1138 Sui Southern Gas System              EN         437.0      436.1           0.2         0.0    178.0     178.0      178.0      9.0         5.1           0.0          9.0
             Rehabilitation
165   1143/ WAPDA Tenth Power (Sector)           EN        1415.0      780.8          44.8     125.0     125.0     250.0      253.5       0.0         0.0          0.0           0.0
       1144 Project
166    1179 North-West Frontier Province         AN          41.0       43.0          (4.8)      32.8       0.0      32.8       31.7       0.3        1.0           0.3          0.0
             Barani Area
167    1185 Provincial Highways Project          TC         207.0      220.3          (6.4)     165.4       0.0     165.4      155.2      10.7        6.9          10.7          0.0
168    1200 Health Care Development              SI          77.4       51.8          33.1       60.0       0.0      60.0       58.0      15.1       26.1          15.1          0.0
169    1209 Flood Damage Restoration (Sector)    MS         396.0      258.9          34.6      100.0       0.0     100.0      101.6      23.9       23.6          23.9          0.0
170    1210 Teacher Training                     SI          71.3       26.7          62.6       52.1       0.0      52.1       51.2      29.8       58.1          29.8          0.0
171    1277 Population Project                   SI          39.0       30.6          21.5       25.0       0.0      25.0       24.6       1.5        6.1           1.5          0.0
172    1297 Third Punjab On-Farm Water           AN          87.0       76.0          12.7      62.2        0.0     62.2       62.5      16.1       25.8          16.1           0.0
             Management Project
173    1323 Sukkur Bridge                        TC           64.7       52.2         19.4         0.0     45.0       45.0       45.0     11.4       25.4           0.0         11.4
             Total (Pakistan)                             5,316.4    4,244.3          20.2    1,284.5    814.4    2,098.8    2,197.2    305.2        13.9        251.4         53.8

Papua New Guinea (PNG)
 174 1097 Third Rural Health Services            SI          26.3       20.7          21.5       21.9       0.0      21.9       21.7      5.9        27.1           5.9         0.0
 175 1153/ Transport Infrastructure              TC          69.0       41.5          39.9       30.0      39.0      69.0       69.1     36.9        53.5          15.6        21.3
      1154 Development
 176 1224 Higher Education Project                SI         28.0       25.2          10.0       19.9       0.0      19.9       18.8       4.0       21.1           4.0         0.0
 177 1225 Population and Family Planning          SI         33.0        6.3          80.9        7.2       0.0       7.2        6.9       1.7       24.4           1.7         0.0
           Total (PNG)                                      156.4       93.7          40.1       79.0      39.0     118.0      116.6      48.5       41.6          27.1         21.3

Philippines




                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 1
 178    801/ Fourth Road Improvement             TC         147.0      145.2           1.2         0.0    105.5     105.5      105.5       1.4        1.3          0.0           1.4
       1322
 179    914 Fourteenth Power Sector              EN         161.0      159.0           1.2        0.0     120.0     120.0      120.0       9.0        7.5          0.0           9.0
 180    915 Sorsogon Integrated Area             AN          30.1       29.2           3.0       24.1       0.0      24.1       26.6       3.6       13.6           3.6
             Development                                                                                                                                                           0
 181 1033/ Second Palawan Integrated Area        AN          73.5       85.9         (16.9)      25.0      33.0      58.0       59.2       0.8        1.4          0.5           0.3
       1034 Development
                                                                                                                                                             Continued on next page




                                                                                                                                                                                        53
                                                                                                                                                                                     54
                                                                              Table A1.1--Continued
                                                          Project Cost ($ million)                              Loan Data ($ million)                     Cancellation ($ million)
      Loan                 Project           Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF       OCR       Total              a
                                                                                                                        Available Cancelled  Percent        ADF         OCR
       No.                                                                Over/(Under)                                                      Unutilized
182    1042 Sixteenth Power (Masinloc Thermal EN         441.0     429.3              2.7       0.0    200.0      200.0     200.0       3.2         1.6         0.0           3.2




                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 1
            Power)
183   1048/ Irrigation Systems Improvement    AN          36.3      36.3              0.0      20.0       9.0      29.0      29.9       2.0        6.8          1.2           0.8
       1049
184    1053 Earthquake Damage                 TC         123.0     137.0           (11.3)    100.0        0.0     100.0      98.0       2.0        2.1           2.0          0.0
            Reconstruction
185   1056/ Metropolitan Cebu Water Supply     SI         33.0      24.4             26.0      16.0       6.0      22.0      21.9       5.0       22.7          1.7           3.3
       1057
186    1058 Fifth Road Improvement            TC         205.4     216.6            (5.5)       0.0    150.0      150.0     150.0       5.8        3.9          0.0           5.8
187    1106 Industrial Forest Plantations     AN          41.1      19.8             51.7       0.0     25.0       25.0      25.0      11.8       47.1          0.0          11.8
            (Sector)
188    1163 Mt. Pinatubo Damage               TC          55.0      42.6             22.6      37.0       0.0      37.0      38.5       5.5       14.3           5.5          0.0
            Rehabilitation
189    1207 Meralco Distribution              EN         230.0     197.2             14.3       0.0    138.0      138.0     138.0      12.5        9.1          0.0          12.5
190    1398 Northern Luzon Transmission and   EN         896.3     657.2             26.7       0.0    244.0      244.0     244.0      82.3       33.7          0.0          82.3
            Generation
191    1474 Leyte-Mindanao Interconnection    TC           6.0       5.5              9.1      0.0       5.3       5.3        5.3       0.4        8.1          0.0           0.4
            Engineering Project
            Total (Philippines)                       2,478.7   2,185.2              11.8    222.1    1,035.8   1,257.9    1,261.9    145.3       11.5          14.5        130.8

Samoa
 192 1193 Cyclone Damage Rehabilitation         MS         10.8      12.3         (13.4)       8.6        0.0       8.6       8.8       0.1        1.1           0.1          0.0
          Total (Samoa)                                    10.8      12.3         (13.4)       8.6        0.0       8.6       8.8       0.1        1.1           0.1           0.0

Sri Lanka
 193    899   Perrenial Crops Development       AN         25.7      22.2           13.8      17.3        0.0      17.3      18.7       3.1       16.6           3.1          0.0
 194    955   Smallholder Tea Development       AN         57.1      28.5           50.1      25.0        0.0      25.0      28.1      10.7       38.1          10.7          0.0
 195 1021     Power System Expansion (Sector)   EN         97.5     112.4         (15.3)      74.3        0.0      74.3      81.2       3.8        4.7           3.8          0.0
 196 1038     Second Telecommunications         TC         62.1      60.8            2.0      41.1        0.0      41.1      42.6       9.1       21.3           9.1          0.0
 197 1096     Low-Income Housing Development    SI         32.4      36.0         (11.1)      20.0        0.0      20.0      21.4       0.1        0.3           0.1          0.0
 198 1166     North Western Province Water      SI         40.0      22.4           44.0      30.0        0.0      30.0      29.5      12.2       41.3          12.2          0.0
              Resources Development
199    1183   Participatory Forestry            AN         25.0      24.1            3.7      10.5        0.0      10.5      10.1       2.1       21.3           2.1          0.0
200    1189   Second Health and Population      SI         33.3      27.9           16.0      26.1        0.0      26.1      25.1       3.1       12.3           3.1          0.0
201    1204   Urban Development Sector          SI         36.0      36.7          (1.8)      27.0        0.0      27.0      27.1       1.5        5.4           1.5          0.0
202    1235   Second Water Supply and           SI         51.2      58.8         (14.8)      40.0        0.0      40.0      39.7       0.0        0.0           0.0          0.0
              Sanitation
203    1438   Emergency Rehabilitation of       EN         41.1      42.9          (4.2)      24.0        0.0      24.0      22.5       0.0        0.0           0.0          0.0
              Petroleum Storage Facilities
              Total (Sri Lanka)                          501.4      472.6           5.7      335.3        0.0     335.3     346.0      45.7       13.2          45.7          0.0

                                                                                                                                                          Continued on next page
                                                                                 Table A1.1--Continued
                                                             Project Cost ($ million)                                   Loan Data ($ million)                             Cancellation ($ million)
      Loan               Project                Sector Estimated Actual         Percent        ADF           OCR        Total              a
                                                                                                                                Available Cancelled         Percent         ADF         OCR
       No.                                                                   Over/(Under)                                                                  Unutilized
Thailand
 204 1151 Seventh Power Distribution              EN          434.5      579.1          (33.3)        0.0      109.0      109.0       109.0          6.0            5.5         0.0           6.0
           (Sector)
 205 1170 Third Power Transmission (Sector)       EN          349.1      213.2           38.9         0.0       94.3       94.3         94.3         6.3            6.7         0.0           6.3
           Loan
 206 1176 Fifth Highway (Sector)                  TC          177.0      126.6           28.5         0.0       93.0       93.0        93.0         26.5           28.5         0.0          26.5
 207 1195 Bangkok Urban Transport                 TC          211.2      148.5           29.7         0.0       70.3       70.3        70.3         40.0           56.9         0.0          40.0
 208 1239 Second Rural Telecommunications         TC          373.3      160.3           57.1         0.0       84.1       84.1        84.1         37.5           44.6         0.0          37.5
 209 1245 Fourth Power Transmission               EN          405.8      317.5           21.8         0.0      115.6      115.6       115.6         19.6           16.9         0.0          19.6
           (Sector) Loan
 210 1246 Eighth Power Distribution (Sector)      EN          534.0       517.0           3.2         0.0      134.6      134.6       134.6        11.5             8.6         0.0          11.5
 211 1326 Chonburi Water Supply                   SI           65.0        40.9          37.1         0.0       38.5       38.5        38.5         8.5            22.0         0.0           8.5
 212 1429 Rural Electrification                   EN          429.3       285.4          33.5         0.0      100.0      100.0       100.0        29.5            29.5         0.0          29.5
           Total (Thailand)                                2,979.2     2,388.4           19.8         0.0      839.4      839.4       839.4       185.5            22.1          0.0        185.5

Tonga
 213 1030 Fisheries Development                   AN            2.7        2.6             2.3        2.4        0.0        2.4          2.5         0.0            0.0          0.0          0.0
 214 1303 Transport Infrastructure                TC           12.5       13.3           (6.5)       10.0        0.0       10.0          9.7         0.3            3.0          0.3          0.0
 215 1412 Outer Islands Agricultural              AN            5.7        4.6           19.2         3.6                   3.6          3.3         0.0            0.1          0.0          0.0
          Development
          Total (Tonga)                                        20.9       20.5             1.7       16.0        0.0       16.0         15.5         0.3            1.9          0.3          0.0

Vanuatu
 216   843/ Santo Port                            TC           10.5       10.3             2.2        9.2        0.0        9.2          9.1         0.0            0.1          0.0          0.0
      1080
 217 1448 Urban Infrastructure                    SI          12.8       12.7              0.9      10.0         0.0       10.0         9.0         0.0            0.0          0.0           0.0
 218 1684 Cyclone Emergency Rehabilitation        MS            2.0        2.7          (32.5)        2.0        0.0         2.0         2.0         0.0            1.6          0.0          0.0
            Total (Vanuatu)                                    25.3       25.6           (1.2)       21.2        0.0        21.2        20.1         0.0            0.2          0.0           0.0

Viet Nam
 219 1344 Red River Delta Water Resources          SI          75.0       73.7             1.7       60.0        0.0       60.0         54.4         2.8            5.2          2.8          0.0
          Sector
 220 1354 Saigon Port                             TC           40.0       34.2           14.5        30.0        0.0       30.0         28.2         0.7            2.5          0.7          0.0
          Total (Viet Nam)                                    115.0      107.9            6.1        90.0        0.0       90.0         82.6         3.5            4.3          3.5           0.0

                Totals                                    39,624.4    33,255.7           16.1    4,743.2    11,569.5   16,312.7    16,459.4     2,695.0        -              671.1      2,024.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 1
AN = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, KESC = Karachi Electric Supply Corporation, MS = multisector, OT = others, SI = social infrastructure, TC = transport and communications,
WAPDA = Water and Power Development Authority.
a
  Available loan amount represents the dollar equivalent of the special drawing rights loan at the time of loan cancellation/closing.
Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     55
56        Appendix 1



                 Table A1.2: Most Number of Projects with Cost Divergence 20% or More
                      (for project completion reports completed from 1998 to mid-2003)

Item                                             Cost Underrun                      Cost Overrun
                                                Percent to      Average           Percent to      Average
                                         No.   Total Projects (unweighted)   No. Total Projects (unweighted)

A. By Sector

     Social Infrastructure                23        38.3          36.4        1          1.7         32.0
     Agriculture                          21        43.8          48.9        2          4.2         26.0
     Energy                               16        37.2          36.4        4          9.3         43.8
     Transport                            14        25.0          39.0       10         17.9         41.5
     Other Sectors                         3         5.9          46.2        3         23.1         42.9

                Total                   77                                   20
         % to Total Projects           35.0                                  9.1

B. By Country

     Indonesia                            17        54.8          42.1
     Pakistan                             13        54.2          34.2        2          8.3         26.4
     Nepal                                 8        53.3          49.9
     Thailand                              7        70.0          35.5        2         20.0         33.3
     India                                 6        60.0          38.8
     China, Peoples Republic of                                               6         26.1         33.6
     Lao People's Dem. Rep.                                                   3         21.4         72.5
     Bangladesh                                                               1          4.8         33.2

                Total                   51                                   14
         % to Total Projects           23.0                                  6.3

Source: Post Evaluation Information System.
                                                                                            Appendix 1          57


                          Table A1.3: Cancelled Amounts for All Loans
                                           ($ million)



Source                                                  1998       1999       2000       2001      2002


Ordinary Capital Resources                              1,560        858      1,051       892       1,012
Asian Development Fund                                    325        116         97        54         125

    Total                                               1,885        974      1,148       946       1,137
Source: ADB. 2003. Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance Portfolio Performance for the Period Ending
31 December 2002 . Manila.



                 Table A1.4:Cumulative Cancelled Amounts for Closed Loans

Status                                                  1998       1999       2000       2001      2002

Number of loans closed                                     62         60         65        53          69
Loan amounts ($ million)                                3,511      4,533      5,512     3,243       6,558
Cumulative Disbursed Amounts ($ million)                2,889      3,595      4,967     2,309       5,401
Cumulative Cancelled Amounts ($ million)                  622        938        546       935       1,157
Ratio of Cancellations to Loan Amounts (%)                 18         21         10        29          18
Ratio of Cancellations to Cumulative                       22         26         11        41          21
Disbursements (%)
Source: ADB. 2003. Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance Portfolio Performance for the Period Ending
31 December 2002 . Manila.
58            Appendix 2

                 ANALYSIS OF A SAMPLE OF 30 PROJECT COMPLETION REPORTS
                                  ISSUED IN 1980 and 1981

                 Table A2.1: Basic Data Regarding Sample of 30 PCRs Issued in 1980
                                             and 1981

               Item                                                              Values      Percentages

               Projects In:
                  Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector                           11            36.7
                  Energy Sector                                                       5            16.7
                  Social Infrastructure Sector                                        5            16.7
                  Transport and Communications Sector                                 9            30.0
                        Total                                                        30           100.0

               Average Special Funds ($ million)                                 3.496             27.5
               Average Ordinary Capital Resources ($ million)                    9.235             72.5
                       Total                                                    12.732            100.0

               Loan Data
                 Average Date of Approval                                       May-73
                 Actual Date of Loan Effectiveness                              Sep-73
                 Actual Closing Date                                            Oct-79
                 Actual Duration Between Approval and Closing                      6.3
                 Average Number of Extensions                                      0.5

               PCR = project completion report.
               Source: Operations Evaluation Department.

             Table A2.2: Loan Data Regarding Sample of 30 PCRs Issued in 1980 and 1981

                                                                                Amount            Percent of Total
     Item                                                                      ($ million)     Weighted    Unweighted

     Original Loan Allocation
     Works                                                                       5.265             41.4         38.6
     Goods                                                                       4.673             36.7         40.2
     Consulting Services                                                         0.484              3.8          5.3
     Administration                                                              0.000              0.0          0.0
     Other Costs                                                                 0.072              0.6          0.9
     Interest During Construction                                                0.575              4.5          4.5
     Unallocated                                                                 1.336             10.5         10.5
        Total (Original Allocation)                                             12.732            100.0        100.0

     Net Loan Amount Disbursed
     Works                                                                       5.391             47.5         43.4
     Goods                                                                       4.527             39.9         44.9
     Consulting Services                                                         0.493              4.3          6.2
     Administration                                                              0.000              0.0          0.0
     Other Costs                                                                 0.054              0.5          0.6
     Interest During Construction                                                0.477              4.2          4.3
     Unallocated                                                                 0.026              0.2          0.7
        Total (Net Amount Disbursed)                                            11.356            100.0        100.0

     % Disbursement                                                              89.2%

     PCR = project completion report.
     Note:    Weighted values take into account the size of the project or loan; unweighted values do not adjust for size.
     Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
                                                                                                                 Appendix 2           59
          Table A2.3: Project Cost Data in 30 Project Completion Reports Issued in 1980 and 1981

                                                                        Cost       % of Weighted % of Weighted % of Unweighted
Estimate at Appraisal                                                ($ million)        Cost      Base Cost          Cost
Civil Works                                                            12.824            57.5          66.3           48.9
Survey, Investigation, Design, and Mapping                               0.012            0.1           0.1            0.0
Research and Development (extension and demonstration)                   0.061            0.3           0.3            0.3
Institutional Development and Strengthening                              0.000            0.0           0.0            0.0
Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture (purchase + maintenance)              4.446           19.9          23.0           25.7
Materials                                                                0.000            0.0           0.0            0.0
Goods (=48+49)                                                           4.320           19.4          22.4           25.6
Consulting Services                                                      0.897            4.0           4.6            5.3
Training and Fellowships                                                 0.014            0.1           0.1            0.1
Operation and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                              0.022            0.1           0.1            0.1
Financing of NGOs                                                        0.000            0.0           0.0            0.0
Implementation Assistance                                                0.026            0.1           0.1            0.1
Land                                                                     0.644            2.9           3.3            1.4
Capital Goods                                                            0.001            0.0           0.0            0.0
Incremental Administrative Costs                                         0.000            0.0           0.0            0.0
Initial Working Capital                                                  0.091            0.4           0.5            0.4
Taxes and Duties                                                         0.295            1.3           1.5            1.5
        Total Base Costs                                               19.328            86.6         100.0           86.6
Physical Contingencies                                                   0.185            0.8           1.0            0.9
Foreign Price Contingencies                                              0.369            1.7                          1.4
Local Price Contingencies                                                0.266            1.2                          1.0
        Total Contingencies                                              2.440           10.9                         10.5
Service Charge/Interest During Construction                              0.550            2.5                          2.9
        Total Cost                                                     22.319           100.0                        100.0

Actual Cost As Per PCR
Civil Works                                                             20.206           61.5             65.6                 57.8
Survey, Investigation, Design, and Mapping                               0.003            0.0              0.0                  0.0
Research and Development (extension and demonstration)                   0.039            0.1              0.1                  0.1
Institutional Development and Strengthening                              0.000            0.0              0.0                  0.0
Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture (purchase + maintenance)              7.658           23.3             24.9                 28.3
Materials                                                                0.089            0.3              0.3                  0.1
Goods (=74+75)                                                           7.747           23.6             25.2                 28.4
Consulting Services                                                      1.102            3.4              3.6                  4.8
Training and Fellowships                                                 0.022            0.1              0.1                  0.1
Operation and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                              0.339            1.0              1.1                  0.7
Financing of NGOs                                                        0.000            0.0              0.0                  0.0
Implementation Assistance                                                0.053            0.2              0.2                  0.1
Land                                                                     1.056            3.2              3.4                  1.8
Capital Goods                                                            0.000            0.0              0.0                  0.0
Incremental Administrative Costs                                         0.094            0.3              0.3                  0.2
Initial Working Capital                                                  0.090            0.3              0.3                  0.3
Taxes and Duties                                                         0.045            0.1              0.1                  0.8
        Total Base Costs                                                30.793           93.8            100.0                 95.2
Physical Contingencies                                                   0.065            0.2                                   0.4
Foreign Price Contingencies                                              0.031            0.1                                   0.2
Local Price Contingencies                                                0.012            0.0                                   0.1
        Total Contingencies                                              1.049            3.2                                   2.7
Service Charge/Interest During Construction                              0.999            3.0                                   2.1
        Total Cost                                                      32.841          100.0                                 100.0

% Increase in Cost                                                        47.1

Appraisal Estimate of Foreign Exchange Cost                             10.711           53.5             61.6
Appraisal Estimate of Local Currency Cost                                9.318           46.5             38.4
Actual Foreign Exchange Cost                                            11.805           42.5             50.1
Actual Local Currency Cost                                              15.940           57.5             49.9
NGO = nongovernment organization, PCR = project completion report.
Note: Weighted values take into account the size of the project or loan; unweighted values do not adjust for size.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
60        Appendix 3



          ANALYSIS OF 220 PROJECT COMPLETION REPORTS ISSUED AFTER 1998

A.        Scope

1.      A study was undertaken to quantitatively document a number of characteristics of
investment projects completed since 1996, and investigate their relationships with cost
variations and loan cancellations.1 Of particular interest were such features as the project's size,
duration, sector, country, funding sources, estimated and actual costs by expenditure category,
complexity as determined by numbers of components and scope changes, specific reasons
given for time overruns, loan cancellations, cost underruns, project success ratings, and
economic and financial internal rates of return (EIRR and FIRR).

B.        Methodology

2.      All investment projects completed from 1996 through 2002 were included which (i) had
project completion reports (PCRs) issued from January 1998 through June 2003, and (ii) were
typical investment projects or sector investment projects (program loans and development
finance institutions were excluded). For all projects with cost underruns or overruns of more
than 20% compared with the original estimate of project cost, additional data were entered
regarding scope changes, reasons for loan cancellations, cost underruns, and time overruns.
The grouping of 220 projects was subjected to statistical analysis, which is summarized in this
special evaluation study (SES). Tables A3.1­A3.3 report the main statistics calculated. Tables
A3.1a­A3.1c distinguish between projects with (i) cost underruns higher than 20% above the
original cost estimate (77 projects), (ii) cost overruns more than 20% lower than the original
estimate (20 projects), and (iii) cost variations that were less than 20% above or below the
estimate (123 projects). Tables A3.2a­A3.2c distinguish between five macrosectors: agriculture
and natural resources (AN), energy (EN), social infrastructure (SI), transport and
communications (TC), and other sectors (OS). Those macrosectors constitute mainly
multisectoral emergency response projects and some industry projects. Tables A3.3a­A3.3c
distinguish between 11 developing member countries (DMCs) that had 10 projects or more in
the sample. Country findings in particular should be looked at with caution, because the number
of observations was often small. Findings are relatively more robust for Indonesia, Pakistan, the
People's Republic of China (the PRC), and Bangladesh, with 31, 24, 23, and 21 projects
included, respectively. On the other hand, the grouping is not a sample in a strict statistical
sense; all investment projects with PCRs were taken into account.

C.        Limitations

3.      The collective PCRs may not fully image all projects with cost variations, given that the
proportions of loan cancellations by sector and country in particular were found to be slightly
higher for projects without PCRs (as yet) from those with PCRs.2 The situation may, therefore,
be somewhat more acute than the analysis indicates. But this cannot be proven until the PCRs
with final estimates of the project cost variations are issued.

4.      All financial figures are presented in US dollar equivalent values. In loans funded by
special funds (SF), project financial data have been expressed in the Loan Agreement in special
1
    For the purposes of this appendix, loan savings shall be subsumed under loan cancellations.
2
    A separate analysis was conducted for 447 projects in the four main macrosectors --AN, EN, SI, and TC--
    comparing those with PCRs and without PCRs. Two hundred nineteen projects with PCRs had an average loan
    cancellation of 17% (unweighed), 228 projects without PCRs had a cancellation of 21.3%. The average for the four
    sectors was 19%.
                                                                                                     Appendix 3       61


drawing rights (SDR). Such data have been converted into their dollar values at the time of the
various loan disbursements, in line with standard practice at the Asian Development Bank
(ADB). This means that the loan disbursement figures of certain SF-based projects may be
reflected with equivalent dollar values at the time of each individual disbursement, which may
cumulatively differ from the equivalent dollar value as reflected in the appraisal document.

5.     Not all PCRs included expenditure data in the recommended ADB disbursement and
cost categorizations, so the study team had to make some assumptions. In cases where data
were missing or demonstrably incorrect, the data were excluded from statistical manipulation.

6.      Reasons for cost underruns, scope changes, and time underruns or overruns have been
taken from PCRs, but may not have been recorded systematically; they are based on ultimately
subjective perceptions of the PCR writers. As mentioned, these data were gathered only for
projects with cost variations greater than 20%. The findings are indicative, and should be
interpreted with caution.

D.        Findings

          1.        General

7.     Time of project approval. Many of the projects in the sample were already approved in
the early 1990s. More than 90% of the projects were approved before June 1995, when ADB
issued new project administration instructions for cost estimating, particularly regarding price
contingencies. A newer generation of completed projects may have lower averages of cost
overruns and underruns.

8.       Project duration and delays. More than 90% of all projects in the grouping were
delayed, and exceeded their planned durations. The average time between approval and
effectiveness of the loan was 1 year. The average delay between the closing date of the Loan
Agreement and the actual loan closing date was 2.6 years. Overall, the average period from
project approval until completion was 7.4 years, i.e., 2.6 years longer than planned in the report
and recommendation of the President (RRP). The consequences of these delays for cost
variations are the increased effects of inflation and possible changes of exchange rates during
those extended periods (both between local currency and the dollar, and between SDR and the
dollar). Additional consulting services needed due to the delays also affect project costs. The
data collected show that projects with cost underruns are not completed sooner. Overall, both
projects with large cost underruns (i.e., more than 20% less than the estimates) and overruns
(more than 20% over the estimates) had somewhat longer delays (3.1 and 2.8 years,
respectively) than projects with less cost variation (2.5 years). Projects with large underruns, but
that take much longer to complete, indicate inefficiencies in the use of capital.

9.      Size of loans and projects. A modest but statistically significant negative correlation
was found between the absolute size of the actual loan disbursed, and the relative portion
cancelled and relative cost underrun. 3 The larger the loan, the smaller the proportion of the loan
or project cost canceled. This is probably why very large projects often have a lower proportion
financed by the loan. The consequence is that even when a project cost underrun is incurred,
the loan can still be fully disbursed. So when ADB finances a relatively smaller portion of the


3
    Pearson's correlations: r = 0.2321 and 0.1729 respectively. All r referred to in this appendix have a confidence level
    of 99% or higher.
62        Appendix 3



project, the likelihood of a subsequent loan cancellation is smaller.4 This finding is not mirrored
for the overall project costs; many larger projects have either a large relative cost underrun, or a
large relative cost overrun. Larger projects seem to be estimated less adequately than smaller
projects. The average size of projects with large cost underrun ratios was $240 million, and that
of their loans was $82 million. The average size of projects without large cost variation ratios
was only a little more than half of that at $126 million, and that of their loans was $63 million.
The average size of projects with large cost overrun ratios was $264 million, and that of their
loans was $103 million. Overall, the relation between cost variations and loan cancellations in
the sample was r =0.7613.

10.     Size of cost underruns and loan cancellations. The average size of project cost
variation was ­$25 million on an average $178 million cost, indicating an overall unweighted 5
overestimation of the project cost at appraisal of 12.9%. Because cost variations are larger for
larger projects and they have more cost underruns, the percentage of the total cost of the
220 projects canceled is higher (13.9% on a weighted basis). The proportion of the loan in the
projects canceled was 16.4% (or an average of $11.7 million off each loan), also lower than that
calculated for all loans approved in 1985­1994 (Appendix 6). When all PCRs for projects
completed between 1996 and mid-2003 are turned in, the cancellation percentage can be
expected to rise to about 19% before any beneficial effects for more recent projects will be felt
from such new developments as lower international and national inflation, and the new system
of calculation for price contingencies.

11.     Apart from project costs, loan cancellations and cost underrun proportions were
negatively correlated with the proportions of works expenditures and with operation and
maintenance (O&M) expenditures: the lower the relative amounts for works and the higher the
amounts for O&M, the higher the likelihood of cancellations and cost underruns. O&M amounts
planned are seldom spent within the project life, also because of delays during implementation.
O&M amounts may not be overestimated, but governments often cannot honor the
commitments because of recurrent budget constraints. It should be cautioned that the
correlations are not beyond r =.2500, indicative of the complexities in the analysis and the
variety of circumstances that can lead to cost variations. For example, cost underruns were not
found statistically related to levels of depreciation of currencies per se, or to relative amounts for
purchase of goods, consultants, training, price contingencies, and other costs. Cost underruns
were related only to underspending in the major expenditure categories such as works, but not
in most of the smaller categories such as training, O&M, or taxes. Despite substantial
underestimation in many cases of such small categories as implementation assistance, land
acquisition or right of way, and capital goods purchase, this did not have a statistical relation
with cost overrun situations. Appendix 5 shows findings of the correlation analysis.

12.     Role of financing sources other than ADB and government. The presence of
financing sources other than ADB or the government contributed to the likelihood of cost
underruns and overruns of projects. Other financing sources included external agencies
providing grants or loans, local banks, and even contributions by beneficiaries. Although 31% of
projects without large cost variations had additional financing sources, the proportions were
51% for projects with large cost underruns, and 65% for projects with overruns. Simplicity in
funding situations apparently helps prevent large cost variations. Conversely, the presence of
other financing sources leads to a higher likelihood of large cost variations; a greater multiplicity
of interests may lead to more disjointed implementation processes . The influence of other

4
    R = ­0.5850 for project cost and loan proportion.
5
    Unweighted means that the average percentage is not weighted in accordance with the project's financial size.
                                                                                  Appendix 3     63


funding sources on costs may be greater than is evident from the data. In the project case
studies, some projects that had not budgeted for contributions from other funding sources,
sometimes got additional funds from such sources during implementation. That then led either
to loan cancellations, or to increased scope and cost overruns.

13.     Role of scope changes. There was no statistical relationship between the number of
project components and the likelihood of loan or cost underruns. But the number of scope
changes recorded markedly affected cost variations (r = 0.5345) and loan cancellations (r =
0.3222), as expected. Many projects with large underruns, however, still had minor scope
additions, apart from scope reductions. This phenomenon is indicative of efforts sometimes
undertaken to gear up nonperforming projects by adding scope where the original scope proved
unattainable. Scope changes are among the main reasons mentioned for cost underruns in
PCR narratives. Scope changes were not recorded for projects in the sample with less than
20% cost variation, but may have played an important role in increasing expenditures for
projects that otherwise would have had larger cost underruns.

14.     Role of exchange rates and price contingencies in 1991­1996 projects. Changes in
exchange rates between the dollar and local currencies are recorded for each project in the
grouping. Changes were large in the period studied (mainly 1991­1996). But the dollar at the
end of a project was worth an average of 2.5 times the local currency it bought at the start.
Thus, many projects weresubject to combined effects of both serious local inflation and
depreciation of local currency. Thus, local currency depreciation does not always mean fewer
dollars spent and, therefore, fewer loan cancellations. Whether this happens largely depends on
the amount of foreign exchange needed in a project. The Lao PDR, with the largest currency
depreciation in the group, had fewer cancellations and underruns than most other countries
studied. The Lao PDR also had a low proportion of loans for reimbursing local currency costs
(22%). Indonesia, which had the second-worst currency depreciation, had large cost underruns
and loan cancellations. But Indonesia also had substantially more loans devoted to funding local
costs (36% vs 22% in the Lao PDR). Important to the impact of exchange rate changes is the
way in which they are foreseen at the time of project appraisal, and how these prospects are
taken into account in calculating price contingencies. As explained in the main text of this report,
the system for calculating price contingencies has changed over time, with new (although non-
mandatory) guidelines issued in July 1995. Almost 90% of the projects reviewed here were
appraised before the new guidelines, so the influence of these guidelines cannot be very large
in this analysis. Local and foreign price contingencies usually took into account inflation
prospects--but much less, the prospects of depreciation of the local currency against the dollar,
or the dollar against the SDR in the case of SF-financed projects. If these had been considered,
then contingencies would have gone down significantly, as is demonstrated by a separate
analysis of price contingencies before and after introduction of the new system for projects in
India, Indonesia, and Pakistan. From 23 projects in the sample, which were appraised shortly
after the new guidelines were introduced, it is clear that the total price contingencies averaged
$5 million, whereas they averaged $14.8 million under the old system. In relative terms, the
23 new project budgets devoted 4.7% to price contingencies; the previous projects budgeted
7.0%. If the difference between the old and new systems is a minimum of 2.3%, then the
average cost underrun for newer projects would be 2.3% lower from this factor alone.

15.     Reasons given in for time overruns in project completion reports. Cost underruns
and overruns were both correlated with time overruns, indicating that the problems of projects
with large cost variations translate into delays. Narratives in PCRs regarding time overruns were
categorized in terms of main reasons provided. Indirectly, they provide an angle on cost
variations. The most important reasons given for time overruns were (i) government delays
64     Appendix 3



(50% of the projects); (ii) procurement-related delays (37%); and (iii) other delays of disparate
nature (36%), indicating the difficulty to predict all the delays that may arise. Secondary factors
were (i) contractor delays (19%), (ii) delays in work progress (18%), and (iii) start-up delays
(16%). Time overruns should normally lead to higher costs because of higher fees for consulting
services and, especially when exchange rates are fixed, international and local inflation.
Therefore, another type of relation with cost underruns, explainable by the finding that ADB
sometimes closes loans before all works and other activities are completed. Loan agreements
have fixed durations, and extensions are granted only after special ADB approval. Almost 80%
of all projects were granted extensions; almost 50% were granted more than one. But after the
third extensions, operations departments often deny additional requested extensions, because
deadlines have repeatedly been failed to be met, and funds are needed more urgently
elsewhere. One special reason for time overruns should be highlighted. About 18% of projects
(one in six) has been affected in some way by calamities: natural disaster, war, or security-
related factors. The proportion may be larger than for projects with less cost variations, but no
data were gathered to check this. Again, the projects indicate that some levels of cost variation
are facts of life. Delays by ADB and consultants were admitted in 7% of the projects in the
sample.

16.     Quality of project preparation. About a third of the projects with large cost variations
were preceded by project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA). This is somewhat lower
than the proportion for other projects, 39%. But there is some relationship between PPTA and
the quality of cost estimating. This relationship was, however, not statistically significant at a
0.01% level This is partly due to the quality of project preparation in some countries, which
obviates the need for PPTAs. In countries such as India and Thailand, feasibility studies are
conducted by the executing agencies (EAs) themselves, without support from ADB PPTAs. Also
given that cost underruns are high in these countries, the findings indicate that if a PPTA is not
conducted, there is a greater likelihood of poorer cost estimates and ultimately, larger cost
variations.

17.     Loan cancellations and types of disbursement. Per the appraisal estimate, an
average of 42% of loans was to be spent on works, 23% on goods (i.e., equipment, vehicles,
furniture, and materials), 7% on consulting services, 6% on service charges, and 19% on other
costs (Figure A3.1). Actual disbursement patterns show that most of the unallocated amounts
went to works, and to some extent, to goods (Figure A3.2). These two categories accounted for
49% and 27% of the total disbursements. The study did not find other large differences in the
distribution of loan funds across expenditure categories, as compared with the original
estimates. In absolute figures, expenditures in all categories had gone down, and were least for
works (98% of estimated cost). (In terms of overall project costs, the percentage was 109%.)
The effect of loan cancellations on the level of service charges and interest during construction
(IDC) was proportionate to the level of overall cancellations.
                                                                                                               Appendix 3        65




                           Figure A3.1: Average Loan Allocation and Disbursement Proportions


             60.0

             50.0

             40.0
  Percent




             30.0

             20.0

             10.0

                 0.0
                                 Works      Goods     Consulting    Administration    Other Costs    Service       Unallocated
                                                       Services                                      Charge

                                                              allocation    disbursement




                                    Figure A3.2: Average Loan Allocations and Disbursements


                       $35.000

                       $30.000

                       $25.000

                       $20.000
            Millions




                       $15.000

                       $10.000

                       $5.000

                       $0.000
                                    Works     Goods    Consulting    Administration   Other Costs   Service     Unallocated
                                                        Services                                    Charge

                                                              allocation   disbursement




18.     Reasons mentioned in project completion reports for loan cancellations. The
reasons given in PCRs for loan cancellations are not classified and thus may be subject to
subjective biases of their authors. Nevertheless, this study attempted to categorize the
narratives for the 97 projects with large cost variations in the sample. The patterns follow. The
main reasons recorded were cancellations due to lower cost of works during implementation,
and cancellations of subcomponents and contract packages (both 49% of all projects in the
sample). Loan cancellations due to lower prices of equipment and materials was the third most
important reason (38%). This reflects an observation from the country studies conducted as part
66         Appendix 3



of this SES, that over the period, the international prices of goods in major sectors such as
equipment for EN and water supply projects had gone down, whereas competition from
cheaper, locally made equipment had increased. The fourth most important reason, recorded in
18% of the projects, was cancellation due to changes to alternate financing sources, whether to
local banks such as in the PRC, or to agencies that provide grants such as in Pakistan.
Vigorous bidding competition was mentioned as an important reason for cancellation in 18% of
the projects, much lower than the 40% recorded for projects in the PRC but still significant, and
probably correlated with other reasons discussed. It is recognized that many of the reasons
mentioned may have underlying causes, and may need further explanation.

19.     Breakdown of project cost estimates.6 Of the base costs incurred, an average of 53%
was spent on works (excluding detailed design and research), 21% on goods, and 6% on
consulting services. Of the total cost, 6% was spent on service charges--about the same
percentage as planned during appraisal, despite many delays.7 Works and goods can,
therefore, generally be seen as the main categories in which cost variations have major impacts
on overall project costs. The following categories were usually overspent as compared with the
appraisal estimate: works (an average of 109% of appraisal estimates), implementation
assistance (166%), incremental administrative costs (105%), capital goods (126%), and land
acquisition/right of ways (129%). Categories which, on average, were underspent were goods
(90%) training and workshops (76%), O&M (87%), working capital (79%), and taxes and duties
(38%). Taxes and duties, estimated at 6% of base cost, were only 2% in the final cost
breakdown. Figure A3.3 presents the cost composition by sector and on average, as estimated
at appraisal.

20.     EN projects, the category with the largest projects, had planned to spend the largest
proportion of budgets on works. But in relative terms, TC projects budgeted the largest single
proportion for works (71% of base costs). Goods were the second-largest category overall (22%
of base costs), and other base costs, as a remaining category, were 28%. Contingencies and
service charges/interest during construction (SC&IDC) were budgeted at an average of 19.0%
for each project; 5.5% for physical contingencies, 6.8% for price contingencies, and 6.4% for
SC&IDC.




6
    The composition of the appraised cos ts can vary significantly among projects, but almost all projects have in
    common a portion for works, goods, and other, less substantial cost items such as base project costs. Usually on
    top of this were some physical and price contingencies, and SC&IDC. Works can include civil works, mechanical
    works, land leveling works, etc. The goods budget item can consist of the purchase or maintenance of equipment,
    vehicles, and furniture, as well as acquisition of materials. Other base costs usually consist of such budget items as
    (in decreasing average cost) (i) capital goods (although only used in a few projects); (ii) consulting services; (iii)
    institutional development and strengthening; (iv) land acquisition/right of ways; (v) taxes and duties;
    (vi) incremental administrative costs; (vii) training and fellowships; (viii) survey, investigation, design, and mapping;
    (ix) implementation assistance; (x) initial working capital; (xi) research and development (extension and
    demonstration); and (xii) financing of NGOs (very small).
7
    In absolute terms, the amount went down due to the reduced cost of the projects: the average amount planned was
    $16 million, the average incurred during the life of the projects was $13 million.
                                                                                                  Appendix 3   67


                    Figure A3.3: Cost Composition of Average Project per Sector




            AN = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, OS = other sectors, SI = social
            infrastructure, TC = transport and communications.
            Note: OS sometimes has a large component of capital goods, but the number of projects in this
            category was only 13 of the sample of 220.


21.     Reasons given in PCRs for cost underruns. The study classified the main reasons
given in PCRs for projects with large cost underruns (77 of 220, or 35%). The most important
reasons recorded were (i) exchange rate fluctuations/depreciation of local currency (44% of the
projects in the sample), (ii) overestimation of base costs at appraisal (32%), (iii) lower-than-
anticipated prices during implementation (33%), (iv) changes in project scope (25%),
(v) deletion of project components (21%), and (vi) other reasons (28%). When combined, 32%
of the reasons given are related to wrong estimates of the base costs (i.e., wrong quantities and
equipment prices estimated). Seventy-one percent of all projects were affected by pricing-
related factors, 34% by scope-related factors, and 39% by other reasons. It must be added that
"other reasons" can comprise many types of factors, including ADB "spring cleaning"
operations 8 in combination with occasional needs to fund emergency projects in response to
calamities.

22.     Scope changes. The number of scope changes was investigated for all projects with
major cost underruns or overruns. The average number found was 1.17 for projects with
underruns, and 1.06 for projects with overruns. Seventy-seven percent of all projects had one or
more extensions; this figure varied little among sectors. Thirty-eight percent of all projects with
large underruns had major scope reductions, 17% also had minor additions. Of the projects with
overruns, 56% had major scope additions, which must be important in explaining the large cost
overruns. But the reasons for the scope changes are difficult to classify; whether they related to
bad cost estimating or to forces that could not be anticipated or controlled, was not investigated
in depth in this study.
8
    Canceling portions of slow-moving loans, and closing loans, to generate funds for new projects.
68        Appendix 3




23.     Scope for improvement of cost estimates. The ADB study for the PRC (para. 111 of
the main text) reflected that there should be special attention for improving the estimation of the
base cost at appraisal. This study agrees on the basis of the frequency of observations made in
PCRs in this regard; almost one third of PCRs studied for projects with large cost variations
related these at least in part to inaccurate estimating of base costs. But for countries such as
the PRC, without stable exchange rates over much of the recent past, the argument needs to be
expanded. If the proportion of loan cancellations is to be reduced substantially, much more
attention should be paid to inflation and possible exchange rate fluctuations, as well as to more
specific international and local price developments. Even with "perfect" base cost estimates, the
final cost may be way off in countries with floating exchange rates, because of unforeseen price
changes and wrongly calculated price contingencies.

24.     Relationship of cost variations with success rates. The study compared the success
ratings given in PCRs of projects with large cost variations with success rates for other projects.
Almost 60% of the projects with large underruns were regarded as successful. This compares
with 77% for projects without large cost variations, and 80% of projects with large cost overruns.
The average effect of large cost underruns as a result of price, scope, and other changes,
therefore, is negative rather than positive. The correlation between cost underrun and rating
was r = ­0.2456, and between loan cancellation and rating was r = ­0.3237. The positive effect
on the economies due to lower final costs, in some cases, is apparently outweighed by negative
effects on project quality (except for energy projects, as will be be discussed later). Another
indicator of this is that major cost underruns were generally also correlated with project scope
reductions, and overruns with scope additions. Scope reductions must contribute to lower
project success rates; scope additions to higher success rates, despite the higher costs.9

25.     A study of EIRR for projects as recalculated by their PCRs does not corroborate the
negative effect of underruns in economic terms. Rates of return do not necessarily fully equate
with success rates, which are based on more criteria than these. The average EIRR for projects
with and without large cost variations is almost identical, at about 20% (only 1% lower than
estimated at appraisal). The FIRR indicator displays greater differences. The average FIRR for
projects with large cost overruns is 6%, whereas for cost underrun projects it is 13%. Projects
without major cost variations had an average FIRR of 10%. The relationship between cost
variations and FIRRs at completion was statistically significant, at r = 0.2242. The conclusion is:
Projects with large cost underruns may be less successful than other projects, but the financial
return for the subgroup for which FIRRs were calculated by PCRs (40 of 77) was higher than for
cases without large cost variations, or for cases with higher costs.

          2.       Differences Between Projects with Large Underruns and Projects with
                   Large Overruns

26.    The previous argument may be expanded to include more substantial comparisons
among major categories of project cost variation. Findings of the statistical analyses are in
Tables A3.1a­A3.1c. Thirty-five percent of all projects had major cost underruns (i.e., more than
20% of the original estimated cost); 9% of all projects had major cost overruns. Projects with
large cost underruns were, on average, twice the size of projects without major cost variations
($244 million vs $122 million), indicating relatively coarser estimation for larger projects than for
smaller projects. Figure 4 also shows this; it shows the proportion of projects with large cost

9
    In a larger sense, the cost underruns and loan cancellations may be correlated with the finding that PCRs rated
    only 71% of all projects successful.
                                                                                Appendix 3     69


variations by cost category. Projects with large cost underruns had a higher use of financing
sources other than ADB and government (52% vs 30%), a lower proportion financed by ADB
(58% vs 66%), a higher local cost in the project (38% vs 22%), and a higher percentage of
contingencies and SC&IDC (22% vs 17% of the base cost). Also important, projects with large
underruns also had a smaller proportion of civil works in the appraised cost and in the loan
amount (41% vs 53%). Projects with large cost overruns were also much larger than projects
without major cost variations ($265 million vs $122 million). Half of the projects with large cost
overruns were in the TC sector. Other notable characteristics of projects with large overruns
were the low proportion of the costs financed by ADB (39% vs 64%) and the high proportion of
works in the total estimated cost (66% vs 53%). Reasons for cost overruns given in PCRs were
not recorded. Time overruns were almost the same for both categories of projects, and the
reasons given were also about the same for both categories. Scope additions were
understandably higher for projects with overruns, but 17% of the projects that would ultimately
have cost underruns had minor scope additions, in attempts to salvage project designs that had
gone wrong.

               Figure A3.4: Percent of Projects with Major Cost Variations




       3.      Differences Between Projects with Hard and Soft Loans

27.     The sample included 93 ordinary capital resources (OCR)-financed projects, 117 SF-
financed projects, and 10 "blended" projects. The data set was scanned for possible systematic
differences among the three types of projects. Most differences would, however, normally
correlate with the main sectors for which OCR and SF would be used: EN and TC for OCR, and
SI and AN for SF. The OCR and SF nature of loans for projects could similarly be correlated
with their country distribution. The explanatory power of the OCR and SF nature of loans for
projects, thus, should be treated with caution.
70     Appendix 3



28.     Costs in ordinary capital resources and Special Funds-based projects. Projects
with OCR loans averaged five times larger than projects with SF loans. The ADB loans in OCR
projects averaged three times larger, indicating higher proportions of cost financing by ADB in
SF projects. The SC&IDC for OCR projects was substantially higher, both in amounts and
proportions of the overall loans, at 9.8% vs 4.8% for SF projects, as was expected. The average
percentage of the loan canceled per project in the grouping was 18.6% for OCR-based projects,
and 15.3% for SF-based projects. This might indicate a greater desire of DMCs and their EAs to
economize on the more expensive OCR loans. But the average project cost underruns were
also larger for OCR projects than for SF projects: 15.7% and 11.9%, respectively. Of all projects
with major cost underruns, 53% were OCR-based projects and 47%, SF-based projects. These
figures are reversed for all projects with PCRs in the same period: 42% are OCR based and
53%, SF based. This means that there are relatively more OCR- than SF-based projects with
large cost variations. The higher SC in OCR-based project budgets, which will be reduced
proportionately by reduced disbursements, may help explain the higher loan cancellations for
OCR projects.

29.     Further systematic differences were small or more related to correlated variables such
as the sector and country of the project.

       4.      Sectoral Differences

30.   Sectoral differences in characteristics of projects with large cost variations give another
perspective from which to judge reasons for cost variations (Tables A3.2a­A3.2c).

31.     Project sizes, durations, and delays. The four main sectors reviewed differed
markedly, both in project size and intended and actual durations. AN and SI projects averaged
an equivalent of about $80 million. EN projects averaged more than five times higher, at $431
million. TC projects were intermediate, at $193 million. In terms of loan size, the differences
were smaller, but still marked, with AN and SI at about $45 million, EN with almost three times
that amount at $127 million, and TC with double that amount, $87 million. This also means that
the proportions of project costs funded by loans in the AN and SI sectors were far higher than
those of the other projects. The intended duration of AN and SI projects was, at 5.2 to 5.6 years,
about 1 year longer than those of the two other sectors, despite the lower costs. Actual AN and
EN project durations were generally about 3 years longer than intended; EN projects had the
longest delays. A statistically valid correlation was found between intended project duration and
loan cancellation (r = 0.2022) for the sample as a whole.

32.      Other sector specific characteristics found were the (i) much smaller proportion of
local costs in EN projects; (ii) lower proportion of the total cost financed by ADB in EN projects;
(iii) availability of other financing sources to 56% of all AN and EN projects, almost double the
proportion available to, or used by, SI and TC; (iv) finding that SI and TC had more PPTAs
preceding their projects (around 45% of projects; in AN it was 31% and in EN, 19%); and
(v) AN, with much smaller loans, had received a third more days of fact finding and appraisal by
ADB staff per loan than EN. On the other hand, the average number of project components was
about the same--about four--in all sectors, and start-up delays were also more-or-less the
same in all four sectors. Statistically valid correlations between these factors and cost underruns
or loan cancellations were not found, except for the proportion of the cost locally funded: the
higher this proportion, the higher the loan cancellation and cost underrun (r = 0.2718 and
0.2926). This applied to all sectors, but especially to SI (r = 0.3760 and 0.4543).
                                                                                                Appendix 3        71


33.     In terms of sectoral cost structures of projects , the following characteristics stood out. SI
was the only sector with less than about 40% of all base costs devoted to works. TC was the
sector with the highest proportion of works, 71%; EN devoted 45% to works, and another
significant 40% to equipment and materials--a proportion two or three times higher than in any
other sector. The SI sector uses most consulting services (9%), and has the largest components
for institutional development and strengthening (5%) and training (7%), all about twice the
relative size of such components in the other sectors. AN and SI had also budgeted a relatively
large component for O&M (almost 5%).

34.     Table A3.2(c) the degree to which cost overruns were incurred in individual cost
categories. The percentages higher than 100% indicate actual costs being higher than the
appraised costs, and percentages lower than 100% indicate cost underruns. Depending on the
sector, several cost categories registered both underruns and overruns on a weighted basis. But
in all sectors, civil works were higher than 100% (109%) and could, therefore, be seen as
somewhat underestimated at appraisal. 10 The cost category of SC&IDC was usually under the
appraisal estimate, and approximately proportional to the underrun incurred on the overall cost
(except for the AN macrosector, where the actual SC&IDC cost was far higher). 11 The greater
than average delays in AN projects may have something to do with this.

35.     Loan cancellations and cost underruns. Despite their long duration (an average of
almost 9 years), AN projects had the highest overall proportion of cost underruns, at 22.8%, and
loan cancellations, at 24.6%. SI projects were second at 16.8% and 16.3%, followed by EN
projects at 13.7% and 14.2%, and TC projects at 4% and 11.1%. The loan figures conform to
overall findings for all ADB projects in these sectors (Appendixes 1 and 3), AN being the sector
with the highest loan cancellations and cost underrun ratios, and TC and EN projects with
relatively more cases of significant cost overruns. Table A3.4 shows subsectors with many
cases of either large cost underruns, overruns, or minor cost variations.

     Table A3.4: Subsectors with Cost Underruns, Overruns, and Minor Cost Variations
                                          (%)

 Large Cost Underruns                        Large Cost Overruns             Minor Cost Variations


 Industrial Crops (100)                      Ports and Shipping (29)         Electric Power (86)
 Forestry (66)                               Roads/Road Transport (18)       Urban Development (86)
 Natural Gas (63)                            Energy (16)                     Multisector (70)
 Telecommunications (57)                                                     Irrigation/Rural Development (67)
 Health and Population (50)                                                  Agricultural Support Services (65)
 Education (46)
 Water Supply and Sanitation (43)

Note: Percentages reflect the proportion of projects in the subsector.
Source: Various project completion reports.


36.    Distribution of expenditures. The following sectoral expenditure patterns are
conspicuous. AN projects, despite of large overall underruns, spent much more than their
10
   A slight overrun would be expected, because actual costs incurred would normally have to incur a part of the price
   contingencies, to deal with international and, possibly, local inflation. Given that price contingencies averaged
   about 9% of the total cost estimate, and works about 42%, this would lead to an expected overrun of about 4%. But
   the actual overrun is almost 9%.
11
   OS also registers an overrun on SC&IDC, but this can be assumed to be related to the fact that there were
   generally cost overruns.
72         Appendix 3



appraised costs on works (132% of appraised cost); The works component in projects in Other
Sectors (i.e., mainly multisectoral projects and emergency response projects) were similarly
underestimated. Estimation of works in EN, SI, and TC was relatively better, although the
requirements were generally slightly underestimated. AN and EN also often underestimated the
cost of consulting services, perhaps because of delays in those sectors were longer than usual.
AN had the largest provisions for price contingencies, both foreign and local, at 8.4% of base
cost plus physical contingencies, whereas the mean value was 6.7%. But these figures may be
influenced by the role of country differences and different expectations regarding inflation. In
these countries, AN and TC had the largest shares of contingencies in total costs (more than
14% vs an average of 12.4%), showing that such large amounts appraised do necessarily lead
to large cancellations and overruns: AN was the worst case in this respect, and TC the best
case. But TC had the most variation in project cost underruns and overruns.

37.      Reasons for cost underruns. Reasons mentioned in PCRs for large cost underruns
pointed to some major differences in the sectors. PCRs for SI projects referred most frequently
(38%) to overestimation of the base cost at appraisal. 12 In AN, TC, and SI, the percentages
remained between 27% and 32%. SI, TC, and EN experienced frequent problems with pricing or
inflation, affecting more than 70% of their projects. Only AN seemed less affected; that factor
was mentioned in only 42% of the AN PCRs. EN and TC stood out in that the prices of works
and goods were often lower than anticipated (60% and 53% of all projects with large cost
underruns). All sectors except TC were also seriously affected by changes in project scope and
deletion of project components (between 33% and 47%); for TC it was "only" 14%. Other, more
unforeseeable, reasons for cost underruns were relevant mainly for OT sectors (100%, but for
only three projects) and TC sectors (57%). Other sectors remained between 21% and 43%.

38.     Reasons for loan cancellations. Reasons for loan cancellations in the four sectors
categorized in the study echoed reasons for cost underruns. AN stood out particularly in terms
of cancellation of subcomponents (68% of projects with large cost variations). EN stood out in
terms of the large proportion of cancellations due to lower prices for equipment and materials,
and the effect of unexpectedly vigorous competition in bidding. SI stood out in terms of
cancellations due to unexpectedly lower costs of works during implementation (68% of projects),
related perhaps to the larger proportion of civil works implemented by local contractors using
local contracts in local currencies that, over the period reviewed, often devalued significantly
against the dollar. TC did not stand out for any particular reason; most reasons mentioned in
other sectors were also at least mentioned for TC. Also, all sectors but TC had significant
numbers of projects with cancellations due to changeovers to alternate financing sources. The
importance of this factor varied from 18% to 26% for AN, EN, and SI.

39.     Number of scope changes. SI projects with large cost variations had somewhat more
scope changes (mainly reductions) than projects in other sectors, a factor that may have led to
the relatively large cost underruns; TC had relatively more scope additions.

40.     Time-related differences. The most significant time-related differences were in terms of
EN and TC having shorter duration projects (4 years vs 5­6 years), but ultimately having
relatively larger delays than AN and SI projects. Reasons given were mainly in the areas of
procurement delays, works delays, and contractor delays. PCRs in the TC sector also referred
to start-up delays and government-related delays. The SI sector particularly mentioned start-up
delays (25% of projects) and government delays (70%). The disparate factors, considered

12
     For other sectors with emergency sectors, it was 67, but the sample included only three projects with large
     underruns.
                                                                                Appendix 3    73


together, point to a conclusion that in terms of speed of implementation, all projects seem prone
to a number of systemic, contextual problems, rather than to sector-specific constraints.

41.     Success rates of projects. The success ratings provided by PCRs for projects with
high cost variations reflect some major sectoral differences: AN had only 33% such projects
deemed successful, against 50% overall in the same period; EN had 82% vs 65% overall; SI,
54% vs 69%; and TC, 64% vs 71%. The reviewed projects in AN and TC, but also in SI, are
especially performing below the ADB average level, indicating negative rather than positive
effects on quality of project outcome from large cost variations (mainly cost underruns). For the
EN sector, the relationship is systematically positive, with cost underruns indicating increased
economy and efficiency.

       5.     Country Differences

42.     The projects in the sample were in 26 DMCs; 16 had large cost variations. The
11 countries with 10 or more projects in the sample were selected for the tables: Bangladesh,
the PRC, India, Indonesia, the Lao PDR, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and
Thailand. Projects in other countries in the sample were grouped under a rest category of "other
countries." Tables A3.1­A3.3 cross-tabulate findings of the statistical analysis.

43.     Size of loans and projects. Mean amounts of project loans were between $215 million
in India and $25 million in Nepal and the Lao PDR, with an average project loan size of
$73.5 million. The mean project cost varied between $875 million in India to $32 million in
Nepal, with an overall mean project cost of $178 million. After India, the PRC and Thailand had
large projects (mean from $250 million to $350 million), with Pakistan and the Philippines
around the all-ADB average.

44.     Timing and duration of projects. Projects in the PRC, Thailand, and the Lao PDR
started latest (meaning in 1992). Projects in those countries also had relatively shorter
implementation periods. India topped the list with the most delayed project implementation
periods: an average of 4 years, followed by Pakistan (3 years), and the Philippines (2.5 years).
All other countries in the sample had implementation delays of 2 years or less. Although the
average project book 4.9 years, the average duration from loan approval was 7.6 years.
Projects in Pakistan, India, Philippines, and Bangladesh took about 60­85% more time than
planned. As mentioned before, project duration was correlated with loan cancellations, but not
with cost underruns.

45.     Reasons given for time overruns. Almost all projects in the countries and country
groups had time overruns. Only Indonesia and the PRC had more than 40%) of projects
completed on time. Reasons given for the time overruns differed substantially by country. The
projects with the highest cost variations--India, Indonesia, and the Philippines--suffered from
many procurement delays, partly because of the preponderance of EN and TC projects.
Contractor-related delays were particularly prevalent in India (60% of projects were affected)
and Thailand (50%). Government or institutional and policy-related delays were relatively more
frequent in Indonesia (69%), Pakistan (64%), and India (50%). Calamities related to weather,
natural disasters, and security problems particularly affected the Philippines (40%) and Thailand
(38%). Thailand and, to a lesser extent, Bangladesh had the most serious land acquisition
problems (25% and 20% of projects). Other types of delays were frequently encountered in the
cost underrun projects in Bangladesh and the Philippines, followed by Pakistan.
74     Appendix 3



46.     Project preparation. There were large differences in numbers of PPTAs prepared by
countries. India and Thailand conducted their own feasibility studies and thus, had no PPTAs in
the projects studied. Countries with numerous PPTAs were Nepal (67%), the Lao PDR (57%),
and the PRC (52%). Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and the PRC had the most ADB staff-days per project
in loan fact-finding and appraisal missions, followed by Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, and the
Philippines. This is all somewhat in line with the size of the projects or loans. But if one
calculates the number of "ADB days" of preparation spent per million dollars, a different picture
emerges (Table A3.1b). India and Thailand had, by far, the highest ratios of loan amounts to
staff days, at more than $1.2 million per staff day in the field. In comparison, the Lao PDR,
Nepal, and Sri Lanka each had no more than about $0.3 million per staff day used.

47.     Loan and cost structures. India and the PRC, with the largest loans, used more than
50% for purchase of goods, mainly equipment. Thailand used about 30% for purchase of goods.
All other major countries used less than 25% of loans for goods. Conversely, India and the PRC
used the least of the major countries for works, about 30­33%. Indonesia was close, with 37%.
The average was about 50%. Most other countries used far more than 50% of their loans for
works; the Lao PDR and the Philippines used more than 60%. A correlation of these country-
related differences with the various countries' loan cancellation ratios is not evident.

48.    The differences in percentages of project costs financed by the loans varied greatly
among countries. The average was about 62%. Thailand, the PRC, and India have percentages
lower than 40%, but Nepal and Bangladesh have 70­80% of project costs financed by the
loans. The percentage of local costs financed by the loans varied from 1 to 2% for projects in
Thailand and the PRC, to 20 to 60% in the other countries. As such, these factors were also not
observed to be significantly correlated with loan cancellations. The PRC, with 2% local costs
and 39% of all costs financed by the loan, had a modest loan cancellation ratio of 8%. Thailand
had 1% local costs, and 32% of all costs, financed by the loan, yet had an overall loan
cancellation ratio of 23%.

49.    Cost underruns per project. The average unweighted cost underrun for all projects
was almost 13%: Nepal (27%), Indonesia (26%), India (21%), Pakistan (19%), and Thailand
(18%). These figures correlate with, but do not highlight, the frequency of cost underruns and
overruns (Table A3.2a). The PRC, with 17% of its projects having large underruns, but 26% with
large overruns, had an average cost overrun of 1%--the only country in the group with a net
cost overrun.

50.     Contingencies and service charges. Countries differ in the importance of estimated
and actual price and physical contingencies and service charges to the project cost. This partly
has to do with the proportion of OCR projects in the country portfolios, and partly with
differences in local inflation and depreciation of local currencies. The situation discussed in this
appendix mainly reflects projects approved before June 1995, when new project administration
instructions were issued regarding project cost estimating, particularly with respect to price
contingencies. These instructions better took into account the role of depreciation of local
currencies, and helped bring down the price contingencies.

51.     All RRPs of projects in India, Indonesia, and Pakistan were scanned in terms of
estimated price contingencies. In the group of projects approved before the June 1995
introduction of new instructions, Pakistan averaged 14.6% price contingencies; India, 13.4%;
and Indonesia, 10.8%. For projects approved afterward, the averages for those countries were
6.2%, 9.0%, and 6.3%, respectively. The large reduction in price contingencies was despite the
fact that ADB's forecasts for inflation in Pakistan in the second half of the 1990s were higher
                                                                                 Appendix 3     75


than in the first half. The conclusion is that the new guidelines may have had an effect, and are
leading to a smaller role of price contingencies in generating cost underruns and loan
cancellations.

52.     The sample of 220 projects discussed in this appendix had somewhat smaller
differences between the values for the three countries before and after the system, and for the
group of 220 projects studied as a whole. Average price contingencies before July 1995 were
8.6% for India, 7.1% for Indonesia, and 9.8% for Pakistan. But only 17 of the 24 projects in the
sample that were approved after June 1995 had price contingencies distinguished from physical
contingencies in their PCRs. None of those cases were in India and Pakistan, and only two
were in Indonesia. For Indonesia, the two projects had zero price contingencies, although they
were not sector projects. The main reason for the low overall differences (7.1% in the old
system and 4.7% in the new system) must be related to (i) the small size of the sample, and (ii)
the fact that most projects were approved only shortly after introduction of the new instructions.
The actual difference may be closer to 4­6%.

53.     Role of service charges. Average service charges per country evidently correlate
largely with the proportion of OCR loans in the country portfolios, because this loan category
has much higher service charges. Among the countries studied, estimated service charges
varied from 2.7% of total cost for Nepal to 12.0% and 11.0% for India and Indonesia. Actual
service charges paid at the time of project completion constituted 2% of project costs for Nepal
and Bangladesh, but 13% for Indonesia, and 11% for India (indicating the apparent relative
efficiency of the projects in India, in spite of cost variations).

54.     Reasons for cost underruns. Almost all countries with more than 10 projects in the
sample cited a high proportion of price-related reasons (applying to 50­90% of all projects with
large cost underruns) to partly explain their high cost underruns. Eighty-three percent of the
projects in India experienced much lower prices than anticipated during implementation, as well
as unexpectedly competitive pricing by bidders. Depreciation of the local currency against the
dollar was mentioned as an important reason for cost underruns, particularly for projects in
Pakistan (67%), and to a lesser extent in India (50%).

55.     Scope changes, whether deletion of project components, or additions or reductions of
scope, or both, were mentioned as secondary reasons in many cases. To here This factor was
particularly relevant to Pakistan, where it affected 75% of the projects. India, on the other hand,
did not register any scope change as a reason for its projects with large in underruns. Thailand,
in the same situation as far as underruns were concerned, similarly had only a small proportion
(14%). Nepal, with 7 cases, had 43%. Indonesia, with 17 cases, had 29%.

56.     Inaccurate estimates of base costs were a feature of the explanations especially in
Bangladesh (3 out of 4 cases) and Thailand (43%); other countries with a larger number of
projects in the sample were closer to the overall average of 33%.

57.     Other reasons for cost underruns, not related to price and scope changes, were of
particular relevance to India (83%). Pakistan also was affected by this, at 50%, and Indonesia
at 35% of its projects. Thailand registered no case where "other reasons" helped explain major
cost underruns.

58.     Reasons for loan cancellations. Cancellations of subcomponents and contract
packages were mentioned as main reasons for loan cancellations in the Philippines (80% of
projects) and South Asia (67%, including India [63%] and Pakistan [64%]). Lower-than-
76     Appendix 3



anticipated costs of works during implementation were experienced particularly in India (63% of
projects), Pakistan (57%), and other parts of South Asia (47%); and in Indonesia (82%). Lower
costs of works was far less evident in other countries and country groups. Lower-than-foreseen
prices of equipment and materials was noted particularly in India (100% of projects) and
Indonesia (72%), and to a lesser extent in Pakistan (36%), Thailand (25%), and the PRC (25%).
These are the countries where purchase of goods was often a large component of loans. In
projects in India and the PRC in particular, about 50% of the base costs were planned for
equipment and materials. In other countries, the price slump factor was far less evident,
perhaps illustrative of smaller changes in growth of their own supply markets for equipment and
materials over the period. Unexpectedly vigorous competition in the project bidding processes
was viewed as particularly relevant for India (86% of projects) and the PRC (40%). Changes to
alternate financing sources were significant factors explaining loan cancellations, particularly for
India (25%), Pakistan (21%), Bangladesh (33%), and Nepal (37%). That indicates the force of
local financing sources in India, and of other external agencies in other South Asian countries
(for example, taking over part of the project financing through grants).

59.   Project success ratings. Thailand, with 10 projects in the sample, stands out with a
100% success rate as per PCRs. This would imply that the cost variations have not affected,
and quite possibly have positively improved, the quality of outputs and outcomes in Thailand.
Success rates were also especially higher than average in the Lao PDR, the PRC, and
Bangladesh; more than 80% of projects in each country were rated successful A correlation
between good success ratings and smaller loan cancellations was observed particularly for the
Lao PDR and the PRC. This was less evident for Bangladesh and Thailand.

60.     Fewer than 50% of the projects in Pakistan and the Philippines were rated as
successful. Pakistan had an average cost underrun of 18%, and the Philippines, 11%. Thus no
straightforward relation between country averages of cost underruns and country averages of
success ratios was observed in Pakistan and the Philippines. The sectoral mix of projects in
countries probably predicts success rates better than other factors.
           Table A3.1(a): Summary of Data Collected for All 220 ADB Projects With Cost Variations > and < 20%,
                             Which Have PCRs Issued Between January 1998 and June 2003

Item                                                               Cost Underrun        Cost Variation       Cost Overrun       All Projects
                                                                       > 20%                < 20%               > 20%
                                                                 Number Value         Number Value        Number Value       Number     Value
                                                                 of Cases             of Cases            of Cases           of Cases

A. Nature of Loan Funds of Project by Cost Overrun or Underrun > 20% (Row %)
   Ordinary Capital Resources                                           42     45.2        39      41.9        12     12.9        93      42.3
   Special Funds                                                        32     27.4        78      66.7         7        6       117      53.2
   Blended Loans                                                         3     30.0         6        60         1       10        10        4.5
         Total (row %)                                                  77     35.0       123      55.9        20      9.1       220       100

B. Country of Project by Cost Overrun or Underrun > 20% (Column %)
   Bangladesh                                                           5       6.5        15      12.2         1        5        21       9.5
   China, People's Republic of                                          4       5.2        13      10.7         6       30        23      10.5
   India                                                                6       7.8         3       2.4         1        5        10       4.5
   Indonesia                                                           17      22.1        14      11.4         0        0        31      14.1
   Lao People's Democratic Republic                                     0       0.0        11       8.9         3       15        14       6.4
   Nepal                                                                8      10.4         7       5.7         0        0        15       6.8
   Pakistan                                                            13      16.9         9       7.4         2       10        24      10.9
   Philippines                                                          5       6.5         8       6.5         1        5        14       6.4
   Sri Lanka                                                            2       2.6         9       7.3         0        0        11       5.0
   Thailand                                                             7       9.1         1       0.8         2       10        10       4.5
   Others                                                              10      13.0        33      26.8         4       20        47      21.4
          Total (row %)                                                77      35.0       123      55.9        20      9.1       220     100.0

C. Project Type by Cost Overrun or Underrun > 20% (Row %)
   Investment Projects                                                 67      34.0       113      57.4        17      8.6       197      89.5
   Sector Projects                                                     10      43.5        10      43.5         3       13        23      10.5

D. Sector (Row %)
   Agriculture and Natural Resources                                   21      43.8        25      52.1         2      4.2        48      21.8
   Energy                                                              16      37.2        23      53.5         4      9.3        43      19.5
   Social Infrastructure                                               23      38.3        36        60         1      1.7        60      27.3
   Transport and Communications                                        14      25.0        32      57.1        10     17.9        56      25.5




                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3
   Other Sectors (emergency response projects)                          3      23.1         7      53.8         3     23.1        13       5.9

E. Subsector by Cost Overrun or Underrun > 20% (Row %)
   Airports and Civil Aviation                                          0       0.0         2      66.7         1     33.3        3        1.4
   Agricultural Support Services                                        1      12.5         7      87.5         0        0        8        3.6
   Education                                                           10      45.5        12      54.5         0        0       22       10.0
   Energy                                                               6      31.6        10      52.6         3     15.8       19        8.6
   Electric Power                                                       4      26.7        10      66.7         1      6.7       15        6.8




                                                                                                                                                  77
                                                                                                                       Continued on next page
                                                            Table A3.1(a)--Continued




                                                                                                                                                    78
Item                                                                  Cost Underrun      Cost Variation      Cost Overrun        All Projects
                                                                           > 20%             < 20%              > 20%
                                                                    Number Value       Number Value       Number Value       Number Value
                                                                   of Cases            of Cases           of Cases           of Cases




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 3
   Fisheries                                                                1     25.0        3        75        0         0         4        1.8
   Forestry                                                                 6     66.7        2      22.2        1     11.1          9        4.1
   Health and Population                                                    5     50.0        5        50        0         0        10        4.5
   Industrial Crops                                                         6    100.0        0         0        0         0         6        2.7
   Industry (Non-Agricultural)                                              1     50.0        0         0        1        50         2        0.9
   Irrigation and Rural Development                                         6     30.0       13        65        1         5        20        9.1
   Livestock                                                                1    100.0        0         0        0         0         1        0.5
   Multisector                                                              2     20.0        7        70        1        10        10        4.5
   Nonfuel Minerals                                                         0      0.0        0         0        1      100          1        0.5
   Natural Gas                                                              5     62.5        3      37.5        0         0         8        3.6
   Ports and Shipping                                                       2     28.6        3      42.9        2     28.6          7        3.2
   Refinery                                                                 1    100.0        0         0        0         0         1        0.5
   Roads and Road Transport                                                 6     17.6       22      64.7        6     17.6         34      15.5
   Railways                                                                 2     40.0        2        40        1        20         5        2.3
   Telecommunications                                                       4     57.1        3      42.9        0         0         7        3.2
   Urban Development                                                        2     14.3       12      85.7        0         0        14        6.4
   Water Supply and Sanitation                                              6     42.9        7        50        1       7.1        14        6.4
       Total                                                               77     35.9      123        55       20       9.1      220      100.0

F. Basic Data
   Availability of Other Financing Source (% of projects)                77       51.9       123      30.1       20      65.0      220       40.9
   Year of Project Appraisal (mean)                                      77    1,991.2       123   1,991.8       20   1,991.0      220    1,991.5
   Year of Project Approval (mean)                                       77    1,991.4       123   1,992.0       20   1,991.1      220    1,991.7
   Projects Granted a Supplementary Loan (% of projects)                 77        0.0       123       0.0       20      15.0      220        1.4
   Approved at Time of New Cost Estimate System (% of proj.)             77        6.5       123      13.8       20      10.0      220       10.9
   Value Local Currency at Completion Compared to Appraisal (%)          76       54.6       121      58.6       20      61.4      217       57.4
   Exchange Rate at Completion as proportion of Rate at Appraisal        76        2.4       121       2.5       20       2.6      217        2.5
   Project Duration in years as per Loan Agreement (mean)                76        5.1       120       4.8       19       4.7      219        4.8
   Years Between Appraisal and Project Completion (mean)                 76        7.8       123       7.4       20       8.5      219        7.6
   Years Between Compl. Appraisal and Effectiveness Loan (mean)          75        1.0       123       1.0       20       1.0      218        1.0
   Years Between Intended and Actual Project Completion Date (mean)      77        2.1       123       1.6       20       1.8      220        1.8
   Years Between Closing Date as per Loan Agreement and Final            77        2.1       123       1.6       20       1.7      220        1.8
   Projects Extended (% of projects)                                     77       76.6       123      78.0       20      75.0      220       77.3
   Number of Extensions Given to Project Completion Date (mean)          77      1.47        123     1.33        20     1.50       220      1.39

G. Project Preparation Data
   Projects with PPTA Conducted (% of projects)                          77       33.8       123     39.0        20      30.0      220       36.4
   Person Days Used for Fact-Finding Mission (mean)                      73         43       109       53        20        54      202         50
   Person Days Used for Appraisal Mission (mean)                         72         83       114       73        20        68      206         76
   Days of Preparation by ADB Staff (mean)                               72        127       107      124        20       121      199        125
                                                                                                                          Continued on next page
                                                            Table A3.1(a)--Continued
Item                                                                   Cost Underrun     Cost Variation      Cost Overrun       All Projects
                                                                           > 20%             < 20%              > 20%
                                                                     Number Value      Number Value       Number Value      Number Value
                                                                     of Cases          of Cases           of Cases          of Cases
H. Original Loan Allocation per Project by Fund Category ($ million)
   Special Funds/Asian Development Fund                                    77   14.827      123 24.492          20 19.528        220     20.658
   Ordinary Capital Resources                                              77   68.881      123 37.757          20 83.588        220     52.817
   Supplementary Loan                                                      77    0.000      123     0.000       20    1.534      220      0.139

I.   Original Loan Allocation per Project by Cost Category ($ million)
     Works                                                               77    33.559      123    26.392        20 51.796         220   31.210
     Goods                                                               77    27.183      123    16.774        20 11.067         220   19.898
     Consulting Services                                                 77     3.561      123     3.167        20   2.452        220    3.240
     Administration                                                      77     1.334      123     1.653        20   5.225        220    1.866
     Other Costs                                                         77     3.771      123     2.894        20 15.018         220    4.303
     Service Charge                                                      77     6.307      123     5.023        20   8.589        220    5.797
     Unallocated                                                         77     7.994      123     6.361        20   8.798        220    7.154
           Total                                                         77    83.709      123    62.263        20 102.946        220   73.468

     Local Costs ADB Financed per Project ($ million)                    77    12.256      120    10.983        20   15.801       217   11.879
     Local Costs in Loan per Project (%)                                 76      38.1      120      21.9        20     11.9       216     26.7
     Original Loan Amount as % of Appraised Project Cost                 77      58.1      123      66.4        20     52.0       220     61.6

J. Loan Amount Disbursed per Project by Cost Category ($ million) ACTWORKS
   Works                                                              77   26.281          123    28.189        20 63.083         220   30.694
   Goods                                                              77   21.438          123    17.735        20 11.825         220   18.494
   Consulting Services                                                77    2.493          123     3.350        20   2.940        220    3.013
   Administration                                                     77    0.653          123     1.420        20   4.900        220    1.468
   Other Costs                                                        77    2.003          123     2.264        20 12.529         220    3.106
   Service Charge                                                     77    4.742          123     4.456        20   8.558        220    4.929
   Unallocated                                                        77    0.015          123     0.024        20   0.000        220    0.019
   Total Amount Disbursed from Loan                                   77   57.626          123    57.440        20 103.835        220   61.723

     Loan Disbursed Minus Original Loan Amount                           77   (26.083)     123    (4.823)       20    0.890       220 (11.745)
     Loan Cancellation Amount as % of Original Loan                      77       34.8     123        8.1       20      (3.7)     220     16.4
     Actual Loan Disbursed as % of Actual Project Cost                   77       67.8     123       63.7       20      38.8      220     62.5




                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3
K. Appraisal Cost Estimates per Project by Category ($ million)
   Civil Works                                                           76    98.475      122    49.710        20 118.937      218    73.062
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping                                76     1.965      122     1.120        20   0.375      218      1.346
   Research and Development (extension and demonstration)                76     1.683      122     0.530        20   0.040      218      0.887
   Institutional Development and Strengthening                           76     4.866      122     2.827        20   0.391      218      3.314
   Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture (purchase and maintenance)         72    42.055      121    22.791        20 32.665       213    30.230
   Materials                                                             72    17.882      121     3.899        20 21.650       213    10.292




                                                                                                                                                  79
   Goods (equipment, furniture, materials)                               76    58.181      122    26.508        20 54.315       218    40.102
   Consulting Services                                                   76     3.378      122     3.749        20   2.730      218      3.526
   Training and Fellowships                                              76     2.237      122     1.375        20   0.593      218      1.604
                                                                                                                       Continued on next page
                                                             Table A3.1(a)--Continued




                                                                                                                                                   80
Item                                                                   Cost Underrun      Cost Variation      Cost Overrun       All Projects
                                                                            > 20%             < 20%              > 20%
                                                                     Number Value       Number Value       Number Value      Number Value
                                                                    of Cases            of Cases           of Cases          of Cases




                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3
   Operation and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                              76    2.305      122     3.223       20    0.215      218      2.627
   Financing of NGOs                                                        76    0.058      122     0.000       20    0.000      218      0.020
   Implementation Assistance                                                76    0.646      122     0.466       20    0.270      218      0.511
   Land Acquisition                                                         76    2.391      122     1.734       20    4.537      218      2.220
   Capital Goods                                                            76    0.642      122     0.898       20 28.366        218      3.328
   Incremental Administrative Costs                                         76    1.036      122     1.266       20    6.171      218      1.636
   Initial Working Capital                                                  76    0.315      122     0.858       20    1.335      218      0.713
   Taxes and Duties                                                         76   10.989      122     3.691       20    3.070      218      6.179
           Total Project Base Costs                                         76 189.171       122 97.956          20 221.342       218 141.075
   Physical Contingencies                                                   61   10.725       77     5.879       14    9.141      152      8.124
   Foreign Price Contingencies                                              61    9.467       77     3.406       14 10.248        152      6.469
   Local Price Contingencies                                                61    9.644       77     4.741       14 10.744        152      7.261
           Price Contingencies at Appraisal                                 61   19.111       77     8.147       14 20.991        152     13.730
           Total Contingencies                                              75   30.953      122 14.889          20 29.574        217     21.794
   Service Charge/IDC                                                       76   25.154      122 10.582          20 13.889        218     15.966
           Total Cost                                                       77 243.978       123 122.430         20 264.805       220 177.915

L. Actual Costs at Project Completion by Currency Component ($ million)
   Foreign Exchange Cost                                                  77   101.892       122   51.224        20 143.745        219   77.488
   Local Cost Component                                                   77    62.103       122   51.572        20 207.451        219   69.510

M. Actual Costs per Project at Completion by Category ($ million)
   Civil Works                                                            75    83.516       123 59.325          20 183.766      218    79.064
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping                                 75     0.874       123   1.114         20   0.479      218      0.973
   Research and Development (extension and demonstration)                 75     0.730       123   0.441         20   0.010      218      0.501
   Institutional Development and Strengthening                            75     4.061       123   3.216         20   0.567      218      3.264
   Equipment, Vehicles, Furniture (purchase and maintenance)              75    31.281       123 22.632          20 40.586       218    27.254
   Materialsa                                                             75    13.797       123   3.745         20 32.549       218      9.846
           All Goodsb                                                     75    44.086       123 26.405          20 73.135       218    36.775
   Consulting Services                                                    75     2.261       123   4.049         20   5.076      218      3.528
   Training and Fellowships                                               75     1.209       123   1.347         20   0.534      218      1.225
   Operations and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                           75     1.407       123   3.134         20   0.295      218      2.280
   Financing of NGOs                                                      75     0.034       123   0.000         20   0.000      218      0.012
   Implementation Assistance                                              75     1.437       123   0.518         20   0.705      218      0.851
   Land Acquisition/Right of Way                                          75     1.980       123   1.851         20 12.377       218      2.861
   Capital Goods                                                          75     0.026       123   0.956         20 39.586       218      4.180
   Incremental Administrative Costs                                       75     0.321       123   1.566         20   7.914      218      1.720
   Initial Working Capital                                                75     0.131       123   0.914         20   0.000      218      0.561
   Taxes and Duties                                                       76     3.451       123   1.999         20   0.000      219      2.320
           Total Base Costs                                               76   143.829       123 106.835         20 324.442      219 139.546
                                                                                                                        Continued on next page
                                                            Table A3.1(a)--Continued
Item                                                                  Cost Underrun      Cost Variation      Cost Overrun       All Projects
                                                                           > 20%             < 20%              > 20%
                                                                    Number Value       Number Value       Number Value      Number Value
                                                                   of Cases            of Cases           of Cases          of Cases
   Physical Contingencies                                                  75    0.100      117     0.984       20    0.000      212      0.571
   Foreign Price Contingencies                                             75    0.000      117     0.000       20    0.000      212      0.000
   Local Price Contingencies                                               75    0.000      117     0.075       20    0.005      212      0.041
         Price Contingencies at Appraisal                                  75    0.000      117     0.075       20    0.005      212      0.041
         Total Contingencies                                               76    0.006      123     1.061       20    0.005      219      0.598
   Service Charge/IDC                                                      76   15.883      123     9.351       20 26.757        219     13.207
        Estimate of Total Actual Project Cost                              77 159.285       123 117.247         20 351.204       220 153.229

   Average Unweighed Cost Variation (%) (- = underrun)                    77     (40.7)       123      (4.1)    20      40.1      220     (12.9)
   Average Weighed Cost Variation (%) (- = underrun)                      77     (34.7)       123      (4.2)    20      32.6      220     (13.9)

   Foreign Price Contingencies as % Appraised FEC                         61        9.8        76       6.5     14       6.1      151       7.7
   Local Price Contingencies as % Appraised LEC                           60        8.5        74      11.3     13       6.4      147       9.6
   Total Price Contigencies as % Appr. Base Cost                          61       10.5        77       8.4     14      10.2      152       9.3
   Total Price Contingencies + SC/IDC as % of Base Cost                   61       22.2        77      16.6     14      17.2      152      18.7

N. Reasons Mentioned in PCR for Cost Underrun (% of projects with underrun > 20%)
   Overestimate Base Costs at Appraisal                                  75       32.0                                             75      32.0
   Deletion of Project Components                                        75       21.3                                             75      21.3
   Lower Than Anticipated Prices During Implementation                   75       33.3                                             75      33.3
   Very Competitive Pricing by Bidders                                   75       25.3                                             75      25.3
   Exhange Rate Fluctuation/De(ap)preciation Local Currency              75       44.0                                             75      44.0
   Change in Project Scope                                               75       25.3                                             75      25.3
   Nonavailment of Contingencies                                         75       13.3                                             75      13.3
   Other Reason for Cost Underrun Given                                  75       28.0                                             75      28.0

O. Summary (% of all projects with cost underrun > 20%)
   Wrong Base Cost Estimate                                               72       33.3                                            72      33.3
   Wrong Pricing / Bidding / Inflation estimate                           72       70.8                                            72      70.8
   Scope Changes                                                          72       34.7                                            72      34.7
   Other Reasons                                                          72       38.9                                            72      38.9

P. Reasons Mentioned in PCR for Loan Cancellations/Savings (% of projects with cost variation > 20%)




                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3
   Cancellation of Subcomponents and Contract Packages                  76       55.3                            7      14.3       83      48.3
   Change to Alternate Financing Sources                                76       21.1                            7       0.0       83      18.0
   Lower Cost of Works During Implementation                            76       55.3                            7      28.6       83      49.4
   Lower Price Equipment and Materials Prices                           76       40.8                            7      14.3       83      38.2
   Vigorous Competition in Bidding Process                              76       18.4                            7      14.3       83      18.0
   Other Reasons/Unspecified                                            76       15.8                            7       0.0       83      16.9




                                                                                                                                                   81
Q. Data on Scope Changes as per PCR (for projects with cost variation > 20%)
   Number of Project Components (mean)                                     77       4.3       123       4.3     20       4.0      220        4.3
   Number of Scope Changes Referred to in PCR (mean)                       76       1.2                         18       1.1       94        1.1
                                                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                                                Table A3.1(a)--Continued




                                                                                                                                                               82
Item                                                                      Cost Underrun      Cost Variation      Cost Overrun       All Projects
                                                                               > 20%             < 20%              > 20%
                                                                        Number Value       Number Value       Number Value      Number Value
                                                                       of Cases            of Cases           of Cases          of Cases




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 3
   Projects with Major Scope Addition (%)                                      76      0.0                          18     55.6        94      10.4
   Projects with Major Scope Reduction (%)                                     76     38.2                          18      0.0        94      30.2
   Projects with Minor Scope Addition (%)                                      76     17.1                          18      5.6        94      14.6
   Projects with Minor Scope Reduction (%)                                     76     11.8                          18      5.6        94      10.4
   Projects with Time Overrun (%)                                              75     90.7      120      96.7       19     94.7      218       96.3

R. Reasons for Time Overruns Mentioned in PCRs (if applicable, for
   % of projects with cost variations > 20%)                                   74      93.24                              16     93.75
   Land Acquisition Problem                                                    68        7.4                              15       0.0         83       7.1
   Procurement Delays                                                          68       35.3                              15      40.0         83      36.9
   Works Delays                                                                68       16.2                              15      26.7         83      17.9
   Institutional/Policy Delays                                                 68       10.3                              15       6.7         83       9.5
   Consultant Delays                                                           68        5.9                              15      13.3         83       7.1
   Contractor Delays                                                           68       16.2                              15      26.7         83      19.0
   Government Delays                                                           68       52.9                              15      40.0         83      50.0
   ADB Inaction                                                                68        7.4                              15       6.7         83       7.1
   Calamity/Security Delays                                                    68       17.6                              15      20.0         83      17.9
   Start Up Delays                                                             68       11.8                              15      33.3         83      15.5
   Other Delays                                                                68       30.9                              15      53.3         83      35.7

S. Results Indicators
   Quantified Success Rate for Project by Cost Overrun or Underrun > 20% (Col. %)
   Unsuccessful                                                           4        5.2                0          0         0         0         4        1.8
   Partly Successful                                                    26        33.2               29      23.6          4        20        59       26.8
   Successful/Generally Successful                                      45        58.4               84      68.3         15        75       144       65.5
   Highly Successful                                                      2        2.6                9        8.1         1         5        13        5.9
          Total                                                         77      100.0               122       100         20       100       220      100.0

   Quantified Average Rating of Project as per PCRc                            77      1.58         123     1.85          20     1.85        220      1.75

T. Calculated Rates of Return
    EIRR at Appraisal (mean %)                                                     56        20.6          82       21.5       18     21.1   156       21.1
    EIRR at Completion (mean %)                                                    55        20.4          90       20.1       19     16.5   164       19.8
    FIRR at Appraisal (mean %)                                                     40        13.9          55       12.4       14     10.3   109       12.7
    FIRR at Completion (mean %)                                                    39        12.6          64        9.5       15      5.8   118       10.1
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FEC = foreign exchange cost, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, IDC = interest
during construction, LEC = local exchange cost, NGO = nongovernment organization, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = project completion report,
PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, SC = service charge.
a   The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in
    PCRs.
b   The category of "goods" provides a more complete indication of the cost of equipment and materials, since the breakdown was not always presented in
    PCRs.
c
    0 = unsuccessful, 1 = partly successful, 2 = successful, 3 = highly successful; part of period the rating of 2 was the maximum possible.
Source: Various project completion reports.
                                                                                               Appendix 3              83


       Table A3.1(b): Loan and Cost Data from 220 Projects with PCRs Issued Between 1998
                      and June 2003, by Level of Cost Variation (unweighted)
                          (percentage of project loan and project cost totals)

Item                                                                            Cost     Cost       Cost       Total
                                                                              Underrun Variation   Overrun
                                                                               >20%     <20%        >20%

A. Number of Projects                                                               77       123         20        220

B. Original Loan Allocation by Cost Category (% of total)
   Works                                                                           38.1     42.5       55.1       42.1
   Goods                                                                           25.3     24.0       11.1       23.3
   Consulting Services                                                              7.1      6.9        5.2        6.8
   Administration                                                                   3.5      2.6        4.9        3.1
   Other Costs                                                                     10.7      7.7        7.9        8.8
   Service Charge                                                                   6.7      5.5        6.1        6.0
   Unallocated                                                                      8.6     10.8        9.7       10.0
         Total                                                                    100.0    100.0      100.0      100.0

C. Loan Amount Disbursed by Cost Category (% of total)
   Works                                                                           43.7     50.2       65.9       49.3
   Goods                                                                           29.0     27.7       12.2       26.8
   Consulting Services                                                              9.2      8.1        5.9        8.3
   Administration                                                                   3.6      2.0        4.8        2.8
   Other Costs                                                                      7.5      6.7        5.0        6.8
   Service Charge                                                                   6.9      5.3        6.1        5.9
   Unallocated                                                                      0.0      0.0        0.0        0.0
         Net Total Disbursed from Loan                                            100.0    100.0      100.0      100.0

D. Appraisal Cost Estimates by Cost Category (% of base costs)
   Civil Works                                                                     41.1     52.5       66.3        49.8
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping                                           1.2      1.9        0.2         1.5
   Research and Development (extension and demonstration)                           4.0      0.5        0.0         1.7
   Institutional Development and Strengthening                                      4.3      2.8        0.8         3.1
   Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture (purchase and maintenance)a                  22.4     17.4       13.7        18.7
   Materialsa                                                                       4.8      2.9        5.2         3.8
           All Goods (total equipment, vehicles, furniture, and materials)a        27.0     20.5       18.8        22.6
   Consulting Services                                                              5.6      5.8        3.4         5.5
   Training and Fellowships                                                         4.0      2.1        0.2         2.6
   Operation and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                                      4.5      2.3        0.2         2.9
   Financing of NGOs                                                                0.2      0.0        0.0         0.1
   Implementation Assistance                                                        0.8      0.8        0.1         0.8
   Land Acquisition                                                                 1.5      1.6        1.9         1.6
   Capital Goods                                                                    1.0      2.1        5.0         2.0
   Incremental Administrative Costs                                                 1.1      1.8        1.8         1.5
   Initial Working Capital                                                          0.9      3.4        0.5         2.2
   Taxes and Duties                                                                 2.9      2.0        0.8         2.2
           Total Base Costs (% of total cost)                                      80.3     82.0       82.9        81.5
   Physical Contingencies (% of base costs)                                         4.1      3.9        4.5         4.0
   Foreign Price Contingencies (% of base costs + physical contingencies)           2.8      2.8        4.4         3.0
   Local Price Contingencies (% of base costs + physical contingencies)             4.6      3.4        2.9         3.8
           Price Contingencies at Appraisal (% base costs + phys. cont.)b           7.5      6.2        7.2         6.8
           Total Contingencies (% of total cost)b                                  13.2     11.9       12.2        12.4
   Service Charge/IDC (% of total cost)                                             7.4      6.1        4.9         6.4
           Total Cost                                                             100.0    100.0      100.0       100.0
                                                                                                Continued on next page
84         Appendix 3


                                                Table A3.1(b)--Continued
Item                                                                           Cost     Cost           Cost        Total
                                                                             Underrun Variation       Overrun
                                                                              >20%     <20%            >20%
E. Actual Costs at Project Completion (% of base costs)
   Civil Works                                                                     43.3        55.3        69.8       52.5
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping                                           0.7         2.0         0.2        1.3
   Research and development (extension and demonstration)                           3.1         0.4         0.0        1.3
   Institutional Development and Strengthening                                      4.3         2.9         0.7        3.2
   Goods (total equipment, vehicles, furniture, and materials)                     27.4        19.0        15.0       21.5
   Consulting Services                                                              6.2         5.6         3.7        5.6
   Training and Fellowships                                                         3.5         1.6         0.1        2.1
   Operations and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                                     4.9         2.1         0.1        2.9
   Financing of NGOs                                                                0.2         0.0         0.0        0.1
   Implementation Assistance                                                        1.8         0.7         0.1        1.0
   Land Acquisition/Right of Way                                                    1.6         1.7         4.0        1.9
   Capital Goods                                                                    0.1         2.2         5.0        1.7
   Incremental Administrative Costs                                                 1.1         1.9         1.3        1.6
   Initial Working Capital                                                          0.3         3.4         0.0        2.0
   Taxes and Duties                                                                 1.6         1.2         0.0        1.2
           Total Base Costs (% of total cost)                                      92.0        94.5        94.3       93.6
   Physical Contingencies (% of base costs)                                         0.2         0.2         0.0        0.2
   Foreign Price Contingencies (% of base costs + physical contingencies)           0.0         0.0         0.0        0.0
   Local Price Contingencies (% of base costs + physical contigencies)              0.0         0.1         0.0        0.1
                                                                        b
           Price Contingencies at Appraisal (% base costs + phys. cont.)            0.0         0.1         0.0        0.1
                                                 b
           Total Contingencies (% of total cost)                                    0.2         0.4         0.0        0.3
   Service Charge/IDC (% of total costs)                                            8.1         5.1         5.7        6.2
           Total Cost                                                             100.0       100.0       100.0     100.00


IDC = interest during construction, NGO = nongovernment organization, PCR = project completion report.
a  The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such
   goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
b  Due to missing cases (where physical, foreign, and local price contingencies were not distinguished), figures may not add
   up.
   The percentage is based on division of average price contingencies over average total cost
Source: Various project completion reports.
                                                                                                     Appendix 3            85


       Table A3.1(c): Loan and Cost Data from 220 Projects with PCRs Issued Between 1998
                       and June 2003, by Level of Cost Variation (weighted)
              (percentages of average amounts spent over average appraised amounts)

Item                                                                        Cost     Cost           Cost         Total
                                                                          Underrun Variation       Overrun
                                                                           >20%     <20%            >20%

A. Number of Projects                                                             77         123           20        220

B. Disbursement as % of Original Loan Allocation
   Works                                                                        78.3       106.8         121.8      98.3
   Goods                                                                        78.9       105.7         106.8      92.9
   Consulting Services                                                          70.0       105.8         119.9      93.0
   Administration                                                               48.9        85.9          93.8      78.7
   Other Costs                                                                  53.1        78.2          83.4      72.2
   Service Charge                                                               75.2        88.7          99.6      85.0
   Unallocated                                                                   0.2         0.4           0.0       0.3
         Net Total Disbursed from Loan                                          68.8        92.3         100.9      84.0

C. Actual Costs at Project Completion as % of Appraised Costs
   Civil Works                                                                  84.8       119.3         154.5     108.2
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping                                       44.5        99.5         127.8      72.3
   Research and Development (extension and demonstration)                       43.4        83.2          25.0      56.5
   Institutional Development and Strengthening                                  83.5       113.8         145.2      98.5
   Goods (total equipment, vehicles, furniture, and materials)                  75.8        99.6         134.6      91.7
   Consulting Services                                                          66.9       108.0         185.9     100.1
   Training and Fellowships                                                     54.0        98.0          90.1      76.4
   Operation and Maintenance (recurrent costs)                                  61.1        97.2         137.2      86.8
   Financing of NGOs                                                            58.6                                57.9
   Implementation Assistance                                                   222.4       111.1         261.1     166.6
   Land Acquisition/Right-of-Way                                                82.8       106.8         272.8     128.9
   Capital Goods                                                                 4.0       106.5         139.6     125.6
   Incremental Administrative Costs                                             31.0       123.6         128.3     105.1
   Initial Working Capital                                                      41.4       106.5           0.0      78.7
   Taxes and Duties                                                             31.4        54.2           0.0      37.6
           Total Base Costs                                                     76.0       109.1         146.6      98.9

D. Contingencies and Service Charge as % of Appraised Costs
   Physical Contingencies                                                        0.9        16.7           0.0       7.0
   Foreign Price Contingencies                                                   0.0         0.0           0.0       0.0
   Local Price Contingencies                                                     0.0         1.6           0.0       0.6
         Price Contingencies                                                     0.0         0.9           0.0       0.3
         Total Contingencies                                                     0.0         7.1           0.0       2.7
   Service Charge/IDC                                                           63.1        88.4         192.7      82.7

          Total Cost as % of Appraised Cost                                     65.3        95.8         132.6      86.1


IDC = interest during construction, NGO = nongovernment organization, PCR = project completion report.
Source: Various project completion reports.
                                                                                                                                                                                            86
                                    Table A3.2(a): Summary of Data Collected for All 220 ADB projects with Cost Underruns > 20%
                                                            Compared to All Projects, by macrosector




                                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 3
Item                                               Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                 Social             Transport and       Other Sectorsa       Total
                                                                                                                 Infrastructure        Communications
                                                 Cost Var. Overruns Underruns   Total    Underruns Total       Underruns Total         Underruns Total     Underruns Total        All
                                                  <20%      >20%      >20%                 >20%                  >20%                    >20%                >20%               Sectors

A.     Number of Projects                            25         2       21         48          17        43           24          60         14      56           3       13         220
         >20% Overrun                                                               2                     4                        2                 10                    3          21
         >20 % Underrun                                                            21                    17                       24                 14                    3
         Variation <20%                                                            25                    22                       35                 32                    7

       % Projects by Sector                         52.1       4.2     43.8     100.0         39.5     100.0        40.0    100.0           25.0   100.0        23.1   100.0

B.     Nature of Loan Funds of Project (row %)
       Ordinary Capital Resources                    28         50     33.3      31.3         81.3      62.8         39       30            85.7    53.6        33.3    23.1        42.3
       Special Funds                                 60         50     66.7      62.5         12.5      32.6        56.5      65             7.1    44.6        66.7    69.2        53.2
       Blended Loans                                 12          0        0       6.3          6.3       4.7         4.3       5             7.1     1.8           0     7.7         4.5
             Total (row %)                          100        100     100       100 0        100       100         100      100            100     100         100     100         100

C.     Country of Project by Macro Sector Classification (column %)
       Bangladesh                                    12          0      9.5      10.4            0       4.7         13       15               0     7.1           0     7.7         9.5
       China, People's Republic of                   12        50         0       8.3            0       4.7         4.3      3.3           21.4    23.2           0    15.4        10.5
       India                                           0         0        0         0          25        14            0        0           14.3     7.1           0       0         4.5
       Indonesia                                     12          0     14.3      12.5         12.5         7        30.4     23.3           28.6     8.9        33.3    23.1        14.1
       Lao People's Democratic Republic                0         0        0         0            0         7           0      10               0     8.9           0       0         6.4
       Nepal                                           0         0      19        8.3          6.3       4.7         8.7      8.3              0     5.4        33.3     7.7         6.8
       Pakistan                                      20        50      23.8      22.9         18.8       14         16.7      8.3              0     1.8        33.3     7.7        10.9
       Philippines                                   12          0      4.8       8.3         12.5      11.6         4.3      1.7            7.1     5.4           0     7.7         6.4
       Sri Lanka                                       8         0      4.8       6.3          5.9       4.7         4.3      8.3              0     1.8           0       0           5
       Thailand                                        0         0        0         0         17.6       14          4.3      1.7           21.4     5.4           0       0         4.5
       Others                                        24          0     23.8      22.9          6.3       14          13       20             7.1     25            0    30.8        21.4
              Total (row %)                         11.4       0.9      9.5      21.8          7.3      19.5        10.5     27.3            6.4    25.5         1.4     5.9        100

D.     Project Type by Macro Sector Classification (row %)
       Investment Projects                            88       100     85.7      87.5         81.3      83.7        91.3          90        92.9    96.4        66.7     84.6        89.5
       Sector Projects                                12         0     14.3      12.5         18.8      16.3         8.7          10         7.1     3.6        33.3     15.4        10.5
                                                                                                                                                                  Continued on next page
                                                                              Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                               Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                  Social             Transport and        Other Sectorsa       Total
                                                                                                                  Infrastructure        Communications
                                                 Cost Var. Overruns Underruns   Total    Underruns Total        Underruns Total         Underruns Total      Underruns Total        All
                                                  <20%      >20%      >20%                 >20%                   >20%                    >20%                 >20%               Sectors
E.     Basic Data
       Availability of Other Financing Source     40.0%    100.0%      71.4       56.3        52.9       55.8        29.2     26.7           50.0     32.1        66.7     38.5       40.9
          (% of projects)
       Year of Project Appraisal (mean)          1990.7    1988.5    1989.5     1990.1      1991.9   1991.1        1991.8   1991.9         1992.0   1992.4      1992.7   1992.9    1991.5
       Year of Project Approval (mean)           1991.0    1988.5    1989.7     1990.4      1992.0   1991.3        1991.9   1992.1         1992.2   1992.5      1993.3   1993.1    1991.7
       Projects Granted a Supplementary Loan      0.0%      0.0%        0.0        0.0         0.0      2.3           0.0      0.0            0.0      3.6         0.0      0.0       1.4
          (% of projects)
       Approved at Time of New Cost Estimate         8.0      0.0       0.0        4.2        11.8       11.6         4.2     10.0           14.3     16.1        33.3     15.4       10.9
          System (% or projects)
       Value Local Currency at Completion           65.4     48.7      53.1       59.4        52.3       51.4        59.8     59.2           52.7     59.1        49.7     54.7       57.4
          Compared to Appraisal (%)
       Exchange Rate at Completion as              2.01      2.53       2.4        2.2         2.3        2.5         2.4      2.7            2.4      2.5         2.4      2.2        2.5
          Proportion of Rate at Appraisal
       Project Duration in years as per Loan       5.24      6.50       5.9        5.6         4.1        4.6         5.3      5.2            4.5      4.4         4.7      3.8        4.9
          Agreement (mean)
       Years Between Appraisal and Project         8.66     12.51       8.8        8.9         7.3        8.0         7.6      7.3            7.2      6.9         5.8      6.0        7.6
          Completion (mean)
       Years Between Compl. Appraisal and          1.27      0.93       1.1        1.2         1.0        1.0         1.0      1.0            1.0      0.9         0.8      0.9        1.0
          Effectiveness Loan (mean)
       Years Between Intended and Actual           1.97      2.64       1.8        1.9         2.5        2.7         1.6      1.1            2.8      1.6         0.6      1.9        1.8
          Project Completion Date (mean)
       Years Between Closing Date as per           1.97      2.64       1.8        1.9         2.5        2.7         1.6      1.1            2.8      1.6         0.6      1.9        1.8
          Loan Agreement and Final
       Projects Extended (% of projects)          80.0%    100.0%      76.2       79.2        70.6       88.4        75.0     66.7           85.7     76.8        66.7     84.6       77.3
       Number of Extensions Given to Project       1.36      2.00       1.2        1.3         1.6        1.8         1.2      1.1            2.1      1.4         0.7      1.7        1.4
          Completion Date (mean)

F.     Project Preparation Data
       Projects with PPTA Conducted               20.0%     50.0%      42.9       31.3        11.8       18.6        41.7     45.0           28.6     46.4        66.7     30.8       36.4




                                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 3
          (% of projects)
       Person Days Used for Fact -Finding            57       140        37        52           47        46           41          44         58       57           0       46         50
          Mission (mean)
       Person Days Used for Appraisal                89       150       104        98           61        56           84          82         68       70          85       62         76
          Mission (mean)
       Days of Preparation by ADB Staff (mean)      145       290       141       150         108        100          128     125            126      127          85     106         125
                                                                                                                                                                   Continued on next page




                                                                                                                                                                                             87
                                                                                                                                                                                                  88
                                                                                Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                                 Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                     Social           Transport and         Other Sectorsa        Total




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3
                                                                                                                       Infrastructure      Communications
                                                Cost Var. Overruns Underruns          Total    Underruns Total       Underruns Total       Underruns Total       Underruns Total         All
                                                  <20%       >20%    >20%                        >20%                  >20%                  >20%                  >20%                Sectors
G.     Original Loan Allocation by Fund Category ($ million)
       SF/ADF                                      24.35        61.00     21.00      24.41         6.50   18.88         18.99    17.66         4.85     19.33       36.80    32.28      20.66
       OCR                                         22.928       70.000    11.919     20.073      149.776 108.101        34.288   28.948      114.600    67.285      26.667   38.692     52.817
       Supplementary Loan                           0.000        0.000     0.000      0.000        0.000   0.093         0.000    0.000        0.000     0.476       0.000    0.000      0.139

H.     Original Loan Allocation by Cost Category ($ million)
       Works                                       23.157       36.100    13.067     19.282       68.067 46.502         17.298   16.812       50.633    45.941      32.186   19.742     30.742
       Goods                                        9.242       54.905     4.429      9.039       67.919 54.967         15.171   12.078       35.919    18.073      15.644   14.165     21.447
       Consulting Services                          2.965        3.485     1.762      2.460        1.534   1.900         4.818    4.151        6.106     4.047       3.960    2.870      3.240
       Administration                               1.162        0.000     2.541      1.717        0.200   0.103         1.364    0.925        0.243     0.202       3.333    1.478      0.786
       Other Costs                                  4.033        0.765     6.287      4.883        0.124   1.455         6.183    4.584        0.875     0.394       4.793   27.119      4.303
       Service Charge                               3.674        8.545     2.209      3.236        7.663   8.179         5.481    4.527       11.960     8.265       3.343    2.596      5.797
       Unallocated                                  3.047       27.200     2.626      3.869       17.745 13.787          2.966    3.557       13.715     9.698       0.221    2.984      7.154
             Total                                 47.280      131.000    32.922     44.487      156.276 126.893        53.282   46.634      119.451    86.619      63.480   70.954     73.468

       Local Costs ADB Financed per Project        17.896       20.462        6.7      13.1           0.0      1.1        29.4     19.3           4.4     11.3        15.3     11.8        11.9
          ($ million)
       Local Costs in Loan per Project (%)         29.741        4.500      48.4       36.9         11.9      7.9         53.2     40.2         21.9      18.4        58.4     25.1        26.7
       Original Loan Amount as % of Appraised      65.69        38.85       67.0       65.2         40.4     47.2         64.8     68.1         44.5      59.4        82.8     75.2        61.6
          Project Cost

I.     Loan Amount Disbursed by Cost Category ($ million)
       Works                                       24.168       76.583      8.764    19.613        58.562 44.919         15.109 16.073         32.867 45.140         26.621 22.345       30.253
       Goods                                         9.441      53.260      2.569      8.260       56.270 50.806         12.621 12.108         27.103 16.215          4.878 13.085       18.494
       Consulting Services                           3.203       8.506      1.143      2.523        1.251    2.085        3.273   3.303         4.691    3.937        1.142   2.573       3.013
       Administration                                1.000       0.000      1.829      1.321        0.026    0.137        0.425   0.394         0.000    0.116        0.413   0.262       0.467
       Other Costs                                   3.236       0.285      2.507      2.794        0.067    1.014        4.178   3.424         1.416    0.400        0.199 21.367        3.106
       Service Charge                                3.334       8.545      0.864      2.470        5.757    6.701        4.844   3.914         9.226    7.429        1.243   2.069       4.929
       Unallocated                                   0.120       0.000      0.000      0.063        0.000    0.000        0.039   0.016         0.018    0.004        0.000   0.000       0.019
       Total Amount Disbursed from Loan            44.502      147.179     17.677    37.044      116.478 105.662         40.489 39.231         75.322 73.241         34.496 61.700       61.723
       Loan Disbursed Minus Original               (2.778)     16.179    (15.245)    (7.442)     (39.799) (21.231)     (12.793) (7.403)      (44.129) (13.379)     (28.984) (9.253)    (11.745)
          Loan Amount
       Loan Amount Disbursed Minus Original                    47.427    (14.565)   (11.747)     (44.174) (37.284)     (12.424) (12.948)     (51.958) (33.634)     (28.984) (23.513)   (22.598)
          Loan Size
                                                                                                                                                                        Continued on next page
                                                                               Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                                Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                Social          Transport and        Other Sectorsa       Total
                                                                                                                 Infrastructure     Communications
                                                 Cost Var. Overruns Underruns Total      Underruns Total       Underruns Total      Underruns Total      Underruns Total        All
                                                  <20%       >20%     >20%                 >20%                  >20%                 >20%                 >20%               Sectors
       Loan Cancellation Amount as % of           8.206    (14.055) 47.866   24.630        23.527 14.247         27.800 16.273        34.525 11.079        40.982 16.533       16.394
          Original Loan
       Actual Loan Disbursed as % of Actual        63.51    31.44     68.13     64.20        71.13    57.37       72.64    69.38       47.58    56.59       88.74    66.82      62.49
          Project Cost

J.     Appraisal Cost Estimates by Category ($ million)
       Foreign Exchange Component                 28.329   238.150    23.644   35.022      444.816 282.029        31.418   30.661     139.009   79.764      68.200   69.998     94.715
             % of average                           37.2      53.4      44.9     43.1         67.9    63.0          36.7     42.0        45.7     47.6        39.8     49.3       54.1
       Local Cost Component                       47.882   207.750    29.039   46.299      210.348 165.589        54.236   42.261     164.930   87.774     103.333   72.122     80.209
             % of average                           62.8      46.6      55.1     56.9         32.1    37.0          63.3     58.0        54.3     52.4        60.2     50.7       45.9
       Civil Works                                34.585   118.980    17.940   30.819      281.965 166.416        31.721   24.278     132.590   99.078      36.970   32.193     73.062
       Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping      3.049     3.745     0.285    1.869        6.766   3.436         1.125    0.797       0.102    0.149       0.000    0.000      1.346
       Research and Development                    0.615     0.000     4.370    2.232        0.000   1.114         1.507    0.639       0.000    0.000       0.000    0.000      0.887
          (extension and demonstration)
       Institutional Development                   3.388     0.000     0.927     2.170       13.764    6.949       3.652    4.725       1.161    0.407       4.540    1.135      3.314
          and Strengthening
       Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture          6.101   102.885     4.520     9.442     107.639    78.708       8.208   10.610      74.145   31.721      16.743   18.319     30.230
          (purchase and maintenance)
       Materialsb                                  0.129     0.000     1.429     0.693       72.906   43.402       2.969    2.032       1.515    3.106       0.000    0.000     10.292
             All Goodsc                            6.230   102.885     6.190   10.239      181.820 122.690        15.141   16.574      75.660   34.909      16.743   18.319     40.102
       Consulting Services                         2.259     5.485     1.368    2.004        2.780   3.204         3.534    3.893       6.388    4.628       4.450    3.892      3.526
       Training and Fellowships                    0.866     0.675     2.473    1.561        0.319   0.382         4.164    3.730       0.985    0.548       0.000    0.358      1.604
       Operation and Maintenance                   1.442     0.000     2.872    2.008        0.000   6.133         4.416    2.282       0.685    1.299       0.000    0.358      2.627
           (recurrent costs)
       Financing of NGOs                           0.000     0.000     0.040    0.018        0.000   0.000         0.148    0.059       0.000   0.000        0.000    0.000       0.020
       Implementation Assistance                   0.822     0.000     0.572    0.678        0.859   0.590         0.705    0.459       0.445   0.376        0.000    0.450       0.511
       Land Acquisition                            2.877     6.480     0.111    1.817        0.037   0.265         2.832    1.694       8.500   4.841        0.100    1.458       2.220
       Capital Goods                               0.380     0.000     2.322    1.214        0.000   0.000         0.000    0.000       0.000   0.000        0.000 55.609         3.328
       Incremental Administrative Costs            0.852    17.350     0.662    1.457        1.912   2.116         1.314    1.571       0.035   1.682        0.117    0.746       1.636




                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 3
       Initial Working Capital                     2.093     0.000     0.680    1.387        0.000   0.090         1.297    0.683       0.746   0.313        0.000    2.225       0.713
       Taxes and Duties                            1.232    30.700     0.342    2.070       42.966 25.106          2.209    1.895       3.431   0.851        2.500    0.625       6.179
               Total Project Base Costs           60.689   286.300    41.155   61.543      507.467 338.548        73.764   63.279     230.727 149.082       65.420 117.369     141.074
       Physical Contingencies                      3.624    36.495     2.125    4.844       27.526 17.744          2.468    1.937      18.314   9.795        0.000    3.067       8.124
                                                                                                                                                                Continued on next page




                                                                                                                                                                                          89
                                                                                                                                                                                        90
                                                                               Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                                Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                 Social          Transport and      Other Sectorsa      Total




                                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 3
                                                                                                                  Infrastructure     Communications
                                               Cost Var.    Overruns Underruns Total     Underruns     Total    Underruns Total Underruns Total Underruns Total               All
                                                 <20%        >20%      >20%                >20%                   >20%            >20%            >20%                      Sectors
       Foreign Price Contingencies               2.800       51.550     1.500   5.085       25.113     15.733       1.657  1.302   16.383   5.571   0.000   2.050              6.469
       Local Price Contingencies                 4.267       49.410     3.320   6.515       20.229     14.360       2.903  2.125   20.651   7.959   0.000   0.583              7.261
             Price Contingencies at Completion   7.066      100.960     4.821  11.600       45.341     30.092       4.560  3.426   37.034 13.530    0.000   2.633             13.730
             Total Contingencies                10.445      137.455     7.753  14.559       72.893     46.017      11.336  8.609   57.770 29.538    4.103   7.138             21.794
       Service Charge/IDC                        5.018       22.145     2.721   4.727       77.425     46.892       7.339  6.326   27.369 14.568    3.343   4.704             15.966
             Total Cost                         76.152      445.900   51.629   80.829      657.785    431.458      91.967 78.070  305.946 192.899  72.867 119.342            177.915

K.     Actual Costs at Project Completion by Currency Component ($ million)
       Foreign Exchange Cost                      26.869    205.465   12.148   27.870      331.080 218.065         27.226   28.578     88.757   70.163    35.153   63.817     77.488
       Local Cost Component                       46.947    362.515   14.573   45.932      132.370 135.919         34.272   33.031     89.780   72.896    61.930   95.792     69.510

L.     Actual Costs at Project Completion by Category ($ million)
       Civil Works                                42.412    305.580   12.229   40.766      257.110 171.848         29.418   26.755     85.817 104.597     27.900   44.034     79.064
       Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping      3.116      4.785    0.085    1.897        2.480   1.794          0.899    0.622      0.011   0.156      0.000    0.000      0.973
       Research and Development                    0.521      0.000    2.546    1.361        0.000   0.887          0.159    0.118      0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000      0.501
          (extension and demonstration)
       Institutional Development                    4.125     0.000    0.334     2.336       12.784     6.117       2.818    5.242      0.879    0.412     0.467    0.108      3.263
          and Strengthening
       Equipment, Vehicles, Furniture               6.661    87.685    2.129     8.180       88.861    75.142       5.923    8.555     55.753   28.632     5.090   18.290     27.254
          (purchase and maintenance)
       Materialsb                                   0.218     0.000    0.635     0.386       60.015    38.855       2.190    1.658      0.715    2.869     0.000    0.000      9.846
             All Goodsc                             6.818    87.685    2.925     8.603     140.334 110.900         11.054   15.506     56.469   31.564     5.090   18.290     36.775
       Consulting Services                          2.593    16.725    1.083     2.552       1.835   3.832          2.334    3.063      4.414    4.660     1.343    3.423      3.528
       Training and Fellowships                     0.489     0.540    1.859     1.074       0.127   0.243          1.784    2.948      0.660    0.491     0.000    0.169      1.225
       Operations and Maintenance                   1.312     1.400    3.529     2.259       0.000   5.851          1.043    0.951      0.785    1.442     0.000    0.238      2.281
           (recurrent costs)
       Financing of NGOs                           0.000      0.000    0.025    0.011        0.000   0.000          0.085    0.034      0.000   0.000      0.000    0.000       0.012
       Implementation Assistance                   0.308      0.000    0.633    0.433        3.027   1.893          1.811    0.926      0.015   0.257      0.000    1.085       0.851
       Land Acquisition/Right of Way               2.371     35.565    0.191    2.856        0.037   0.430          1.256    0.977      8.740   6.167      0.100    5.631       2.861
       Capital Goods                               0.715      0.000    0.050    0.401        0.000   0.000          0.039    0.016      0.000   0.000      0.000 68.568         4.180
       Incremental Administrative Costs            1.455     31.100    0.469    2.297        0.046   2.069          0.561    1.188      0.019   1.772      0.077    0.715       1.720
       Initial Working Capital                     2.264      0.000    0.000    1.204        0.000   0.272          1.450    0.705      0.754   0.211      0.000    0.000       0.561
       Taxes and Duties                            0.800      0.000    0.031    0.430       12.637   8.940          0.685    1.111      2.469   0.638      0.440    0.102       2.320
               Total Base Costs                   69.299    483.380   25.385   67.340      409.227 319.819         55.397   60.161    161.031 152.367     35.417 142.363     139.546
                                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                                             Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                              Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                Social          Transport and       Other Sectorsa       Total
                                                                                                               Infrastructure     Communications
                                                Cost Var. Overruns Underruns    Total    Underruns Total Underruns Total Underruns Total Underruns Total                     All
                                                 <20%      >20%      >20%                  >20%            >20%            >20%            >20%                            Sectors
       Physical Contingencies                     0.000     0.000     0.006     0.003        0.436  0.292    0.000  0.030    0.000  2.009    0.000  0.000                     0.571
       Foreign Price Contingencies                0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000        0.000  0.000    0.000  0.000    0.000  0.000    0.000  0.000                     0.000
       Local Price Contingencies                  0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000        0.000  0.000    0.000  0.146    0.000  0.000    0.000  0.008                     0.041
       Price Contingencies at Appraisal           0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000        0.000  0.000    0.000  0.146    0.000  0.000    0.000  0.008                     0.041
          ($ million)
             Total Contingencies                 0.262      0.000    0.006      0.139        0.000   0.115       0.000    0.176      0.023   1.978       0.000   0.011       0.598
       Service Charge/IDC                        4.194     84.555    1.363      6.304       43.864 31.510        6.525    5.430     21.463 15.738        1.243   3.345      13.207
             Estimate of Total Actual           73.755    567.935   26.754     73.783      453.091 351.444      61.922   65.767    178.522 169.305      36.660 145.719     153.230
                Project Cost
       Average % Unweighed Cost Overrun          (4.71)    26.01    (48.99)    (22.80)     (36.60) (13.68)     (37.22) (16.77)      (38.96)   (3.96)    (46.23)   (0.40)    (12.87)
          per project (- = Underrun)
       Average % Weighed Cost Overrun                               (48.18)     (8.72)     (31.12) (18.54)     (32.67) (15.76)      (41.65) (12.23)     (49.69)   22.10     (13.87)
          per project (- = Underrun)

       Foreign Price Contingencies as %           7.59     17.50        5.7       7.2          4.4       5.1      15.1      8.5       10.0      7.8        0.0      0.9         7.7
          Appraised FEC
       Local Price Contingencies as %             6.14     21.40       10.1       9.1          8.0       7.7       6.8      6.3        6.9     14.0        0.0      0.8         9.6
          Appraised LEC
       Total Price Contigencies as % Appr.        8.76     29.62       12.5      12.0          7.8       8.2       8.7      7.5       11.5      8.5        0.0      1.0         9.3
          Base Cost
       Total Price Contingencies + SC/IDC        16.01     39.61       26.8      23.0         21.5      20.5      16.6     15.2       25.6     17.9        5.5      5.7        18.7
          as % of Base Cost

M.     Reasons Mentioned in PCR for Cost Underrun (% of projects with underrun >20%)
       Overestimate Base Costs at Appraisal                            30.0                   26.7                34.8                28.6                66.7               31.58
       Lower Than Anticipated Prices                                   10.0                   53.3                26.1                64.3                 0.0               34.21
          During Implementation
       Very Competitive Pricing by Bidders                              0.0                    5.3                21.7                42.9                 0.0               26.32
       Exhange Rate Fluctuation/                                       35.0                   33.3                60.9                35.7                66.7               43.42




                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 3
          De(ap)preciation Local Currency
       Change in Project Scope                                         30.0                   33.3                30.4                 7.1                 0.0              25.00
       Nonavailment of Contingencies                                    0.0                   26.7                 8.7                28.6                 0.0              14.47
       Other Reason for Cost Underrun Given                            15.0                   26.7                30.4                28.6               100.0              27.63
                                                                                                                                                            Continued on next page




                                                                                                                                                                                      91
                                                                                                                                                                                               92
                                                                                   Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                                    Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                  Social          Transport and       Other Sectorsa       Total




                                                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 3
                                                                                                                       Infrastructure     Communications
                                                      Cost Var. Overruns Underruns   Total   Underruns Total         Underruns Total      Underruns Total     Underruns Total        All
                                                       <20%      >20%      >20%                >20%                    >20%                 >20%                >20%               Sectors

N.     Summary (% of all projects with cost underrun >20%)
       Wrong Base Cost Estimate                                             31.6                    26.7                  38.1                 28.6                66.7                33.3
       Wrong Pricing / Bidding / Inflation Estimate                         42.1                    73.3                  90.5                 78.6                66.7                70.8
       Scope Changes                                                        47.4                    40.0                  33.3                 14.3                33.3                34.7
       Other Reasons                                                        21.1                    26.7                  42.9                 57.1               100.0                38.9

O.     Reasons Mentioned in PCR for Loan Cancellations/Savings (% of projects with cost variation >20%)
       Cancellation of Subcomponents and                          0.0%                              60.0                  39.1                 50.0                66.7              51.81
         Contract Packages
       Change to Alternate Financing Sources                      0.0%      19.0                    33.3                  21.7                  3.0                 0.0              19.28
       Lower Cost of Works                                      100.0%      47.6                    40.0                  65.2                 64.3                66.7              53.01
         During Implementation

       Lower Price Equipment and                                100.0%      14.3                    60.0                  47.8                 57.1                 0.0              38.55
          Materials Prices
       Vigorous Competition in Bidding Process                    0.0%       0.0                    46.7                   8.7                 35.7                 0.0              18.07
       Other Reasons/Unspecified                                  0.0%      14.3                    20.0                   4.3                 21.4                66.7              14.46

P.     Data on Scope Changes as per PCR (for projects with cost variation > 20%)
       Number of Project Components                     4.16      5.00       4.1       4.2           5.0       4.8         4.0      3.8         3.8     3.8         5.7     3.8         4.3

       Number of Scope Changes Referred to                        1.00       1.1                     1.1       1.1         1.3                  1.1                 1.3               112.5
          in PCR
       Projects with Major Scope Addition                         0.50       0.0                     0.0                   0.0                  0.0                 0.0                10.4
       Projects with Major Scope Reduction                        0.00      42.9                    46.7                  39.1                 21.4                33.3                30.2
       Projects with Minor Scope Addition                         0.00      28.6                     6.7                  13.0                 14.3                33.3                14.6
       Projects with Minor Scope Reduction                        0.50       9.5                    20.0                  13.0                  7.1                 0.0                10.4
       Projects with time overruns                    100.0%    100.0%      90.5      95.8          93.8      96.4       100.0     96.9        84.6   100.0       100.0   100.0        96.3
       Time Overrun (Y/N)                                       100.0%      90.5                    93.3      95.0        90.9                100.0               100.0                93.5

Q.     Reasons for Time Overruns Mentioned in PCRs (if applicable, and only for projects with cost variations > 20%)
       Land Acquisition Problem                                   0.0%      10.5                     7.1                   5.3                  7.7                 0.0                  7.1
       Procurement Delays                                         0.0%      21.1                    50.0                  31.6                 53.8                 0.0                 37.6
                                                                                                                                                                     Continued on next page
                                                                                 Table A3.2(a)--Continued
Item                                                  Agriculture and Natural Resources          Energy                    Social           Transport and          Other Sectorsa     Total
                                                                                                                       Infrastructure      Communications
                                                   Cost Var. Overruns Underruns      Total    Underruns Total       Underruns Total       Underruns Total      Underruns Total         All
                                                    <20%      >20%      >20%                    >20%                  >20%                  >20%                 >20%                Sectors
       Works Delays                                            0.0%      26.3                      35.7                   5.3                   0.0                  0.0                 17.6
       Institutional/Policy Delays                            50.0%      15.8                      14.3                   5.3                   7.7                  0.0                   9.4
       Consultant Delays                                       0.0%      10.5                       0.0                   5.3                   0.0                 33.3                   7.1
       Contractor Delays                                       0.0%      10.5                      28.6                   5.3                  23.1                 33.3                 18.8
       Government Delays                                      50.0%      36.8                      28.6                  68.4                  69.2                100.0                 50.6
       ADB Inaction                                            0.0%       5.3                       7.1                  10.5                   0.0                 33.3                   7.1
       Calamity/Security Delays                                0.0%      26.3                       7.1                   5.3                  30.8                 33.3                 17.6
       Start Up Delays                                         0.0%       5.3                       7.1                  21.1                  15.4                  0.0                 16.5
       Other Delays                                           50.0%      47.4                      28.6                  26.3                  15.4                 33.3                 35.3

R.     Quantified Success Rate for Project by Cost Overrun or Underrun > 20% (Col. %)
       Unsuccessful                                      0          0        9.5                        0                  4.3                     0                  33.3                1.8
       Partly Successful                               36           0       57.1                     13.9                 34.8                  28.6                     0               26.8
       Successful/Generally Successful                 60        100        33.3                     80.6                 56.5                  64.3                  66.7               65.5
       Highly Successful                                 4          0          0                      5.6                  4.3                   7.1                     0                5.9
          Total                                      100.0      100.0      100.0                    100.0                100.0                 100.0                 100.0              100.0

S.     Success Indicators
       Quantified Average Rating of Project           1.68       2.00      1.24       1.50          1.94     1.79         1.58     1.80        1.79     1.93         1.33     1.62      1.75
         as per PCR Ratingd
      EIRR at Appraisal (mean %)                         20.5      14.6      21.3       20.6          21.9      20.5   11.5     22.4         25.2      21.9          5.9     16.8        21.1
      EIRR at Completion (mean %)                        14.6      12.4      14.1       14.3          28.6      21.4   17.1     22.2         23.6      22.5          8.7     17.2        19.8
      FIRR at Appraisal (mean %)                         17.1      10.2      21.0       18.4          14.1      12.5    9.8     11.0         13.3      11.5          5.1       8.8       12.7
      FIRR at Completion (mean %)                        12.7       7.1      13.2       12.7          13.7      10.3   11.4      8.5         13.4       9.8          4.7       6.9       10.1
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FEC = foreign exchange cost, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, IDC = interest during construction, LEC = local
 exchange cost, NGO = nongovernment organization, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PCR = project completion report, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, SC = service charge,
      specialsectors
aSF = Other   funds. are mainly consisting of multisectoral emergency response projects, and some industrial projects.
b      The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
c   The category of "goods" provides a more complete indication of the cost of equipment and materials, since the breakdown was not always presented in PCRs.




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 3
d
    0 = unsuccessful, 1 = partly successful, 2 = successful, 3 = highly successful.
Source: Various project completion reports.




                                                                                                                                                                                                 93
                   Table A3.2(b): Loan and Cost Data from 220 Projects with PCRs Issued Between 1998 and June 2003
                                             by Sector Level of Cost Variation (unweighted)




                                                                                                                                                                                    94
                                                      (percentages of loans and cost)




                                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 3
Item                                      Agriculture and                                                                Transport and
                                                                        Energy               Social Infrastructure                              Other Sectors           Total
                                         Natural Resources                                                              Communications
                                        Underruns      Total       Underruns     Total       Underruns     Total       Underruns     Total    Underruns    Total         All
                                           >20%                      >20%                      >20%                      >20%                   >20%                   Sectors


A. Number of Projects                             21       48               17       43               24       60               14       56            3        13         220
       >20% Overrun                                            2                         4                         1                     10                        3           20
       >20 % Underrun                                      21                        17                        24                        14                        3
       Variation <20%                                      25                        22                        35                        32                        7
       Total


B. Original Loan Allocation by Cost Category (% of total)
   Works                                    40.3        39.6            38.3       37.3            33.2      36.1           43.0       55.5        36.6      37.0         42.1
   Goods                                    11.3        18.3            45.7       36.4            22.3      24.1           29.0       17.2        20.8      21.2         23.3
   Consulting Services                        6.8         5.6            1.2        4.3            12.3       9.9            6.0        6.8         5.2       5.2          6.8
   Administration                             8.0         5.5            0.1        4.7             3.6       2.8            0.1        0.1         4.2       3.3          3.1
   Other Costs                              19.4        16.3             0.1        1.6            13.4      11.5            1.9        1.0        26.2      25.7          8.8
   Service Charge                             6.7         6.1            4.1        4.9             7.6       6.4            8.7        6.9         4.9       2.9          6.0
   Unallocated                                7.5         8.7           10.5       11.0             7.7       9.2           11.2       12.4         2.1       4.6         10.0
         Total                               100.0      100.0          100.0      100.0           100.0     100.0          100.0      100.0       100.0     100.0        100.0

C. Loan Amount Disbursed by Cost Category (% of total)
   Works                                 47.5       47.6                40.9       41.1            39.6      42.6           44.3       63.9        59.1      51.2         49.3
   Goods                                 13.0       20.4                52.8       43.1            25.4      28.3           32.1       19.0        28.1      22.5         26.8
   Consulting Services                   10.3          7.5               1.7        4.9            14.8      11.6            8.5        8.4         3.2       6.6          8.3
   Administration                        10.8          6.6               0.0        4.6             2.0       1.6            0.0        0.1         2.3       0.7          2.8
   Other Costs                           12.5       12.2                 0.1        1.1            10.9      10.0            3.9        1.1         2.5      16.1          6.8
   Service Charge                          5.9         5.6               4.5        5.2             7.2       5.8           11.2        7.5         4.7       2.9          5.9
   Unallocated                             0.0         0.1               0.0        0.0             0.1       0.0            0.1        0.0         0.0       0.0          0.0
         Net Total Disbursed from Loan  100.0      100.0               100.0      100.0           100.0     100.0          100.0      100.0       100.0     100.0        100.0

D. Appraisal Cost Estimates by Cost Category (% of base costs)
   Civil Works                             41.4      43.8               32.8       43.1            36.2      40.5           56.2       71.4        53.9      48.9         49.8
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping   0.7       2.6                2.6        2.4             1.3       1.3            0.1        0.4         0.0       0.0          1.5
   Research and Development                13.2       6.6                0.0        0.5             1.1       0.5            0.0        0.0         0.0       0.0          1.7
      (extension and demonstration)
                                                                                                                                                    Continued on next page
                                                                         Table A3.2(b)--Continued
Item                                         Agriculture and                                                         Transport and
                                                                          Energy           Social Infrastructure                          Other Sectors         Total
                                            Natural Resources                                                       Communications
                                           Underruns        Total    Underruns   Total     Underruns    Total      Underruns   Total    Underruns   Total        All
                                              >20%                     >20%                  >20%                    >20%                 >20%                Sectors
   Institutional Development                      3.0          4.3         4.7       2.1         5.4        5.3          0.8      0.4        13.2         3.3      3.1
      and Strengthening
   Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture                13.0     14.8        37.2      31.5         14.5      15.9         30.1     16.0        20.4     12.7        18.7
       (purchase and maintenance)a
   Materialsa                                         2.1      1.4        13.4       7.5          4.2       4.8          0.3      1.6         0.0      0.0         3.8
         All Goods (total equipment,                 14.4     15.9        52.6      40.8         19.1      20.7         30.4     17.3        20.4     12.7        22.6
             vehicles, furniture, and materials)a
   Consulting Services                                5.6      4.2         1.1       2.2          9.8       9.2          4.0      5.4         7.7         5.9          5.5
   Training and Fellowships                           3.7      2.7         0.1       0.4          9.1       6.6          0.5      0.3         0.0         0.1          2.6
   Operation and Maintenance                          7.5      4.9         0.0       2.3          8.9       4.7          0.2      0.4         0.0         0.4          2.9
       (recurrent costs)
   Financing of NGOs                                  0.1      0.1         0.0       0.0          0.5       0.2          0.0      0.0         0.0      0.0         0.1
   Implementation Assistance                          1.2      1.3         0.1       0.1          1.2       1.1          0.8      0.6         0.0      0.2         0.8
   Land Acquisition                                   0.4      1.7         0.0       0.1          2.2       1.9          4.1      2.2         0.9      1.3         1.6
   Capital Goods                                      3.5      2.8         0.0       0.0          0.0       0.0          0.0      0.0         0.0     25.0         2.0
   Incremental Administrative Costs                   2.0      2.0         0.3       0.6          1.5       2.8          0.1      0.7         1.1      0.7         1.5
   Initial Working Capital                            2.4      6.0         0.0       0.0          0.0       2.5          1.5      0.7         0.0      0.9         2.2
   Taxes and Duties                                   0.8      1.2         5.6       5.3          3.8       2.8          1.2      0.3         2.9      0.7         2.2
         Total Base Costs                            78.5     79.1        78.2      79.6         84.2      84.7         73.7     78.9        85.9     89.1        81.5
            (% of total cost)
   Physical Contingencies                             4.2      4.1         5.4       5.0          2.9       3.1          6.0      4.9         0.0         0.9          4.0
      (% of base costs)
   Foreign Price Contingencies (% of                  3.5      2.9         2.8       3.4          2.6       2.3          6.6      4.0         0.0         0.6          3.0
      base costs + physical contingencies)
   Local Price Contingencies (% of base               6.4      5.8         3.1       2.8          4.1       3.8          6.7      3.8         0.0         0.2          3.8
      costs + physical contingencies)
         Price Contingencies at Appraisal            11.1     17.5         5.9       6.1          6.7       6.1         13.3      7.8         0.0         0.8          6.8
            (% base costs + phys. Cont.)




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 3
         Total Contingencies                         14.7     14.8        11.6      11.7         10.3       9.5         18.2     14.7        10.2         8.3     12.4
            (% of total cost)
   Service Charge/IDC (% of total cost)               6.8      6.0        10.2       8.7          6.0       5.9          8.1      6.4         3.9      2.6         6.4
         Total Cost                                 100.0    100.0       100.0     100.0        100.0     100.0        100.0    100.0       100.0    100.0       100.0

E. Actual Costs at Project Completion (% of base costs)




                                                                                                                                                                             95
   Civil Works                               40.9       46.1              33.3      45.4         43.9      45.6         53.4     71.7        64.9     55.4       52.8
   Survey, Investigation, Design, Mapping     0.6        2.5               1.4       2.2          0.6       1.0          0.0      0.4         0.0       0.0       1.3
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                                         Table A3.2(b)--Continued
Item                                           Agriculture and                                                       Transport and




                                                                                                                                                                             96
                                                                          Energy           Social Infrastructure                          Other Sectors         Total
                                              Natural Resources                                                     Communications
                                             Underruns      Total    Underruns   Total     Underruns    Total      Underruns   Total    Underruns   Total        All
                                                >20%                   >20%                  >20%                    >20%                 >20%                Sectors




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 3
    Research and development                       11.2        5.4         0.0       0.4         0.3        0.1          0.0      0.0         0.0         0.0      1.3
       (extension and demonstration)
    Institutional Development                        3.9       4.9         5.0       2.1          5.5       5.3          0.9      0.5         2.2         0.5          3.1
       and Strengthening
    Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture               9.0      11.0       126.0      63.6         13.8      15.0         31.2     15.4        24.2      11.0       23.6
       (purchase and maintenance)a
    Materialsa                                       1.2       1.4        13.8       7.6          3.6       4.0          0.2      1.4         0.0       0.0        3.3
          All Goods (total equipment,               11.6      13.0        54.3      40.3         19.6      19.9         31.5     16.8        24.2      11.0       21.1
               vehicles, furniture, and materials)a
    Consulting Services                               7.8      5.1         1.4       2.5          9.8       8.6          4.7      5.7         4.7         5.2          5.7
    Training and Fellowships                          4.3      2.5         0.0       0.3          7.0       5.1          0.6      0.2         0.0         0.1          2.1
    Operations and Maintenance                       13.9      7.3         0.0       2.2          4.8       3.2          0.6      0.4         0.0         0.2          3.0
        (recurrent costs)
    Financing of NGOs                                 0.3      0.1         0.0       0.0          0.5       0.2          0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0        0.1
    Implementation Assistance                         2.4      1.4         1.8       1.0          2.4       1.7          0.0      0.3         0.0       0.2        1.0
    Land Acquisition/Right of Way                     0.5      1.6         0.0       0.2          1.6       2.1          5.5      2.8         1.1       3.4        1.9
    Capital Goods                                     0.2      1.7         0.0       0.0          0.1       0.0          0.0      0.0         0.0      23.1        1.7
    Incremental Administrative Costs                  2.4      2.3         0.1       0.8          1.3       2.7          0.1      0.5         0.9       0.4        1.6
    Initial Working Capital                           0.0      5.7         0.0       0.1          0.0       2.4          1.8      0.5         0.0       0.0        2.0
    Taxes and Duties                                  0.1      0.4         2.5       2.5          2.5       2.1          0.9      0.3         2.0       0.5        1.2
            Total Base Costs (% of total cost)       94.2     94.8        89.3      91.5         92.5      94.0         88.5     92.4        96.1      98.1       93.5
    Physical Contingencies (% of base costs)          0.7      0.3         0.2       0.1          0.0       0.1          0.0      0.3         0.0       0.0        0.2
    Foreign Price Contingencies (% of base            0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0          0.0       0.0          0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0        0.0
        costs + physical contingencies)
    Local Price Contingencies (% of base              0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0          0.0       0.3          0.0      0.0         0.0         0.0          0.1
        costs + physical contigencies)
            Total Price Contingencies (% of           0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0          0.0       0.3          0.0      0.0         0.0         0.0          0.1
               base costs + physical contingencies)
            Total Contingencies                       0.6      0.4         0.0       0.0          0.0       0.3          0.0      0.3         0.0         0.0          0.3
               (% of total costs)
    Service Charge/IDC (% of total costs)             5.3      4.8        10.7       8.4          7.5       5.6         11.5      7.3         3.9       1.8        6.2
            Total Cost                              100.0    100.0       100.0     100.0        100.0     100.0        100.0    100.0       100.0     100.0      100.0


IDC = interest during construction, NGO = nongovernment organization, OCR = ordinary capital resources.
a  The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
Source: Various project completion reports.
                 Table A3.2(c): Loan and Cost Data from 220 Projects with PCRs Issued Between 1998 and June 2003
                                           by sector and level of cost variation (weighted)
                                    (percentages of average actual cost over average appraised cost)

                                             Agriculture and                               Social           Transport and
Item                                        Natural Resources         Energy           Infrastructure      Communications       Other Sectors      Total
                                           Underruns Total      Underruns Total     Underruns Total       Underruns Total    Underruns Total        All
                                             >20%                 >20%                >20%                  >20%               >20%               Sectors

A.     Number of Projects                         21       48         17      43           23       60          14      56          3        13       220
         >20% Overrun                                       2                  5                     2                  10                    3        22
         >20 % Underrun                                    21                 17                    23                  14                    3
         Variation <20%                                    25                 21                    35                  32                    7

B.     Disbursement as % of Original Loan Allocation
       Works                              67.1     101.7             86.0    96.6        87.3     95.6        64.9    98.3        82.7    113.2      98.4
       Goods                              58.0       91.4            82.8    92.4        83.2    100.2        75.5    89.7        31.2     92.4      86.2
       Consulting Services                64.9     102.5             81.6   109.7        67.9     79.6        76.8    97.3        28.8     89.6      93.0
       Administration                     72.0       77.0            13.0   133.0        31.1     42.6         0.0    57.4        12.4     17.7      59.4
       Other Costs                        39.9       57.2            53.7    69.7        67.6     74.7       161.8   101.4         4.1     78.8      72.2
       Service Charge                     39.1       76.3            75.1    81.9        88.4     86.5        77.1    89.9        37.2     79.7      85.0
       Unallocated                         0.0        1.6             0.0     0.0         1.3      0.4         0.1     0.0         0.0      0.0       0.3
             Net Total Disbursed                53.7     83.3        74.5    83.3        76.0     84.1        63.1    84.6        54.3     87.0      84.0
               from Loan

C.     Actual Costs at Project Completion as % of Appraised Costs
       Civil Works                         68.2     132.3       91.2        103.3        92.7    110.2        64.7   105.6        75.5    136.8     108.2
       Survey, Investigation,              29.8     101.5       36.6         52.2        79.9     78.0        10.5   105.0                           72.3
          Design, Mapping
       Research and Development            58.3      61.0                    79.6        10.5      18.4                                              56.5
          (extension and demonstration)
       Institutional Development           36.0     107.7       92.9         88.0        77.2    110.9        75.7   101.1        10.3      9.5      98.5




                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 3
          and Strengthening
       Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture  47.1      86.6       82.6         95.5        72.2      80.6       75.2    90.3        30.4     99.8      90.2
                                       a
          (purchase and maintenance)
       Materialsa                               44.4     55.8        82.3    89.5        73.7      81.6       47.2    92.4                           95.7
             All Goods (total equipment,        47.3     84.0        77.2    90.4        73.0      93.6       74.6    90.4        30.4     99.8      91.7
               vehicles, furniture, and materials)a




                                                                                                                                                            97
                                                                                                                                   Continued on next page
                                                                    Table A3.2(c)--Continued
                                            Agriculture and                              Social          Transport and




                                                                                                                                                                   98
Item                                       Natural Resources         Energy          Infrastructure     Communications       Other Sectors     Total
                                          Underruns Total      Underruns Total    Underruns Total      Underruns Total    Underruns Total       All
                                            >20%                 >20%               >20%                 >20%               >20%              Sectors




                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3
       Consulting Services                      79.2     127.4      66.0    119.6       66.1      78.7      69.1    100.7      30.2      88.0   100.1
       Training and Fellowships                 75.2      68.8      39.8     63.7       42.9      79.0      67.0     89.5                47.1     76.4
       Operation and Maintenance              122.9      112.5               95.4       23.6      41.7     114.6    111.0                66.5     86.8
           (recurrent costs)
       Financing of NGOs                       62.5     60.8                             57.5      57.5                                                     57.9
       Implementation Assistance              110.6     63.9      352.5    320.8        257.0     201.7          3.5      68.2                  241.0      166.6
       Land Acquisition/Right-of-Way          171.9    157.2      100.0    162.2         44.4      57.7        102.8     127.4        100.0     386.1      128.9
       Capital Goods                            2.1     33.1                                                                                    123.3      125.6
       Incremental Administrative Costs        70.7    157.7        2.4     97.8         42.7      75.6         53.8     105.3         65.7      95.9      105.1
       Initial Working Capital                  0.0     86.8               302.0        111.8     103.3        101.0      67.4                    0.0       78.7
       Taxes and Duties                         9.1     20.8       29.4     35.6         31.0      58.6         72.0      75.0         17.6      16.2       37.6
             Total Base Costs                  61.7    109.4       80.6     94.5         75.1      95.1         69.8     102.2         54.1     121.3       98.9

D.     Contingencies and Service Charge as % of Appraised Costs
       Physical Contingencies              0.3      0.1         1.6           1.6         0.0        1.6         0.0      20.5                     0.0       7.0
       Foreign Price Contingencies         0.0      0.0         0.0           0.0         0.0        0.0         0.0       0.0                     0.0       0.0
       Local Price Contingencies           0.0      0.0         0.0           0.0         0.0        6.8         0.0       0.0                     1.4       0.6
             Price Contingencies           0.0      0.0         0.0           0.0         0.0        4.2         0.0       0.0                     0.3       0.3
             Total Contingencies           0.1      1.0         0.0           0.2         0.0        2.0         0.0       6.7          0.0        0.2       2.7
       Service Charge/IDC                 50.1    133.4       56.7           67.2        88.9       85.8        78.4     108.0         37.2       71.1      82.7

             Total Cost as % of                51.8     91.3       68.9      81.5        67.3       84.2        58.4       87.8        50.3     122.1       86.1
               Appraised Cost


IDC = interest during construction, NGO = nongovernment organization, PCR = project completion report.
a    The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
Source: Various project completion reports.
                                     Table A3.3(a): Summary of Country Data Collected for All 220 ADB Projects
                                          Which Have PCRs Issued Between January 1998 and June 2003

Item                                   BAN         IND        INO        LAO      NEP      PAK      PHI      PRC      SRI      THA        OTH       Total
A. Nature of Loan Funds of Project (row%)
    Ordinary Capital Resources              0        100          83.9       0        0      20.8     57.1     100        0      100        23.4       42.3
    Special Funds                         100          0           9.7     100      100      66.7     21.4       0      100        0        72.3       53.2
    Blended Loans                           0          0           6.5       0        0      12.5     21.4       0        0        0         4.3        4.5
          Total (row %)

B. Country of Project by Macro Sector Classification (Column %)
   Agriculture and Natural               23.8           0         19.4       0      26.7     45.8     28.6     17.4     27.3         0      23.4       21.8
      Resources
   Energy                                  9.5         60          9.7     21.4     13.3       25     35.7      8.7     18.2      60        12.8       19.5
   Social Infrastructure                 42.9           0         45.2     42.9     33.3     20.8      7.1      8.7     45.5      10        25.5       27.3
   Transportation and                       19         40         16.1     35.7       20      4.2     21.4     56.5      9.1      30        29.8       25.5
      Communications
   Others                                  4.8          0          9.7       0       6.7      4.2      7.1      8.7       0        0         8.5        5.9
         Total (row %)                    100         100         100      100      100      100      100      100      100      100        100        100

C. Project Type by Country (row %)
   Investment Projects                    95.2       100          93.5     100      86.7     79.2     85.7     95.7     81.8      60        91.5       89.5
   Sector Projects                         4.8         0           6.5       0      13.3     20.8     14.3      4.3     18.2      40         8.5       10.5

D. Basic Data (no. of valid cases)         21        10            31       14       15       24       14       23       11       10         47        220
   Availability of Other Financing        47.6      40.0          29.0     57.1     53.3     58.3     21.4     43.5     36.4     60.0        0.3        0.4
      Source (% of projects)
   Year of Project Appraisal (mean)     1991.0    1989.3     1991.5      1992.4   1990.7   1989.6   1990.4   1993.3   1991.1   1992.5    1992.7      1991.5
   Year of Project Approval (mean)      1991.1    1989.3     1991.7      1992.6   1991.0   1989.8   1990.5   1993.3   1991.4   1992.9    1992.9      1991.7
   Projects Granted a Supplementary        0.0       0.0        0.0         7.1      0.0      0.0      7.1      0.0      0.0      0.0       2.1         1.4
      Loan (% of projects)
   Approved at Time of New Cost            4.8       0.0           6.5     14.3      6.7      0.0      7.1     26.1      9.1      0.0       21.3       10.9
      Estimate System (% of projects)
   Value Local Currency at Completion     75.4      48.1          33.1     19.9     54.6     44.0     61.1     78.9     62.2     64.7       72.9       57.4
      Compared to Appraisal (%)
   Exchange Rate at Completion as          1.3       2.4           4.0      8.1      2.0      2.4      1.7      1.3      1.6      1.6        1.7        2.5




                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 3
      proportion of Rate at Appraisal
   Project Duration in years as per        4.8       5.2           5.0      4.7      5.5      5.2      4.6      4.6      5.3      5.2        4.5        4.9
      Loan Agreement (mean)
   Years Between Appraisal and             7.9       9.3           7.0      7.0      7.3      9.6      7.8      6.3      8.0      6.9        7.4        7.6
      Project Completion (mean)
   Years Between Compl. Appraisal          0.9       0.9           0.9      0.8      1.0      1.0      0.8      1.0      1.1      1.0        1.2        1.0
      and Effectiveness Loan (mean)




                                                                                                                                                              99
   Years Between Intended and Actual       2.1       4.0           1.2      1.3      1.6      3.0      2.4      0.8      1.4      1.7        1.4        1.8
      Project Completion Date
                                                                                                                                     Continued on next page
                                                                                                                                                                 100
                                                                       Table A3.3(a)--Continued
Item                                    BAN         IND       INO         LAO       NEP       PAK      PHI       PRC      SRI      THA       OTH       Total
    % Delay Between Intended and         65.5         76.7      39.5       48.6       33.4      86.9    69.5      35.9     50.9     32.6      63.2       55.5
       Actual Duration of Project




                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 3
    Years Between Closing Date as           2.1        4.0       1.2        1.3       1.6        3.0      2.4       0.8      1.4      1.7       1.4        1.8
       per Loan Agreement and Final
    Projects Extended (% of projects)     90.5       90.0       54.8       71.4      80.0       91.7    100.0      52.2     90.9     90.0      76.6       77.3
    Number of Extensions Given to          1.8        1.9        0.9        1.4       1.3        1.8      2.1       0.9      1.0      1.2       1.4        1.4
       Project Completion Date (mean)

E. Project Preparation Data
   Projects with PPTA Conducted           28.6         0.0      38.7       57.1      66.7       41.7     42.9      52.2     45.5      0.0       0.2        0.4
      (% of projects)
   Person Days Used for Fact-Finding        48         69        42          45        37        60       52        86       34       30        39          50
      Mission (mean)
   Person Days Used for Appraisal           96         68        80          57        68       111       79        93       59       49        58          76
      Mission (mean)
   Days of Preparation by ADB Staff        144        137       122          98        98       173      123       176       93       79        97        125
      (mean)
   Loan per ADB Staff Day ($ million)     0.46       1.57      0.92       0.26      0.26       0.47     0.72      0.69     0.33     1.20 #    0.26       0.59

F. Original Loan Allocation by Fund Category ($ million)
   SF/ADF                              66.025        0.000     4.790     25.580    25.130    46.626    15.864     0.000   30.395    0.000    12.751     20.658
   OCR                                  0.000    215.000     107.474      0.000     0.000    33.931    72.311   121.035    0.000   94.835    12.322     52.817
   Supplementary Loan                   0.000        0.000     0.000      0.286     0.000     0.000     1.679     0.000    0.000    0.000     0.067      0.139

G. Original Loan Allocation by Cost Category ($ million)
   Works                                37.426     69.267     45.559     17.381    11.672    43.507    53.302    29.043   17.615   25.102    11.716     30.742
   Goods                                 8.358   106.155      21.191      1.661     4.528    16.821     8.537    53.325    1.947   62.071     7.263     21.447
   Consulting Services                   2.568       1.217    10.678      2.306     1.675     3.125     3.507     1.297    1.416    1.846     1.495      3.240
   Administration                        1.569       1.050     1.354      0.099     0.624     2.480     0.386     0.000    0.611    0.000     0.107      0.786
   Other Costs                           7.311       0.189     7.472      0.206     2.933     1.806     4.477    11.137    5.178    0.000     1.991      4.303
   Service Charge                        2.109     15.200     15.216      0.548     0.593     4.225     9.447    13.260    0.582    1.592     0.633      5.797
   Unallocated                           6.764     21.922     10.793      3.104     3.107     8.608     8.518    12.991    3.045    4.224     1.863      7.154
         Total                          66.105   215.000     112.265     25.305    25.133    80.572    88.175   121.051   30.395   94.835    25.067     73.468

   Local Costs ADB Financed             38.159     21.191     16.239      2.044     5.964    17.594    13.359     5.622    8.277    0.730     2.385     11.879
      ($ million)
   Percentage of Local Costs in           58.6       45.0       35.6       21.9      41.6       38.6     25.4       2.0     25.8      1.1      11.1       26.7
      Loan (%)
   Original Loan Amount as % of           75.3       39.2       60.8       69.0      78.9       64.6     66.9      39.1     52.8     32.2      69.1       61.6
      Appraised Project Cost
                                                                                                                                        Continued on next page
                                                                          Table A3.3(a)--Continued
Item                                      BAN         IND        INO         LAO       NEP       PAK      PHI       PRC       SRI        THA       OTH        Total

H. Loan Amount Disbursed by Cost Category ($ million)
   Works                            43.422      69.940           35.408    19.133    11.094    44.754    52.179     35.509    19.172      19.172   10.330      30.253
   Goods                              8.944     81.454           20.011      2.020     5.060   17.616      9.501    52.751      2.464     53.077     7.063     18.494
   Consulting Services                2.785       0.915           9.169      3.029     1.871     3.167     4.251      0.550     1.198      1.661     1.331      3.013
   Administration                     1.268       0.522           0.546      0.054     0.218     1.599     0.364      0.000     0.434      0.000     0.038      0.467
   Other Costs                        2.058       0.085           5.235      0.099     0.775     1.808     4.122    11.007      3.516      0.000     1.511      3.106
   Service Charge                     1.375     11.840           13.365      0.407     0.419     3.595     7.565    12.106      0.519      1.190     0.481      4.929
   Unallocated                        0.000       0.000           0.008      0.000     0.000     0.039     0.214      0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000      0.019
   Total Amount Disbursed from Loan 59.852    164.756            83.742    24.742    19.437    72.579    78.195    111.924    27.303      75.402   20.753      61.723
   Loan Disbursed Minus Original    (6.253)   (50.244)         (28.523)    (0.563)   (5.697)   (7.993)   (9.980)    (9.127)   (3.092)   (19.433)   (4.314)   (11.745)
      Loan Amount
   Loan Cancellation Amount as %       16.0        23.2           25.7         2.4     29.2       18.3      11.1       8.1      12.6       23.4      13.1        16.4
      of Original Loan
   Actual Loan Disbursed as % of       73.8        40.8           62.2        65.3     76.1       65.0      95.4      36.5      54.8       32.3      66.9        62.5
      Actual Project Cost

I.   Appraisal Cost Estimates by Category ($ million)
     Civil Works                        63.286      250.311    129.066      26.488   19.134     61.081    98.097   116.124    24.100     96.345    17.263     73.062
     Survey, Investigation, Design,      0.081         4.441     3.508       0.299    0.481      2.888     0.414     1.396     0.057      0.000     0.420      1.346
         Mapping
     Research and Development            0.081         3.781     1.218       0.000    0.867      0.823     3.091     0.000     2.302      0.167     0.288      0.887
         (extension and demonstration)
     Institutional Development and       0.000         5.482     4.067       0.523    0.696     10.861     0.221     2.023     0.911      1.467     4.136      3.314
         Strengthening
     Equipment, Vehicles, and Furniture  6.581      203.450     16.936       8.542    1.911     26.339    29.691    71.361     1.766     62.322     7.066     30.230
         (purchase and maintenance)
     Materialsa                          1.949        51.139     1.411       0.419    0.053      1.469     0.204     6.348     0.000    151.768     0.859     10.292
             All Goodsb                  8.530      254.589     21.127       8.961    1.964     28.658    30.219    77.709     1.606    214.090     7.926     40.102
     Consulting Services                 3.781         6.147     8.879       3.000    2.109      1.968     3.414     3.258     0.964      0.819     1.979      3.526
     Training and Fellowships            1.171         0.483     5.424       0.492    0.702      1.083     0.201     1.326     0.291      0.278     1.513      1.604
     Operation and Maintenance           4.564         0.000     2.141       0.423    0.537      3.605     3.376     9.654     0.369      0.300     0.739      2.627
         (recurrent costs)
     Financing of NGOs                   0.000         0.000     0.027       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     0.255      0.000     0.017       0.020




                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 3
     Implementation Assistance           0.974         1.460     0.320       0.544    0.037      1.145     0.666     0.431     0.049      0.000     0.239       0.511
     Land Acquisition                    1.095         0.633     2.523       0.037    0.188      1.741     0.279    10.480     0.118      6.911     0.498       2.220
     Capital Goods                       2.300         0.000     0.000       0.000    0.000      0.019     0.000    24.666     0.864      0.000     2.174       3.328
     Incremental Administrative Costs    1.699         7.634     1.729       0.359    0.761      1.811     0.262     4.008     0.158      0.000     0.729       1.636
     Initial Working Capital             1.409         0.000     0.264       0.236    0.253      0.841     0.706     1.173     4.175      0.000     0.163       0.713
     Taxes and Duties                    1.665        73.382     5.579       0.424    0.174     13.713     0.171     0.513     0.685      4.342     0.146       6.179
             Total Project Base Costs   90.636      608.343    185.871      41.785   27.903    130.236   141.117   252.761    36.905    324.718    38.231    141.074




                                                                                                                                                                        101
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                                                                                                                                       102
                                                                           Table A3.3(a)--Continued
Item                                    BAN         IND           INO         LAO       NEP       PAK        PHI      PRC      SRI       THA       OTH       Total
    Physical Contingencies              10.602     31.616          8.313      3.486     0.705      9.788     3.325    12.596   2.761      6.387     1.421     8.124
    Foreign Price Contingencies          2.496     16.859        13.354       2.083     0.751      8.680     3.837     8.316   1.191      4.118     0.900     6.469




                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 3
    Local Price Contingencies            2.873     36.292          6.887      0.712     0.617     11.295     6.579    11.810   3.104      2.400     0.685     7.261
          Price Contingencies            5.368     53.151        20.241       2.795     1.368     19.976    10.416    20.126   4.294      6.518     1.584    13.730
              at Appraisal
          Total Contingencies           17.065    102.725        30.813       6.157     3.063    27.667     18.782    42.073    5.623    15.727    4.045     21.794
    Service Charge/IDC                   3.400     98.730        32.020       3.790     0.791    11.101     13.839    24.887    3.055    19.184    2.727     15.966
          Total Cost                   111.101    809.798       248.704      51.732    31.757   167.851    173.738   319.721   45.583   341.366   44.065    177.915

J. Actual Costs at Project Completion by Category ($ million)
   Civil Works                         73.027   275.934         115.764      32.473    19.089    79.093     91.510   156.955   27.917    85.410   18.385      79.064
   Survey, Investigation, Design,       0.052      0.448          3.576       0.413     0.519     1.379      0.502     0.736    0.036     0.000    0.603       0.973
       Mapping
   Research and Development             0.107      2.943          0.229       0.000     0.073     1.038      1.716     0.000    0.962     0.044    0.204       0.501
       (extension and demonstration)
   Institutional Development and        0.000      4.263          4.151       0.585     0.270     9.273      0.064     2.243    0.713     1.053    5.099       3.263
       Strengthening
   Equipment, Vehicles, Furniture       5.782   164.044          13.997       8.248     1.364    32.245     33.252    72.730    2.052    46.973    5.664      27.254
       (purchase and maintenance)
   Materialsa                           1.991     47.627          1.192       0.221     0.020     0.899      0.328     6.246    0.000   132.062    0.650       9.846
           All Goodsb                   7.773   211.671          17.263       8.469     1.384    34.644     21.495    78.976    2.052   179.035    6.314      36.775
   Consulting Services                  4.024      3.456          7.683       3.696     1.986     3.802      5.309     3.024    1.127     0.442    1.844       3.529
   Training and Fellowships             0.500      0.186          4.797       0.326     0.341     0.759      0.245     1.123    0.349     0.273    1.005       1.225
   Operations and Maintenance           4.193      0.000          1.595       1.319     0.253     2.752      3.386     8.511    0.208     0.111    0.565       2.281
       (recurrent costs)
   Financing of NGOs                    0.000      0.000          0.017       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000    0.164     0.000    0.005      0.012
   Implementation Assistance            1.257      0.950          1.270       1.774     0.043     2.214      0.467     0.736    0.046     0.000    0.192      0.851
   Land Acquisition/Right of Way        3.605      0.903          1.238       0.042     0.576     3.035      1.119    12.601    0.020     9.639    0.582      2.861
   Capital Goods                        0.000      0.000          0.000       0.000     0.000     0.081      0.000    34.423    1.624     0.000    2.121      4.180
   Incremental Administrative Costs     1.481      4.870          1.729       0.485     0.587     3.261      0.905     4.407    0.213     0.000    0.704      1.720
   Initial Working Capital              1.637      0.000          0.000       0.000     0.099     0.545      1.504     0.015    4.538     0.000    0.042      0.561
   Taxes and Duties                     2.778     20.845          3.076       0.048     0.007     5.128      0.062     0.226    0.282     0.814    0.120      2.320
           Total Base Costs           100.434   526.469         157.676      49.628    25.227   147.004    128.285   303.974   40.251   276.823   37.785    139.546
   Physical Contingencies               5.449      0.000          0.042       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.221    0.000     0.823    0.276      0.571
   Foreign Price Contingencies          0.000      0.000          0.000       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000      0.000
   Local Price Contingencies            0.217      0.000          0.145       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000      0.041
   Price Contingencies at Appraisal     0.217      0.000          0.145       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000      0.041
       ($ million)
           Total Contingencies          5.399      0.000          0.187       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.468     0.225    0.000     0.000    0.004      0.598
   Service Charge/IDC                   2.877     49.702         28.767       2.472     0.442    13.114     15.297    26.893    2.728    15.792    1.752     13.207
           Estimate of Total Actual   108.711   576.171         186.631      52.100    25.669   160.118    144.049   331.092   42.978   296.012   39.541    153.230
              Project Cost
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                                        Table A3.3(a)--Continued
Item                                   BAN          IND       INO          LAO       NEP       PAK      PHI       PRC       SRI       THA          OTH       Total
    Average Cost Overrun(+) or Underrun(-) (%)
    Average Unweighed Cost            (12.89)      (20.83)    (26.12)     10.99    (26.57)   (19.29)    (7.21)    0.78      (7.47)    (18.49)      (8.87)    (12.87)
      Overrun(+) or Underrun(-) (%)
    Average Weighed Cost Overrun(+)     (2.15)     (28.85)    (24.96)      0.71    (19.17)    (4.61)   (17.09)    3.56      (5.71)    (13.29)     (10.27)    (13.88)
      or Underrun(-) (%)

K. Categories of Cost Overruns (Col. %)
   Cost Underrun >20%                     23.8       60.0       54.8           0     53.3      54.2      35.7      17.4      18.2       70.0         21.3       35.0
   Cost Variation < 20%                   71.4       30.0       45.2        78.6     46.7      37.5      57.1      56.5      81.8       10.0         70.2       55.9
   Cost Overrun >20%                       4.8       10.0        0.0        21.4      0.0        8.3      7.1      26.1        0.0      20.0           8.5        9.1
         Total                             100        100        100         100      100       100      99.9       100       100        100          100        100

L. Contingencies
   Foreign Price Contingencies as %         9.2        4.2       4.6         8.0      2.4       7.6       6.2      10.8      6.38     31.70           3.5      7.78
      Appraised FEC
   Local Price Contingencies as %           8.2        8.9       6.9         6.7      4.6      10.6      12.0      23.0     13.94      0.87           5.1      9.74
      Appraised LEC
   Total Price Contigencies as %          12.3       12.5        8.4         9.7      4.0      14.0      14.0       8.5     14.10      4.89           5.2      9.40
      Appr. Base Cost
   Total Price Contingencies + SC/IDC     14.4       33.2       25.1        15.1      6.8      21.1      24.6      20.5     27.36     11.99          14.6     18.91
      as % of Base Cost

M. Reasons Mentioned in PCR for
   Cost Underrun (% of projects with         5            6       17          0         8        13           5         4         2         7          10         77
   underrun >20%, valid cases)
   Overestimate Base Costs at             60.0       33.3       38.9                 25.0      23.1       0.0      20.0     100.0       42.9         30.0       31.6
     Appraisal
   Deletion of Project Components         20.0        0.0       11.1                 25.0      53.8      20.0       0.0      50.0       14.3         10.0       21.1
   Lower Than Anticipated Prices          40.0       83.3       44.4                 12.5       0.0      20.0      80.0      50.0       42.9         10.0       34.2
      During Implementation
   Very Competitive Pricing by Bidders    40.0       66.7       22.2                  0.0       0.0      60.0      80.0       0.0       42.9         10.0       26.3
   Exhange Rate Fluctuation/              40.0       50.0       38.9                 50.0      69.2      40.0      20.0       0.0       28.6         50.0       43.4
      De(ap)preciation Local Currency
   Change in Project Scope                20.0        0.0       16.7                 37.5      38.5      40.0      20.0      50.0       14.3         20.0       25.0




                                                                                                                                                                        Appendix 3
   Nonavailment of Contingencies           0.0       66.7       16.7                  0.0       0.0       0.0      60.0      50.0        0.0          0.0       14.5
   Other Reason for Cost                  60.0       83.3       16.7                 25.0      38.5      40.0       0.0       0.0        0.0         20.0       27.6
      Underrun Given

N. Summary (% of all project with cost underrun >20%)
   Wrong Base Cost Estimate                 75.0      33.3      35.3                 28.6      25.0       0.0      25.0     100.0       42.9         22.2      33.33
   Wrong Pricing / Bidding /                50.0      83.3      76.5                 57.1      75.0      50.0     100.0      50.0       71.4         66.7     70.833
     Inflation Estimate




                                                                                                                                                                        103
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                                                                                                                               104
                                                                          Table A3.3(a)--Continued
Item                                     BAN         IND         INO         LAO       NEP       PAK      PHI     PRC     SRI     THA      OTH       Total
    Scope Changes                         25.0          0.0        29.4                  42.9      75.0    50.0    25.0    50.0    14.3     22.2    34.7222
    Other Reasons                         75.0         83.3        35.3                  28.6      50.0    25.0    50.0    50.0     0.0     22.2    38.8889




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 3
O. Reasons Mentioned in PCR for Loan Cancellations/Savings (% of projects with cost variation >20%)
   Cancellation of Subcomponents       66.7       71.4       33.3        0.0       75.0        64.3       100.0    20.0     0.0    25.0      45.5       47.8
      and Contract Packages
   Change to Alternate                 33.3       28.6       16.7        0.0       37.5        21.4        25.0     0.0     0.0    12.5       9.1       17.8
      Financing Sources
   Lower Cost of Works                 83.3       71.4       77.8        0.0       25.0        64.3        25.0    20.0   100.0    25.0      27.3       50.0
      During Implementation
   Lower Price Equipment and           16.7      100.0       72.2        0.0       12.5        35.7        25.0    30.0    50.0    25.0       9.1       38.9
      Materials Prices
   Vigorous Competition in              0.0       85.7       16.7        0.0         0.0        0.0        25.0    40.0     0.0    25.0       0.0       17.8
      Bidding Process
   Other Reasons/Unspecified            0.0       57.1       22.2        0.0         0.0       28.6         0.0     0.0     0.0    25.0       9.1       16.7

P. Data on Scope Changes as per PCR (for projects with cost variation > 20%)
   Number of Project Components        4.67        7.70         4.06      4.57         5.13       4.08    4.21     4.39   3.55    3.50      3.66       4.30
   Number of Scope Changes             3.00        1.25         1.06      1.00         1.63       1.13    1.20     0.60   0.50    0.63      0.77       1.13
      Referred to in PCR
   Major Scope Addition                 16.7         0.0           0.0     66.7          0.0        0.0    20.0    40.0     0.0    12.5       7.7       10.4
   Major Scope Reduction                33.3        25.0           0.0      0.0         87.5       66.7    80.0     0.0     0.0    25.0      15.4       30.2
   Minor Scope Addition                 50.0        12.5           0.0      0.0         25.0        6.7     0.0    20.0     0.0    12.5      30.8       14.6
   Minor Scope Reduction                33.3        37.5           0.0      0.0          0.0       13.3    20.0     0.0    50.0     0.0       7.7       10.4
   Actual Duration > Intended Duration
   Time Overrun (Y/N)                  100.0      100.0          93.3      92.9         86.7     100.0    100.0    91.3   100.0   100.0       1.0        1.0

Q. Reasons for Time Overruns Mentioned in PCRs (if applicable, for projects with cost variations > 20%)
   Land Acquisition Problem            20.0        12.5         12.5        0.0         0.0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0    25.0       0.0       7.1%
   Procurement Delays                  20.0        75.0         56.3      100.0        25.0        21.4    80.0    33.3     0.0    37.5       0.0     37.6%
   Works Delays                        20.0        25.0         18.8       50.0         0.0         7.1     0.0    16.7    50.0    37.5      18.2     17.6%
   Institutional/Policy Delays           0.0       12.5          0.0        0.0        62.5        14.3     0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0       9.4%
   Consultant Delays                   40.0         0.0          6.3       50.0         0.0         7.1     0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       9.1       7.1%
   Contractor Delays                     0.0       62.5          6.3       50.0         0.0        14.3    20.0    16.7     0.0    50.0       9.1     18.8%
   Government Delays                   20.0        50.0         68.8       50.0        50.0        64.3    20.0    33.3    50.0    37.5      54.5     50.6%
   ADB Inaction                          0.0        0.0          6.3       50.0        12.5        14.3    20.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0       7.1%
   Calamity/Security Delays            20.0        12.5          6.3       50.0        12.5        21.4    40.0     0.0    50.0    37.5       9.1     17.6%
   Start Up Delays                     20.0        12.5         12.5       50.0        12.5         7.1     0.0    33.3    50.0    12.5      27.3     16.5%
   Other Delays                        60.0        37.5         31.3       50.0        12.5        42.9    60.0     0.0    50.0    37.5      36.4     35.3%
                                                                                                                                      Continued on next page
                                                                              Table A3.3(a)--Continued
Item                                        BAN         IND         INO          LAO       NEP       PAK     PHI      PRC         SRI       THA        OTH         Total

R. Results Indicators
   PCR Rating by country                        81          60         61.3       92.9        60      54.1      50       82.5       72.8       100        76.6       71.3
   Highly Successful                           4.8           0            0          0         0         0       0       21.7        9.1         10       10.6        5.9
   Successful/Generally Successful            76.2          60         61.3       92.9        60      54.1      50       60.8       63.7         90         66       65.4
   Partly Successful                            19          40         35.5        7.1        40      41.7    42.9       17.4       27.3          0       21.3       26.8
   Unsuccessful                                  0           0          3.2          0         0       4.2     7.1          0          0          0        2.1        1.8
   Quantified Average Rating of Project      1.86        1.60         1.58       1.93      1.60      1.50    1.43       2.04       1.82       2.10       1.85       1.75
      as per PCRc

S. Calculated Rates of Return
   RRPs with EIRR calculated                     9          10          18          10       10        19       11         22          8        10         29         156
   EIRR at Appraisal (mean %)                 36.6        27.4        22.0        16.6     20.1      19.9     16.8       19.9       18.5      20.7       19.8        21.1

    PCRs with EIRR recalculated                 13          10          17          12       10        19       12         23          8        10         30         164
    EIRR at Completion (mean %)               32.9        24.2        22.0        16.3     21.6      16.3     17.0       17.1       19.0      19.0       18.1        19.8

    RRPs with FIRR calculated                    4           8          14           6        3        12        5         21          8          8        20         109
    FIRR at Appraisal (mean %)                14.1        11.4        14.1        11.0     12.0      17.5     14.4       11.5       14.7        8.8      11.1        12.7

    PCRs with EIRR recalculated                  7           8          14             7      5        11        7         23          8         7          21        118
    FIRR at Completion (mean %)               19.3        13.2        10.9           4.7    9.2       9.7     13.5        9.3       10.7      11.6         6.4       10.1


ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADF = Asian Development Fund, BAN = Bangladesh, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FEC = foreign exchange cost, FIRR = financial
internal rate of return, IDC = interest during construction, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, LEC = local exchange cost, NEP = Nepal,
NGO = nongovernment organization, OCR = ordinary capital resources, PAK = Pakistan, PCR = project completion report, PHI = Philippines, PPTA = project preparatory
technical assistance, PRC = People's Republic of China, RRP = report and recommendation of the President, SC = service charge, SF = special funds, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA =
Thailand, OTH = others.
a   The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
b   The category of "goods" provides a more complete indication of the cost of equipment and materials, since breakdown was not always presented in PCRs.
c
   0 = unsuccessful, 1 = partly successful, 2 = successful, 3 = highly successful.
Source: Various project completion reports.




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 3
                                                                                                                                                                             105
                  Table A3.3(b): Loan and Cost Data from 220 Projects with PCRs Issued Between 1998 and June 2003




                                                                                                                                                                          106
                                                              by Country
                                            (average percentages of loan amounts and costs)




                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 3
Item                                   BAN        IND        INO        LAO        NEP        PAK        PHI        PRC        SRI        THA        OTH        Total

A. Number of Projects                        21         10         31         14         15         24         14         23         11         10         47      220

B. Original Loan Allocation by Cost Category (% of total)
   Works                                44.6       27.6       35.6        53.5       42.8       51.9      57.4        24.8      46.1        41.7       42.7       41.8
   Goods                                12.6       54.5       18.1        16.3       14.6       17.3       8.1        46.3       9.0        28.2       28.4       29.2
   Consulting Services                   7.1        0.5       10.9        10.7        6.7        5.6      10.0         1.1       4.2         2.3        8.1        4.4
   Administration                        3.8        0.5        2.8         1.0        4.6        5.2       0.6         0.0       3.7        19.5        1.3        1.1
   Other Costs                          18.5        0.1        9.4         2.2       18.8        4.8       6.1         4.9      24.4         0.0        7.7        5.9
   Service Charge                        3.8        6.7       14.3         2.7        2.7        4.4       8.9        11.5       1.9         2.1        2.3        7.9
   Unallocated                           9.6       10.1        8.9        13.6        9.9       10.9       8.9        11.3      10.7         6.2        9.6        9.7
         Total                         100.0     100.0       100.0       100.0      100.0      100.0     100.0       100.0     100.0       100.0      100.0      100.0

C. Loan Amount Disbursed by Cost Category (% of total)
   Works                             58.9       33.5          37.0        67.8       55.5       57.2      61.5        30.8      58.7        45.3       49.1       49.3
   Goods                             14.1       59.0          23.2        15.1       19.8       20.1      10.1        52.5      13.2        30.2       31.9       26.8
   Consulting Services                8.4        0.4          13.5        13.4        8.3        7.4      12.6         0.5       4.1         3.9        9.9        8.3
   Administration                     3.3        0.3           2.2         0.8        4.4        4.6       0.6         0.0       3.5        19.4        1.2        2.8
   Other Costs                       13.1        0.0           8.1         1.3        9.7        5.9       6.1         4.5      18.6         0.0        5.7        6.8
   Service Charge                     2.2        6.8          15.9         1.7        2.4        4.7       8.8        11.6       1.9         1.2        2.1        5.9
   Unallocated                        0.0        0.0           0.0         0.0        0.0        0.1       0.4         0.0       0.0         0.0        0.0        0.0
         Net Total Disbursed from   100.0     100.0          100.0       100.0      100.0      100.0     100.0       100.0     100.0       100.0      100.0      100.0
         Loan

D. Appraisal Cost Estimates by Cost Category (% of base costs)
   Civil Works                                49.7      38.2  49.8        62.9       59.5       48.7      56.5        50.5      53.6        39.1       45.5        49.8
   Survey, Investigation, Design,              0.7        0.2  4.0         1.5        1.4        1.8       3.5         0.7       0.3         0.0        0.7         1.5
      Mapping
   Research and Development                    0.1        0.7  0.8         0.0        5.0        2.3       8.0         0.0       6.0         0.0        0.5         1.7
      (extension and demonstration)
   Institutional Development                   0.0        1.0  4.7         5.6        4.5        7.2       0.1         1.1       3.5         0.9        2.7         3.1
      and Strengthening
   Equipment, Vehicles, and                   10.4      45.6  16.2        12.3        7.6       14.0      16.2        29.2       6.2        19.4       24.1        18.7
      Furniture (purchase and maintenance)a
   Materialsa                                  3.3        2.6  1.4         1.9        0.3        1.7       0.5         2.9       0.0        33.2        3.6         3.8
          All Goods (total                    13.8      48.2  17.3        14.2        8.0       17.1      20.0        32.1       5.6        52.6       27.7        22.6
              equipment, vehicles, furniture, and materials)a
   Consulting Services                         7.1        1.4  7.5         9.2        8.5        2.8       3.5         1.7       2.7         1.1        8.0         5.5
   Training and Fellowships                    3.4        0.0  4.4         2.3        3.4        2.3       0.8         0.6       1.1         0.2        3.7         2.6
   Operation and Maintenance                   4.3        0.0  2.8         1.6        3.0        6.4       2.8         2.5       2.0         0.1        2.7         2.9
      (recurrent costs)
   Financing of NGOs                           0.0        0.0  0.1         0.0        0.0        0.0       0.0         0.0       0.9         0.0       0.1        0.1
                                                                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                                                         Table A3.3(b)--Continued
Item                                      BAN        IND        INO        LAO        NEP       PAK      PHI      PRC      SRI      THA      OTH       Total
    Implementation Assistance                 1.6       0.2        0.4          0.5      0.2       1.9      1.4      0.2      0.2      0.0      0.9        0.8
    Land Acquisition                          1.7       0.3        1.8          0.2      1.2       1.6      0.4      4.3      0.4      4.1      0.9        1.6
    Capital Goods                             3.5       0.0        0.0          0.0      0.0       0.1      0.0      4.3      5.5      0.0      4.3        2.0
    Incremental Administrative                3.8       1.8        1.2          1.0      3.0       1.3      0.8      1.1      0.5      0.0      1.4        1.5
        Costs
    Initial Working Capital                   7.8       0.0        0.5         0.1       1.8       2.1      1.5      0.5     15.6      0.0       0.6       2.2
    Taxes and Duties                          2.4       8.0        4.5         0.9       0.5       4.7      0.8      0.5      2.2      2.0       0.2       2.2
            Total Base Costs                 83.0      71.4       77.6        82.4      89.9      79.4     78.6     77.8     80.1     87.7      84.3      81.5
               (% of total cost)
    Physical Contingencies                    4.5       4.1        3.1         4.4       1.8       5.0      3.1      5.4      6.5      2.5       4.3       4.0
        (% of base costs)
    Foreign Price Contingencies               2.8       2.4        2.8         5.9       1.6       3.1      3.5      3.7      2.8      3.1       2.3       3.0
        (% of base costs + physical contingencies)
    Local Price Contingencies                 6.2       6.2        3.7         2.0       1.6       6.7      6.2      4.8      7.2      0.6       1.7       3.8
        (% of base costs + physical contigencies)
            Price Contingencies at            8.9       8.6        6.4         7.8       3.1       9.8      9.7      8.6     10.1      3.6       4.0       6.8
               Appraisal (% base costs + phys. Cont.)
            Total Contingencies              14.0      16.5       11.3        13.4       7.6      15.8     15.1     13.9     13.6      6.6      10.2      12.4
               (% of total cost)

    Service Charge/IDC                        3.0       12.0      11.1         4.2       2.5       5.4      6.3      8.3      6.3      5.7       5.4       6.4
       (% of total cost)
          Total Cost                        100.0      100.0     100.0       100.0     100.0    100.0     100.0    100.0    100.0    100.0     100.0     100.0

E. Actual Costs at Project Completion (% of base costs)
   Civil Works                                54.5      44.8      50.3        65.8      61.2      51.7     58.1     56.6     57.2     35.7      48.2      52.8
   Survey, Investigation, Design,              0.2        0.0      4.2         1.8       1.5       0.9      4.0      0.3      0.1      0.0       0.7       1.3
      Mapping
   Research and development                    0.4        0.7      0.3         0.0       1.9       2.5      8.0      0.0      3.4      0.0       0.4       1.3
      (extension and demonstration)
   Institutional Development                   0.0        1.0      5.2         5.2       4.9       6.6      0.0      1.2      3.3      0.7       2.8       3.1
      and Strengthening
   Equipment, Vehicles, and                    8.3      45.2      13.7        10.5       8.2      12.4    116.4     25.2      6.1     22.2      22.6      23.6
      Furniture (purchase and maintenance)a
   Materialsa                                  3.7        2.6      1.4         0.7       0.2       1.3      0.5      2.8      0.0     33.4       3.2       3.3
          All Goods (total                    12.0      47.7      17.7        11.2       8.4      16.1     17.8     28.1      6.1     55.6      25.9      21.1




                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 3
              equipment, vehicles, furniture, and materials)a

    Consulting Services                       7.0        0.9       8.1         8.9       7.1       4.2      4.6      1.0      2.7      0.6       8.3       5.7
    Training and Fellowships                  1.7        0.0       4.6         1.4       3.0       2.1      0.7      0.4      1.4      0.2       2.7       2.1
    Operations and Maintenance                3.6        0.0       2.9         2.4       3.5       7.5      2.5      2.3      0.9      0.1       2.7       3.0
       (recurrent costs)
    Financing of NGOs                         0.0        0.0       0.2         0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0      0.7      0.0       0.1        0.1




                                                                                                                                                                  107
    Implementation Assistance                 2.2        0.2       1.4         0.9       1.1       2.2      0.4      0.2      0.2      0.0       1.0        1.0
                                                                                                                                        Continued on next page
                                                                         Table A3.3(b)--Continued




                                                                                                                                                                         108
Item                                       BAN        IND       INO        LAO        NEP       PAK      PHI      PRC        SRI       THA       OTH           Total
    Land Acquisition/Right of Way              3.3        0.4      1.1          0.3      3.6       1.0      0.8      4.6        0.1       6.7       0.9            1.9
    Capital Goods                              0.0        0.0      0.0          0.0      0.0       0.2      0.0      4.3        6.8       0.0       4.3            1.7
    Incremental Administrative Costs           3.3        1.2      1.3          1.8      3.5       1.8      0.8      0.8        0.7       0.0       1.3            1.6




                                                                                                                                                                         Appendix 3
    Initial Working Capital                    8.8        0.0      0.0          0.0      0.2       1.2      1.9      0.0       15.6       0.0       0.5            2.0
    Taxes and Duties                           3.0        3.1      2.6          0.4      0.0       2.1      0.3      0.2        0.8       0.4       0.3            1.2
            Total Base Costs                 96.6       89.4      86.4        97.2      98.0      94.7     87.7     91.6       94.3      94.7      96.9           93.5
               (% of total cost)
    Physical Contingencies                     0.9        0.0      0.1         0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0       0.1       0.0        0.3       0.3           0.2
        (% of base costs)
    Foreign Price Contingencies                0.0        0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0        0.0       0.0           0.0
        (% of base costs + physical contingencies)
    Local Price Contingencies                  0.4        0.0      0.3         0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0        0.0       0.0           0.1
        (% of base costs + physical contigencies)
            Total Price Contingencies          0.4        0.0      0.3         0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0        0.0       0.0           0.1
               (% of base costs + physical contingencies)
            Total Contingencies                1.1        0.0      0.4         0.0       0.0       0.0      0.5       0.1       0.0        0.0       0.3           0.3
               (% of total costs)

    Service Charge/IDC                        2.2       10.6      13.2         2.8       2.0       5.3     11.8       8.3       5.7        5.3       2.8           6.2
       (% of total costs)
          Total Cost                        100.0      100.0     100.0       100.0     100.0    100.0     100.0    100.0      100.0     100.0      100.0        100.0


IDC = interest during construction, NGO = nongovernment organization, OCR = ordinary capital resources, SF = special funds.
a  The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
   Minor errors in percentages may be due to lacking detailed budget breakdowns.
Source: Various project completion reports.
               Table A3.3(c): Loan and Cost Data from 220 Projects with PCRs Issued Between 1998 and June 2003
                                                      by Country (weighted)a
                                  (percentages of average actual cost over average appraised cost)

Item                             BAN        IND        INO        LAO        NEP        PAK        PHI        PRC        SRI        THA        OTH        Total

A. Number of Projects                  21         10         31         14         15         24         14         23         11         10         47      220

B. Disbursement as % of Original Loan Allocation
   Works                         116.02    100.97      77.72      110.08      95.04     102.87      97.89     122.27     108.84      76.38      88.17      98.41
   Goods                         107.01     76.73      94.43      121.57     111.74     104.73     111.29      98.92     126.57      85.51      97.24      86.23
   Consulting Services           108.43     75.18      85.86      131.36     111.72     101.34     121.19      42.44      84.57      89.99      89.05      93.00
   Administration                 80.83     49.71      40.34       54.28      34.91      64.49      94.36                 71.01                 35.42      59.41
   Other Costs                    28.15     44.97      70.05       48.04      26.43     100.14      92.08      98.84      67.89                 75.88      72.18
   Service Charge                 65.21     77.89      87.83       74.27      70.62      85.08      80.07      91.30      89.23      74.75      76.08      85.04
   Unallocated                     0.00      0.00       0.08        0.00       0.00       0.45       2.52       0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00       0.27
         Net Total Disbursed      90.54     76.63      74.59       97.77      77.33      90.08      88.68      92.46      89.83      79.51      82.79      84.01
            from Loan

C. Actual Costs at Project Completion as % of Appraised Costs
   Civil Works                         115.39   110.24  89.69     122.59      99.76     129.49      93.29     135.16     115.84      88.65     106.50     108.21
   Survey, Investigation,               63.68    10.09 101.93     138.28     107.92      47.75     121.28      52.69      62.70                143.59      72.31
       Design, Mapping
   Research and Development            132.00    77.84  18.81                  8.47     126.21      55.50                 41.80      26.67      70.81      56.45
       (extension and demonstration)
   Institutional Development                     77.76 102.06     111.85      38.83      85.38      28.87     110.85      78.23      71.82     123.28      98.47
       and Strengthening
   Equipment, Vehicles, and             87.86    80.63  82.64      96.55      71.36     122.42     111.99     101.92     116.19      75.37      80.15      90.16
                                              b
       Furniture (purchase and maintenance)
   Materialsb                          102.15    93.13  84.47      52.81      37.50      61.20     161.05      98.40                 87.02      75.67      95.67
            All Goods                   91.12    83.14  81.71      94.51      70.44     120.89      71.13     101.63     127.81      83.63      79.66      91.70
           (total equipment, vehicles,
            furniture, and materials)b
   Consulting Services                 106.45    56.22  86.53     123.20      94.17     193.21     155.49      92.82     116.88      54.04      93.18     100.07
   Training and Fellowships             42.73    38.51  88.43      66.27      48.56      70.10     122.24      84.68     119.89      98.40      66.44      76.37
   Operation and Maintenance            91.86           74.50     311.79      47.10      76.35     100.32      88.16      56.38      37.04      76.45      86.81
       (recurrent costs)




                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 3
   Financing of NGOs                                    61.51                                                             64.29                 31.59      57.86
   Implementation Assistance           129.17    65.07 396.40     326.33     116.64     193.26      70.21     170.74      94.44                 80.22     166.60
   Land Acquisition/Right-of-Way 329.25         142.65  49.08     112.88     305.95     174.31     401.54     120.23      16.92     139.47     116.84     128.87
   Capital Goods                         0.00                                           425.27                139.56     188.04                 97.55     125.58
   Incremental Administrative           87.15    63.79 100.04     134.92      77.09     180.04     345.20     109.95     135.06                 96.49     105.13
       Costs
   Initial Working Capital             116.16            0.00       0.00      39.26      64.83     213.03       1.26     108.69                25.56     78.67




                                                                                                                                                                   109
   Taxes and Duties                    166.80    28.41  55.14      11.28       4.09      37.40      36.25      44.07      41.11      18.74     82.22     37.55
            Total Base Costs           110.81    86.54  84.83     118.77      90.41     112.87      90.91     120.26     109.07      85.25     98.83     98.92
                                                                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                                                  Table A3.3(c)--continued




                                                                                                                                                                110
Item                            BAN       IND       INO            LAO       NEP        PAK       PHI       PRC        SRI       THA       OTH       Total
D. Contingencies and Service Charge as % of Appraised Costs
    Physical Contingencies       51.40      0.00      0.50          0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00       1.76      0.00      12.89     19.44      7.02
    Foreign Price Contingencies   0.00      0.00      0.00          0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00




                                                                                                                                                                Appendix 3
    Local Price Contingencies     7.54      0.00      2.11          0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00      0.57
          Price Contingencies     4.03      0.00      0.72          0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00      0.30
          Total Contingencies    31.64      0.00      0.61          0.00       0.00      0.00      2.49       0.53      0.00       0.00      0.09      2.75
    Service Charge/IDC           84.62     50.34     89.84         65.23      55.86    118.14    110.53     108.06     89.29      82.32     64.27     82.72

         Total Cost as %              97.8       71.2      75.0     100.7       80.8      95.4      82.9      103.6      94.3      86.7       89.7      86.1
            of Appraised Cost


BAN = Bangladesh, IDC = interest during construction, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, NEP = Nepal, NGO = nongovernment
organization, PAK = Pakistan, PCR = project completion report, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand, OTH =
others.
a
    Countries with 10 or more projects completed over the period are presented separately.
b
    The two categories of equipment and materials do not always add up to the goods category, given that occasionally such goods were not subdivided in PCRs.
Source: Various project completion reports.
                                 ANALYSIS OF COST ESCALATION FACTORS, EXCHANGE RATES, AND INFLATION

                           Table A4.1: People's Republic of China: Local Cost Escalation Factors vis-à-vis Inflation Ratea


                                                               Local Cost Escalation Factor as per Project Administration Instructions (%)
          Yuan/$           Deva-        Actual
          (Period         luation      Inflation
    Year Average)           (%)          (%)b       1990     1991      1992     1993     1994    1995     1996    1997   1998   1999 2000    2001C 2002C


    1985          2.94
    1986          3.45       (17.6)
    1987          3.72         (7.8)
    1988          3.72          0.0
    1989          3.77         (1.2)
    1990          4.78       (27.0)          3.1       14
    1991          5.32       (11.3)          3.4       12        5
    1992          5.51         (3.6)         6.4       10        7         5
    1993          5.76         (4.5)        14.7         8       7         6       10
    1994          8.62       (49.6)         24.1         8       7         7       10     12
    1995          8.35          3.1         17.1                 7         7         7     7       15
    1996          8.31          0.4          8.3                           7         7     7       10        12
    1997          8.29          0.3          2.8                                     7     7         7       10     8
    1998          8.28          0.1         (0.8)                                          7         7       10     8      0
    1999          8.28          0.0         (1.4)                                                    7       10     8      3      0




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 4
    2000          8.28         (0.0)         0.4                                                             10     8      4      3    1.8
    2001          8.28          0.0          0.7                                                                    6      4      4     2
    2002          8.28          0.0         (0.8)                                                                          4      5     3

a
    These factors apply to the procurement of both manufactured goods and civil works.




                                                                                                                                                           111
b
    Based on consumer price index.
C
 Not available.
Sources: Various issues of the Asian Development Bank's Project Administration Instructions and Key Indicators.
                                                                                                                                                                112
                                           Table A4.2: India: Local Cost Escalation Factors vis-à-vis Inflation Ratea




                                                                                                                                                                Appendix 4
                                                                  Local Cost Escalation Factor as per Project Administration Instructions (%)
            Rupees/$         Deva-       Actual
             (Period        luation     Inflation
    Year    Average)          (%)         (%)b         1990     1991     1992       1993     1994    1995         1996   1997   1998   1999
                                                                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                                                              2000 2001 2002
                                                                                                                                                            c




    1985           12.37
    1986           12.61        (2.0)          5.6
    1987           12.96        (2.8)          7.0
    1988           13.92        (7.4)          8.7
    1989           16.23       (16.6)          6.8
    1990           17.50        (7.9)          9.0         8
    1991           22.74       (29.9)         13.7         8        9
    1992           25.92       (14.0)         11.6         8        8         9
    1993           30.49       (17.7)          7.7         8        8         6          6
    1994           31.37        (2.9)         10.5         8        8         6          5    8.5
    1995           32.43        (3.4)         12.5                  8         6          5    7.1       7.1
    1996           35.43        (9.3)          8.1                            6          5    5.4         6        7.1
    1997           36.31        (2.5)          4.6                                       5      5         6         6      7
    1998           41.26       (13.6)          4.4                                              5         6         6      7      7
    1999           43.06        (4.4)          8.3                                                        6         6      7      7     7.5
    2000           44.94        (4.4)          6.3                                                                  6     6.5     6     7.5    7.5
    2001           47.19        (5.0)          5.2                                                                         6      6     6.5    6.5
    2002           48.61        (3.0)          2.5                                                                                6     6.5    6.5

a
    These factors apply to the procurement of both manufactured goods and civil works.
b
    Based on wholesale price index.
c
 Not available.
Sources: Various issues of the Asian Development Bank's Project Administration Instructions and Key Indicators.
                                      Table A4.3: Indonesia: Local Cost Escalation Factors vis-à-vis Inflation Ratea

                                                                Local Cost Escalation Factor as per Project Administration Instructions (%)
            Rupiah/$         Deva-        Actual
             (Period        luation      Inflation
    Year    Average)          (%)          (%)b         1990    1991      1992     1993      1994   1995     1996     1997   1998 1999
                                                                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                                                         2000 2001 2002
                                                                                                                                                       c




    1985          1,111
    1986          1,283         (15.5)         (0.3)
    1987          1,644         (28.1)        22.1
    1988          1,686          (2.6)         5.5
    1989          1,770          (5.0)         8.4
    1990          1,843          (4.1)        10.0          7
    1991          1,950          (5.8)         5.1          7      10
    1992          2,030          (4.1)         5.2          7        9         8
    1993          2,087          (2.8)         3.7          7        8         7         7
    1994          2,161          (3.5)         5.4          7        8         7         6     9
    1995          2,249          (4.1)        11.4                   8         6         6     8        8
    1996          2,342          (4.1)         7.6                             6         6     7        7         8
    1997          2,909         (24.2)         9.2                                       6     6        6         7     7
    1998         10,014       (244.2)       108.9                                              6        6         6     6     35
    1999          7,855         21.6           8.8                                                      6         6     6     20    17
    2000          8,422          (7.2)        12.5                                                                6     6     10    10    10




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 4
    2001         10,261         (21.8)        14.1                                                                      5      8     7     7
    2002          9,311           9.3          2.8                                                                             8     7     7

a
    These factors apply to the procurement of both manufactured goods and civil works.
b
    Based on wholesale price index.




                                                                                                                                                           113
c
 Not available.
Sources: Various issues of the Asian Development Bank's Project Administration Instructions and Key Indicators.
                                                                                                                          114
                       Table A4.4: Pakistan: Local Cost Escalation Factors vis-à-vis Inflation Ratea




                                                                                                                          Appendix 4
                                                                   Local Cost Escalation Factor as per PAI (%)
           Rp/$    Deva-            Actual
          (Period luation          Inflation
                                          b                                                             C     C
    Year Average)   (%)              (%)     1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002


    1985   15.8534
    1986   16.5691         (4.5)          4.7
    1987   17.3169         (4.5)          5.0
    1988   17.9185         (3.5)         10.0
    1989    20.44        (14.1)           9.7
    1990    21.61          (5.7)          7.3       6
    1991    23.69          (9.6)         11.7       6     10
    1992    24.96          (5.4)          9.8       6      8      8
    1993    27.97        (12.1)           7.4       6      6      6       8
    1994    30.42          (8.8)         16.4       6      6      6       7    9.3
    1995    31.49          (3.5)         16.0              6      6       7      8     10
    1996    35.91        (14.0)          11.1                     6       7      7      8     11
    1997    40.92        (13.9)          13.0                             7      7    7.5     10     12
    1998    44.94          (9.8)          6.6                                    7    7.5     10     10      10
    1999    49.12          (9.3)          6.3                                         7.5       9    10      10   8
    2000    53.65          (9.2)          1.8                                                   9      9      9   7   7
    2001    61.93        (15.4)           6.2                                                          8      9   7   7
    2002    59.70          3.6            2.1                                                                 9   6   6

a
  These factors apply to the procurement of both manufactured goods and civil works.
b
  Based on wholesale price index.
C
  Not available.
Sources: Various issues of the Asian Development Bank's Project Administration Instructions and Key Indicators.
                                    Table A4.5: Philippines: Local Cost Escalation Factors vis-à-vis Inflation Ratea


                                                                Local Cost Escalation Factor as per Project Administration Instructions (%)
             Peso/$          Deva-        Actual
             (Period        luation      Inflation
                                           (%)b
                                                                                                                                                  c    c
    Year    Average)          (%)                      1990     1991      1992     1993      1994   1995    1996      1997   1998 1999   2000 2001 2002



    1985          18.61
    1986          20.39          (9.6)        (0.4)
    1987          20.57          (0.9)         7.6
    1988          21.09          (2.6)        11.9
    1989          21.74          (3.0)         8.9
    1990          24.31        (11.8)          8.5        12
    1991          27.48        (13.0)         17.1        10       12
    1992          25.51           7.2          3.7        12       10        12
    1993          27.12          (6.3)        (0.1)       10        8        10          9
    1994          26.42           2.6          8.5          8       8         8          9     9
    1995          25.71           2.7          5.5                  8         8          8     8        8
    1996          26.22          (2.0)         9.0                            8          8     8        8         9
    1997          29.47        (12.4)          0.5                                       8     8        8     7.5       7
    1998          40.89        (38.8)         11.7                                             8        8         7     7     10
    1999          39.09           4.4          5.8                                                      8         7     7      8   8.5




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 4
    2000          44.19        (13.1)          1.9                                                                7     7      7     7     7
    2001          50.99        (15.4)          2.3                                                                      7      6     6     6
    2002          51.60          (1.2)         3.6                                                                             6     6     6

a
    These factors apply to the procurement of both manufactured goods and civil works.




                                                                                                                                                           115
b
    Based on wholesale price index.
c
 Not available.
Sources: Various issues of the Asian Development Bank's Project Administration Instructions and Key Indicators.
                                                                                                                                                                                               116
                                                  Table A4.6: International Cost Escalation Factor vis-a vis International Inflation Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 4
                                                                      International Cost Escalation Factor as per Project Administration Instructions (%)
                             Inflation
                  ICEFa        Rateb
     Year          (%)          (%)               1990         1991       1992         1993          1994         1995          1996          1997         1998           1999   2000   2001

     1990          4.9          5.7                4.9
     1991          3.9          2.2                             3.9
     1992          3.7          4.3                             3.9         3.7
     1993          3.7          (0.3)                           3.9         3.7          3.7
     1994          2.7          3.6                             3.9         3.7          3.7           2.7
     1995          2.7          8.2                                         3.7          3.7           2.7           2.7
            c
     1996          2.4          (4.4)                                       3.7          3.7           2.7           2.7          2.4
     1997          2.4          (4.9)                                       3.7          3.7           2.7           2.7          2.4           2.4
     1998          2.4          (3.9)                                       3.7          3.7           2.7           2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4
     1999          2.4          (0.6)                                       3.7          3.7           2.7           2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4
     2000          2.4          (6.0)                                       3.7          3.7           2.7           2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4    2.4
     2001          2.4          (1.4)                                                                  2.7           2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4    2.4    2.4
     2002          2.4          0.5                                                                    2.7           2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4    2.4    2.4
     2003                                                                                                            2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4    2.4    2.4
     2004                                                                                                            2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4    2.4    2.4
     2005                                                                                                            2.7          2.4           2.4          2.4           2.4    2.4    2.4

ICEF = International Cost Escalation Factor, PAI = Asian Development Bank Project Administration Instructions.
a
    ICEF applies to both manufactured goods and civil works.
b
    Based on the manufactures unit value index.
b
 This is the latest set of ICEF projections from available PAIs.; estimates made in years subsequent to 1996 are assumed to be based on the ICEF of 1996 (in boldface).
Sources: Various issues of the Asian Development Bank's Project Administration Instructions and Key Indicators.
                                                                                           Appendix 5         117


           CORRELATIONS BETWEEN COST VARIATIONS AND SOME PROJECT
                             CHARACTERISTICS

1.      The project and project process characteristics that could be investigated through a
Pearson correlation test are reflected in Table A5.1. Statistically significant correlations are
marked by * to indicate a significance level of p = 0.01, and by ** for a significance level at p =
0.001. The strength of the correlation is indicated by the coefficient (maximum strength = 1, and
no correlation = 0), and the nature of the relation by a positive mark, or by parenthesis if the
relationship is negative (negative for opposite relation--the higher x, the lower y). To simplify
the table, only significant correlations (with one or two stars) are reflected with their coefficients.
Nonsignificant correlation coefficients are indicated by a dot only. For purposes of comparison,
the table shows not only the dependent variable of percent cost underrun, but also the percent
loan cancellation (coefficient between the two at 0.763**).

   Table A5.1: Correlation Analysis Results: Pearson's Rank Correlation Coefficientsa

                             Correlation                              % of Loan            % of Cost
                                                                      Canceled             Underrun
      Average Scope Addition (­ = reduction)                              (0.3222)**           (0.5345)**
      Local Cost Appraised as % of Total Cost                               0.2718**             0.2947**
      Local Cost Disbursed as Proportion of Project Cost                           .             0.2770**
      Local Exchange Component at Completion                                       .           (0.2281)**
      Duration of Project as per Loan Agreement                              0.2022*                    .
      Total Final Cost of the Project                                              .                    .
      Local Exchange Component at Appraisal                                        .                    .
      Foreign Exchange Component at Appraisal                                      .                    .
      Foreign Exchange Component at Completion                                     .                    .
      Local Cost Amount                                                            .                    .
      Loan as Proportion of Project Cost                                           .                    .
      Price Contingencies                                                          .                    .
      Total Appraised Contingency Amount                                           .                    .
      Depreciation of Local Currency                                               .                    .
      Year of Project Appraisal                                                    .                    .
      Year of Project Start                                                        .                    .
      Years Between Appraisal and Completion                                       .                    .
      Years Between Appraisal and Effectiveness                                    .                    .
      Number of Extensions Given to Project                                        .                    .
      Number of Project Components                                                 .                    .
      Number of Project Preparatory Technical Assistance                           .                    .
      Days of Asian Development Bank Preparation                                   .                    .

       Cost Categories (% of total cost at appraisal)
       Works                                                                       .           (0.2463)**
       Institutional Strengthening                                                 .                     .
       Goods                                                                       .                     .
       Consulting Services                                                         .                     .
       Training                                                                    .                     .
       Operation and Maintenance                                            0.2284*              0.2605**
       Implementation Assistance                                                   .                     .
       Land Acquisition                                                            .                     .
       Incremental Assistance                                                      .                     .
       Taxes and Duties                                                            .                     .
       Base Costs                                                                  .                     .
       Physical Contingencies                                                      .                     .
       Foreign Price Contingencies                                                 .                     .
       Local Price Contingencies                                                   .                     .
       Total Contingencies                                                         .                     .
       Service Charge/Interest During Construction                                 .                     .
     a
        Number of cases: 164. One-tailed significance: * = 0.01; ** = 0.001; "." means a coefficient is not
     statistically significant at 0.01.
     Source: Operations Evaluation Department estimates.
118       Appendix 5



2.      The main conclusion of this test is that only a few correlations could be established that
were statistically significant at a high level. The phenomenon of cost variations obviously does
not lend itself to easy explanations and, therefore, lessons of use for the future. The strongest
correlation established was between the number of scope additions or reductions, and the level
of cost underrun. Not surprisingly, the higher the number of scope reductions reported in the
project completion report, the higher was the chance of a cost underrun. A positive correlation
was found between the proportion of the local cost in the total cost, and the level of the cost
underrun. This points to the effect of devaluation of the local currency, which has contributed to
smaller loan withdrawals and also the computation of lower project costs in dollar equivalent
(although much higher in local currency equivalent).1 Of all the cost categories, only the
categories of works and operation and maintenance (O&M) costs showed definite correlation
with cost underruns. The higher the percentage of appraised works costs in the total cost, the
smaller the cost underrun was (and the higher the chance of a cost overrun). The higher the
O&M cost anticipated, the higher the chance of a cost underrun, since only small portions of the
anticipated allocations for O&M costs were generally spent (partly due to project delays, and
partly due to lack of government budget), leading to a cost underrun. Perhaps surprisingly, the
size of the project bore no one-way relation to the proportion of the cost underrun. In fact, the
relation was two-way: smaller projects generally had relatively smaller cost variations; larger
projects had more cases both of cost underruns and cost overruns.




1
    Paradoxically, many projects that registered cost underruns in dollar terms, registered cost overruns in local
    currency terms.
                                                                                    Appendix 6      119


           ANALYSIS OF CANCELLATIONS OF ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK LOANS

A.      Scope

1.      A study was undertaken to document relationships between loan characteristics and
loan cancellations, and to assess trends since the start of the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
in 1968 until August 2003, specifying (i) the type of loans, whether ordinary capital resources
(OCR) or special funds (SF); (ii) the sectoral nature of the loans; and (iii) the country destination
of the loan. A special study was made for loans closed after1996.

B.      Methodology and Limitations

2.      ADB's internal database on loans (the Loan Financial Information System) was
downloaded and a statistical analysis was performed. Cancellation percentages are unweighted
for loan size, unless otherwise indicated.

3.      All of the SF loans, since December 1991 are expressed in special drawing rights (SDR)
value. Dollar amounts are withdrawn from these loans against the day value of these SDRs at
the time of withdrawal. The database registers the dollar values. The analysis cannot take into
account the SDR: dollar exchange rate fluctuations from opening to closure of the loans in
different periods of ADB.

C.      Findings

        1.       Types of Loans

4.      From its start in 1968 until late August 2003, ADB approved 1,906 loans; 930 were
funded from OCR and 976 from SF. Of these, 1,452 loans have since been closed and 454 are
ongoing; 85.8% were project loans; 6.5%, sector development project loans; and 7.7%, program
loans. The nature of loans has changed over the period (Table A6.1). The proportion of program
loans and sector loans has been increasing, relative to that of project loans. The number of
supplementary loans has gone down over the years. Among the project loans, there were some
41 supplementary loans (2.8% of all loans), indicating a relatively low number of cost overruns
of projects and programs.

                         Table A6.1: ADB Loan Types by Approval Perioda

  Period          Project         Sector Project      Supplementary       Program             Total
              Loans    Mean       Loans    Mean       Loans   Mean    Loans     Mean    Loans     Mean
               (no.)    (%)        (no.)    (%)        (no.)   (%)     (no.)     (%)     (no.)      (%)

1968­1974    206      13.4       0        0.0        9      22.0      0      0.0       215       11.3
1975­1984    451      29.4       21       12.8       25     61.0      14     8.5       511       26.8
1985­1994    449      29.2       64       39.0       6      14.6      43     26.1      562       29.5
1995­2003    430      28.0       79       48.2       1      2.4       108    65.5      618       32.4
Total        1,536    80.6       164      8.6        41     2.2       165    8.7       1,906     100.0

ADB = Asian Development Bank.
a
  For 1,906 loans approved from 1968 to late August 2003.
Source: ADB's Loan Financial Information System.
       120     Appendix 6


               2.        Size of Loans

       5.      The average loan amount has been rising nominally since ADB's beginning. Table A6.2
       shows means and proportions for four periods of ADB history, and for both closed and open
       loans. The mean loan amount was $8.891 million in 1968­1974 and $75.3 million in 1995­2003.
       Since ADB's beginning, $13.4 billion of the total portfolio of $85.2 billion, or 13.6%, has been
       canceled and "saved." For closed loans, it was 16.7%. The mean cancellation has been
       somewhat higher, at 15.1% for all loans, and 17.9% for closed loans.

                                 Table A6.2: Loan Status, Amount, and Cancellations

Item                        1968­1974   1975­1984        1985­1994               1995­2003                       1968­2003
                             Closed      Closed       Closed   Ongoing       Closed    Ongoing     Closed         Ongoing      Total
                              Loan        Loan         Loan     Loan          Loan      Loan        Loan           Loan

Number of Loans                 215           511           543        19        183       435           1,452         454       1,906

Mean
Approved Loan (million)        8.891       27.306       61.697    101.091     100.714    66.560      46.692         68.005      51.769
Cancelled Amount (million      0.881        6.097        9.802     21.146      14.854     3.868       7.814          7.247       7.046
Percent Cancelled             11.673       22.760       16.789     19.960      17.422     4.450      17.948          5.099      15.100
Loan Disbursed (million)       8.010       21.209       51.895     79.945      85.860    62.692      38.878         46.699      44.723

Sum
Approved Loan (million) 1,911.610       13,953.390   33,501.340 1,920.730 18,430.650 28,953.560 67,796.982 30,874.293 98,671.280
Cancelled Amount (million 189.410        3,115.420    5,322.290 401.770    2,718.330 1,682.640 11,345.450 2,084.411 13,429.860
Percent Cancelled             9.90           22.30        15.90     20.90      14.70       5.80      16.70       6.80      13.60
Loan Disbursed (million) 1,722.200      10,837.960   28,179.050 1,518.960 15,712.320 27,270.920 56,451.532 28,789.882 85,241.410

Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.


       6.      A test was performed distinguishing between loans closed after 1995 that were (i) lower
       than $20 million; (ii) between $20 million and $99.999 million; and (iii) $100 million or higher.
       The mean cancellation proportions were 17%, 20.1%, and 17.1%, respectively, indicating little
       systematic relationship between loan amount and cancellation proportion over this period. This
       finding was corroborated by a correlation test on all 1,906 loans, which proved to be very weak
       at ­0.0288, although significant at the 0.001 level.

               3.        Sectoral Composition of Loans

       7.      Table A6.3 shows the sectoral composition of the loan portfolio.

                                          Table A6.3: ADB Loan Types by Sectora

                Sector                 Project        Sector Project    Supplementary       Program               Total
                                  Loans Mean          Loans Mean        Loans Mean       Loans Mean          Loans Mean
                                  (no)     (%)        (no)   (%)        (no)   (%)       (no)   (%)          (no)    (%)

        ANR                       455       29.6      46      28.0      13      31.7     48       29.1       562       29.5
        Energy                    251       16.3      25      15.2      13      31.7     9        5.5        298       15.6
        Finance                   136       8.9       2       1.2       0       0.0      39       23.6       177       9.3
        Industry and Non-Fuel     41        2.7       1       0.6       3       7.3      16       9.7        61        3.2
        Social Infrastructure     314       20.4      59      36.0      3       7.3      16       9.7        392       20.6
        Transport and Comm.       250       16.2      25      15.2      6       14.6     6        3.6        287       15.1
        Multisector               42        2.7       3       1.8       2       4.9      10       6.1        57        3.0
        Others                    47        1.5       3       1.8       1       2.4      21       12.7       72        3.8
        Total                     1,536     80.6      164     8.6       41      2.2      165      8.7        1,906     100.0

       ADB = Asian Development Bank, ANR = agriculture and natural resources.
       a
         For 1,906 loans approved from 1968 to late August 2003.
       Source: ADB's Loan Financial Information System.
                                                                                               Appendix 6          121


8.      This analysis focused on the four major sectors that account for 82% of all loans:
agriculture and natural resources, energy, social infrastructure, and transport and
communications.

           4.       Loan Savings and/or Cancellations in Closed Loans

9.      Table A6.4 gives average proportions of each loan that was canceled in each of four
periods of approval: 1968 (start of ADB operations)­1974, 1975­1984, 1985­1994, and 1995­
2001.1 Relatively fewer loans were closed during the last period, because many loans approved
after January 1995 are still open.

                       Table A6.4: Unweighed Cancellations and/or Percentages
                                of Savings by Type and Sector of Loan
                                         (by approval period)

    Item                         1968­1974             1975­1984                1985­1994        1995­2001
                                 Loans   Mean          Loans   Mean             Loans   Mean     Loans Mean
                                 (no.)   (%)           (no.)   (%)              (no.)   (%)      (no.)   (%)

    Total Effective Loans        211       11.7        509       22.8           536    16.8      173        17.4

    Type of Loan
    Project                      202       11.6        449       23.3           426    17.9      107        23.2
    Sector Project               0         0.0         21        26.7           61     17.7      12         13.2
    Supplementary Project        9         12.5        25        15.9           6      12.1      1          0.0
    Program                      0         0.0         14        10.3           43     5.5       53         7.0

    Type of Funding
    OCR                          126       13.7        275       25.8           243    17.9      90         27.3
    SF                           85        8.6         234       19.2           293    15.9      83         6.7

    Sector
    ANR                          59        9.1         187       26.7           187    26.7      24         19.4
    Energy                       48        7.4         96        22.4           80     14.2      23         16.6
    Finance                      25        8.1         54        16.1           40     12.8      26         15.2
    Industry and Non-Fuel        10        39.1        17        16.2           18     7.4       7          14.1
    Social Infrastructure        21        2.9         84        22.2           109    16.5      47         15.7
    Transport and Comm.          42        17.3        59        20.4           84     9.7       24         26.8
    Multisector                  0         0.0         10        13.2           24     8.0       9          4.8
    Others                       6         32.1        2         48.0           14     24.2      13         19.1

    Total Loans                  215                   511                      543              183

    Loans Approved but           4                     2                        7                10
      not Effective

ADB = Asian Development Bank, ANR = agriculture and Natural Resources, OCR = ordinary capital resources, SF =
Special Funds.
a
  For 1,906 loans approved from 1968 to late August 2003.
Source: ADB's Loan Financial Information System.

10.    An average of 17% of loans approved after 1985 was canceled. Project loans were
somewhat more prone to cancellation than sector loans and, especially, program loans. The
phenomenon of supplementary loans for cost overruns has, on the other hand, all but stopped;
of loans approved from1995 to 2001, only one was followed by a supplementary loan. The

1
     No loans approved after 2001 had been closed by the time of this report.
122    Appendix 6


broad sectoral breakdown of the loans shows that cancellations vary from 14% to 27% in most
sectors. But average cancellations were far lower in the small sector of multisector projects;
nine loans were approved from 1995 to 2001.

11.    The higher proportion of closed SF program loans (of shorter duration) in this period may
account for the far-better percentage of loan savings. But this may change with time, with
closure of more project loans that were approved over the period.

12.     The average cancellation of loans approved between 1985 and 1994 was 16.8%, or
around 4% more than the percentage of cost underrun of projects approved mainly during this
period. This may indicate a preference of developing member countries (DMCs) to economize
on loan funds, rather than other sources.

13.    Figure A6.1 and Tables A6.5 and A6.6 give more detailed overviews of loan cancellation
percentages by period, subsector, and country.


                                 Figure A6.1: Loan Cancellation and/or Saving
                                        as Percentage of Loan Amount
                            45
                            40
                            35
        Percent Cancelled




                            30
                            25
                            20
                            15
                            10
                            5
                            0
                               68

                               70

                               72

                               74

                               76

                               78

                               80

                               82

                               84

                               86

                               88

                               90

                               92

                               94

                               96

                               98

                               00
                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            20
                                                  Year of Loan Approval


   Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.

14.     Table A6.5 shows that loan cancellations have been a common phenomenon for
projects since ADB began. Projects prepared in 1971 and 1972 are exceptions to the rule that
the cancellation percentage has usually been higher than 12%. The years 1981­1984 are a
cluster of approval years with loans that later had high cancellations. But loans approved in the
last decade, particularly loans approved in 1997,also had relatively large cancellations,
presumably because of the Asian financial crisis.

15.     There has been much variation over time in the level of loan cancellations by sector and
subsector, perhaps indicating the random nature of factors that led to the cancellations. For
loans approved after 1985, cancellations were relatively high, especially in subsectors of
agriculture and natural resources, notably in agricultural support services, forestry, fisheries,
livestock, irrigation, and rural development. Major loan cancellations have also been in the
                                                                                           Appendix 6     123

subsectors of fuel and minerals, telecommunications, water supply and sanitation, and "other
subsectors" (for example, of emergency or of "governance" nature).

              Table A6.5: Cancellations as Proportion of Original Loan Amount, 1968­2003
                                               (by sector)

Sector                                           1968­1974        1975­1984        1985­1994        1995­2003
                                             Loans     Mean   Loans     Mean   Loans     Mean   Loans     Mean
                                              (no.)     (%)    (no.)     (%)    (no.)     (%)    (no.)     (%)

Agriculture and Agro-Industry
Fisheries                                     10     12.11     24     37.59     15     42.48       0     0.00
Industrial Crops and Agricultural Products    13      8.15     19     25.71     11     48.82       3    54.85
Irrigation and Rural Development              27      9.20     95     22.67     71     20.18       4    28.93
Livestock                                      1      0.30     11     30.58      4     30.52       1    44.01
Forestry                                       0      0.00     11     33.35     17     38.11       1    19.73
Agricultural Support Services                  5     11.67     19     34.71     47     14.26      15     8.15
Fertilizer Production                          3      0.00      8     10.51      2     12.84       0     0.00

Energy
Electric Power                                46      6.67     82     22.27     63     11.98      18    17.26
Natural Gas                                    2     25.27      9     30.38     13     18.16       3    18.09
Others                                         0      0.00      0      0.00      0      0.00       2     8.06
Refinery                                       0      0.00      2     12.87      0      0.00       0     0.00
Fuel Minerals                                  0      0.00      3      7.19      2     59.09       0     0.00
Others                                         0      0.00      0      0.00      2     14.29       0     0.00

Industry and Non-Fuel Minerals
Industry (Non-Agricultural)                    8     41.59     12     10.26     18       7.44      7    14.07
Non-Fuel Minerals                              2     28.94      5     30.33      0       0.00      0     0.00

Transport and Communications
Roads and Road Transportation                 19     21.30     32     14.84     58      9.04      13    16.88
Ports and Shipping                            16     13.07     22     32.01     14     12.10       6    45.38
Airports and Civil Aviation                    6     16.72      3      4.98      4     12.05       3    35.80
Railways                                       1     10.59      2      6.39      8      8.62       2    21.65
Telecommunications                             6     32.11      2     47.99     13     24.08       2    26.17

Social Infrastructure
Water Supply and Sanitation                   17       2.97    38     24.48     33     19.65      10    25.81
Education                                      4       2.52    24     15.75     40     15.94      17    14.80
Urban Development and Housing                  0       0.00    11     23.07     21     14.44      10    20.33
Health and Population                          0       0.00    11     27.89     15     14.24      10     2.48

Finance
Capital Market Development                     0       0.00     0      0.00      6      0.00      17    16.10
Development Finance Institutions              25       8.12    54     16.07     34     15.01       9    13.63

Multisector                                    0      0.00     10     13.24     24      8.01       9     4.80
Others                                         0      0.00      0      0.00      1     25.84      11    17.81
                  Total                      211     11.67    509     22.76    536     16.79     173    17.42

Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.
124       Appendix 6


          Table A6.6: Cancellations as Proportion of Original Loan Amount, 1968­2003
                                          (by country)

                                     1968­1974          1975­1984         1985­1994        1995­2003
                                 Loans     Mean     Loans     Mean    Loans     Mean   Loans     Mean
Country                           (no.)     (%)      (no.)     (%)     (no.)     (%)    (no.)     (%)

East and Central Asia
China, People's Republic of        0       0.00        0       0.00    35      5.44     23     22.97
Hong Kong, China                   1       0.00        4       8.75     0      0.00      0      0.00
Kazakhstan                         0       0.00        0       0.00     2      0.02      6      7.72
Republic of Korea                 24      14.03       47      25.37     8     12.39      2     27.52
Kyrgyz Republic                    0       0.00        0       0.00     1      0.27      8      7.71
Mongolia                           0       0.00        0       0.00     7      0.98     11      2.14
Taipei,China                      12      22.07        0       0.00     0      0.00      0      0.00
Tajikistan                         0       0.00        0       0.00     0      0.00      2      0.01
Uzbekistan                         0       0.00        0       0.00     0      0.00      2     53.77

Mekong Region
Cambodia                           1      61.50        0       0.00     2      0.36      5      1.12
Lao People's Dem. Rep.             4       0.35        8      32.12    19      2.64      6      2.23
Myanmar                            6       2.74       25      15.44     1     99.98      0      0.00
Thailand                          12       6.24       34      27.54    19     25.28     11     24.26
Viet Nam                           9      22.33        0       0.00     4      4.75      8      8.43

Pacific
Cook Islands                       0       0.00        2       0.00     6     12.62      3     13.09
Fiji Islands                       2       2.80        4       1.76     6     18.18      0      0.00
Kiribati                           0       0.00        2      40.13     3      3.61      0      0.00
Marshall Islands                   0       0.00        0       0.00     5     11.58      2      0.00
Federated States of Micronesia     0       0.00        0       0.00     1     17.03      1      0.00
Nauru                              0       0.00        0       0.00     0      0.00      1     54.00
Papua New Guinea                   2       0.00       18      10.45    22     20.51      2      0.00
Samoa                              5       1.21       12       7.81     7      5.65      1      0.00
Solomon Islands                    0       0.00        8      12.45     5     17.13      1     38.31
Tonga                              1       0.00        5      10.28     6      5.94      1      0.06
Tuvalu                             0       0.00        0       0.00     0      0.00      1      0.00
Vanuatu                            0       0.00        2      18.22     4      9.49      3      0.54

South Asia
Afghanistan                        3      46.10        5      74.98     0      0.00      0      0.00
Bangladesh                        11      21.18       49      22.75    48     15.27      9     13.16
Bhutan                             0       0.00        2      12.49     8     32.84      4      0.25
India                              0       0.00        0       0.00    26     22.10     16     25.40
Maldives                           0       0.00        2       7.91     4      5.23      0      0.00
Nepal                              9       2.04       35      19.72    32     31.83      5      3.86
Pakistan                          19      12.51       50      17.16    64     16.40     11     23.75
Sri Lanka                         12       8.84       25      16.90    35     13.96      3      0.30

Southeast Asia
Indonesia                         27      12.63       76      24.72    85     18.27     17     41.91
Malaysia                          22       8.10       33      34.30    18     36.41      1     18.82
Philippines                       19       1.59       57      29.14    53     14.62      7     23.78
Singapore                         10      21.21        4      12.16     0      0.00      0      0.00

              Total              132      11.67      338      22.76   373     16.79     73     17.42

Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.
                                                                              Appendix 6     125

16.     As with the smaller subsectors, the average loan cancellation proportions for the smaller
DMCs were heavily influenced by the effects of random factors associated with small numbers
of loans. Thus, some DMCs with only a few loans over a period might be either far higher, or
lower, than the general averages. The patterns for the DMCs with larger portfolios indicate that
A, B, and C categories have all been affected by large cancellations: Malaysia and Thailand
have large averages; so do countries such as India and Nepal. Loan cancellations have been
growing with the People's Republic of China (the PRC), Indonesia, and Pakistan. Thus, it
cannot be presumed that the DMC category would have by itself have affected the average size
of the loan cancellations. Of the smaller DMCs in loan terms, Bhutan stands out in size of loan
cancellations. Conversely, DMCs such as the Lao People's Democratic Republic (the Lao PDR)
and Mongolia, and some of the Pacific countries, stand out as cases with low loan cancellations.

D.     Loans Closed from 1996 to Late June 2003

17.      Table A6.7 summarizes data on all 447 loans closed after 1996 by (i) type of loan,
(ii) type of funding, (iii) macrosector, (iv) subsector, and (v) individual country.

18.     In recent years, sector loans have had, as expected, lower levels of cancellations and/or
savings (17.2%) than other investment project loans (19.3%). But remarkably, sector investment
loans have had fairly high cancellations, despite their more open nature. ADB's practice of
closing loans after a certain agreed period may contribute to this.

19.    OCR loans have averaged distinctly higher cancellations than SF loans (23.4%/ loan vs
15.2%/loan). But although the average OCR loan of $105 million had a cancellation of
$23 million, the average SF loan of $37 million had a cancellation of $5 million. Clearly,
executing agencies have put more effort in fully utilizing the advantageous SF loans, rather than
OCR loans, which must be repaid with commitment and higher service charges.

20.     The sectoral breakdown again shows that loan cancellations affect all sectors. Most
affected are the sectors of agriculture and natural resources, finance, and "other" sectors
(including emergency projects that are usually poorly estimated). Table A6.7 reflects mostly
loans approved before 1995. Loans approved after 1995 show a more relevant, and recent,
phenomenon: lower cancellations for agriculture and natural resources and finance loans, and
higher cancellations for transport and communication.

21.    Subsectors that have experienced substantial loan cancellations since 1996 include
capital market development (43.3%); fisheries (42.5%); forestry, irrigation, and rural
development (21.5%); ports and shipping (28.9%); telecommunications (30.5%); and "other"
sectors (see above). At the country level, loans closed after 1996 have had high cancellation
rates, especially for India (25.2%), Indonesia (29.2%), Malaysia (32.4%), Nepal (22.6%),
Pakistan (21%), Papua New Guinea (20%), Philippines (21.3%), and Thailand (25.0%). DMCs
with more closed loans, and that had far lower than average loan cancellations over the period,
included Bangladesh, PRC, Lao PDR, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam.
126       Appendix 6

                 Table A6.7: Average Amounts and Cancellation/Saving Percentages
                          of All ADB Project Loans Closed Since Early 1996a
                  (by type of loan, type of funding, macrosector, subsector, and country)

Item                                                              Loan        Loan Cancellation         Net
                                            Loans    Loans      Amount       Amount         %         Amount
                                             (no.)    (%)       ($million)   ($million)               ($million)

A.     Type of Loan (sum)
       Project Loan                            391      87.5 25,822.940      5,280.020       20.4   20,542.930
       Sector Loan                              56      12.5 5,120.660         761.170       14.9    4,359.490
          Total                                447     100.0 30,943.600      6,041.190       19.5   24,902.420

       Type of Loan (mean)
       Project Loan                            391      87.5       66.043      13.504        19.3       52.539
       Sector Loan                              56      12.5       91.440      13.592        17.2       77.848
          Total                                447     100.0       69.225      13.515        19.1       55.710

B.     Type of Funding (mean)
       OCR                                     212      47.4     105.382       22.954        23.4       82.428
       SF                                      235      52.6      36.607        5.000        15.2       31.607

C.     Macrosector (mean)
       Agriculture and Natural Resources       113      25.3      43.727       10.582        26.2       33.145
       Energy                                   71      15.9     119.065       22.652        15.7       96.413
       Finance                                  21       4.7      55.424       16.040        23.3       39.385
       Industry and Non-Fuel Minerals            8       1.8     107.350        9.691        15.3       97.659
       Social Infrastructure                   123      27.5      49.018        8.464        16.4       40.554
       Transport and Communications             78       0.2      93.640       15.680        15.4       77.960
       Multisector                              18       4.0      58.065        5.839         8.2       52.227
       Others                                   15       3.4      76.490       30.237        31.0       46.257

D.     Subsector (mean)
       Airports and Civil Aviation               5       1.1      44.302       24.140        21.8       20.162
       Agricultural Support Services            30       6.7      39.593        6.539        15.9       33.054
       Capital Market Development                5       1.1      24.695       16.919        43.3        7.776
       Development Finance Institutions         16       3.6      65.027       15.765        17.1       49.262
       Education                                45      10.1      48.764        9.342        17.3       39.422
       Electric Power                           55      12.3     116.064       20.771        13.9       95.293
       Fisheries                                 9       2.0      26.307       16.660        42.5        9.648
       Fuel Minerals                             1       0.2      34.454       23.489        68.2       10.965
       Forestry                                 13       2.9      34.316       13.387        41.8       20.928
       Health and Population                    15       3.4      54.211        6.902        14.7       47.309
       Industrial Crops and Agro-Industry        8       1.8      63.116       24.459        47.0       38.658
       Industry (Non-Agriculture)                8       1.8     107.350        9.691        15.3       97.659
       Irrigation and Rural Development         51      11.4      48.993        8.778        21.5       40.215
       Livestock                                 2       0.4      33.458       16.142        47.0       17.316
       Natural Gas                              12       2.7     137.557       31.929        19.7      105.628
       Ports and Shipping                       12       2.7      79.716       22.977        28.9       56.739
       Roads and Road Transport                 54      12.1      90.762       11.403        11.8       79.359
       Railways                                  7       1.6     175.000       30.113        15.2      144.887
       Telecommunications                       11       2.5      98.257       37.121        30.5       61.136
       Urban Development and Housing            29       6.5      58.178        7.158        12.6       51.020
       Water Supply and Sanitation              34       7.6      39.252        9.106        19.1       30.146
       Multisector                              18       4.0      58.065        5.839         8.2       52.227
       Others                                    3       0.7     128.333       19.763        14.9      108.570
       Others                                    4       0.9      16.647       11.307        32.4        5.340


ADB = Asian Development Bank, OCR = ordinary capital resources, SF = Special Funds.
a
     All ADB project loans closed after 1995 and before September 2003.
                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                                                                       Appendix 6         127


                                         Table A6.7--Continued

Item                                                          Loan        Loan Cancellation           Net
                                        Loans    Loans      Amount       Amount         %            Amount
                                         (no.)    (%)       ($million)   ($million)                 ($million)


E.     Country (mean)
       Bangladesh                           37       8.3      60.148       7.715      16.8            52.433
       Bhutan                                5       1.1       6.596       0.520       7.4             6.075
       Cambodia                              5       1.1      29.690       0.230       1.3            29.461
       China, People's Republic of          50      11.2     117.492      16.357      13.8           101.135
       Cook Islands                          4       0.9       1.692       0.255      19.8             1.438
       Federated States of Micronesia        1       0.2       6.208       1.057      17.0             5.151
       Fiji Islands                          2       0.4      13.800       0.000       0.0            13.800
       India                                35       7.8     141.486      30.028      25.2           111.458
       Indonesia                            63      14.1      97.566      29.824      29.2            67.742
       Kazakhstan                            6       1.3      28.620       2.841       7.7            25.779
       Kiribati                              1       0.2       1.026       0.060       5.8             0.966
       Korea, Republic of                    2       0.4      38.900       9.841      33.8            29.060
       Kyrgyz Republic                       6       1.3      20.028       0.250      12.4            19.778
       Lao People's Dem. Rep.               17       3.8      23.824       0.617       3.2            23.207
       Malaysia                             11       2.5      50.573      12.002      32.4            38.571
       Maldives                              2       0.4       9.422       0.890       9.6             8.532
       Marshall Islands                      5       1.1       5.890       0.774      11.6             5.116
       Mongolia                             10       2.2      16.785       0.262       3.0            16.522
       Myanmar                               1       0.2      46.022      46.011     100.0             0.011
       Nepal                                27       6.0      24.006       4.889      22.6            19.117
       Pakistan                             49      11.0      75.645      11.495      21.0            64.149
       Papua New Guinea                     11       2.5      20.520       4.903      20.0            15.617
       Philippines                          36       8.1      65.538      12.020      21.3            53.518
       Samoa                                 1       0.2       8.845       0.098       1.1             8.747
       Sri Lanka                            21       4.7      36.388       2.960       9.7            33.428
       Tajikistan                            1       0.2       4.660       0.001       0.0             4.659
       Thailand                             18       4.0      86.908      22.772      25.0            64.137
       Tonga                                 7       1.6       4.606       0.272       5.9             4.334
       Uzbekistan                            2       0.4      50.000      26.885      53.8            23.116
       Vanuatu                               3       0.7       5.475       0.688      12.9             4.786
       Viet Nam                              8       1.8      62.274       6.909      10.8            55.365

Source: Asian Development Bank's Loan Financial Information System.
                 Management Response on the Special Evaluation Study
                             on Project Cost Estimates



         On 20 August 2004, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       "Management and staff will continue to make efforts to enhance project design and
implementation by improving the quality of cost estimation as recommended. For those
recommendations which may require further study, we will consider them based on a careful
analysis of the associated costs and benefits."
                                   BOARD OF DIRECTORS

                      DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE


    Chairperson's Summary of the Committee's Discussion on 25 August 2004 of the
                  Special Evaluation Study on Project Cost Estimates


1.      With its meeting on 25 August 2004, the Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC)
started its August 2004 ­ July 2005 review cycle. At this first meeting, the DEC considered two
reports by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED): (i) Special Evaluation Study on Project
Cost Estimates; and (ii) Project Performance Audit Report on the Livestock Development
Project (Loan 973-PAK[SF]) in Pakistan. This Chairperson's Summary covers the DEC's
discussion of the first report.

2.       As background, in its discussion of the annual review of evaluation activities in August
2002, the DEC had focused, among other things, on the issue of the persistent variances
between project cost estimates and actual costs, as reported by OED. The DEC thought the
issue warranted a thorough examination and recommended that a special evaluation study be
initiated as part of OED's 2003 work program. Specifically, the DEC recommended that the
OED study investigate the reasons why actual costs differed from appraisal estimates, with a
view to making project cost estimates more realistic. In July 2004, OED circulated its final
report, Special Evaluation Study on Project Cost Estimates, simultaneously to Management and
the Board in advance of public disclosure so that Management response to the report, if any,
and the DEC's views could be obtained and publicly disclosed together with the report.

3.      The DEC appreciated that Management, in its response, supported the
recommendations of the report in principle. At the same time, Management has qualified that
"for those recommendations which may require further study, we (Management and staff) will
consider them based on a careful analysis of the associated costs and benefits".

4.      The DEC generally endorsed the special evaluation study's conclusions and the
objectives of its main recommendations, as summarized on pages v-vii of the Executive
Summary and discussed in greater detail in Section V. The DEC considered the report to be a
major and important input to an action plan that needed to be formulated as the next step. At
the same time, the DEC emphasized that more accurate cost estimation was not the end, but a
means to the objective of improving efficiency and effectiveness in the allocation of ADB's
scarce resources and reducing negative impacts to borrowing members. With the total amount
of loan cancellations having doubled in the last five years, the need for immediate action was
real and pressing.

5.      The solution to the issue of persistent project cost underruns would not be achieved
overnight, but monitorable change had to start. Such change might require fundamentally new
business processes and systems, instead of mere adjustments to the existing system. The
DEC remains concerned that borrowing member countries may be incurring excess
commitment charges on OCR loans for projects that ultimately have major cost underruns. At
the same time, ADB and the borrowing members share the responsibility for good project
design.
                                                2



6.      The DEC agreed with Director General, OED on the larger significance of this study.
The initial motivation for the study had been concern over technical and due diligence issues
related to project preparation and implementation procedures; significant changes in the nature
of the lending program over the years might have resulted in gaps in the skills mix of staff, which
could have led to some weakening in technical abilities for cost estimation. At the same time,
the study's analysis and findings point to more fundamental potential issues involving ADB's
policies as a lender, including implications for ADB income. For instance, as a consequence of
the study, further consideration should be given to a need to review ADB's current policies or
practices on: determining the size of loans, local cost financing, procedures covering physical
and price contingencies and their amounts, treatment of interest during construction,
commitment charge accrual, supplementary loans, and use of loan savings.

7.     At the discussion, individual DEC members voiced their respective key concerns in
considering the findings of the study. In particular, these included the following.

   ·   Improvement of project cost estimation is directly related to capacity building in
       executing agencies of borrowing members.
   ·   In reviewing ADB's supplementary loan policy, there is room for the Board to consider
       further delegation of related decision making to Management. In this context, the
       concept of a "two-part loan system" ­ the first part for base cost, the second for
       contingencies and a fixed percentage for cost overruns, with approval for use of the
       second part possibly delegated to Management - could be further analyzed and
       subjected to careful consultation with borrowing members. However, increased flexibility
       should not be at the expense of any due diligence responsibilty of the Board.
   ·   Innovative solutions, such as the option for a borrowing member not to borrow for
       contingencies, should be considered.
   ·   The issue of inconsistent application of ADB guidelines in estimation of price
       contingencies must be further examined. Accountability for ensuring consistent
       application of the guidelines ADB-wide must be clarified and established.
   ·   Since corruption and poor governance issues were perceived by staff and consultants as
       major factors for project cost variances, these deserve further specific examination.
   ·   The effect of increased loan conditionalities on cost overruns should be assessed.
   ·   The implicit financial effects of poor project cost estimates on the borrowing member
       government should be further defined so that these could be explicitly addressed in the
       future.

9.      In all these, recognizing that the recommendations might not be budget neutral if
substantially implemented and that ADB had limited budget resources, a cost-benefit analysis
should provide the basis for proceeding with a recommendation. Since it was clear that action
should be taken, the DEC wished to engage Management in the consideration of more specific
next steps to be taken on each of the recommendations of the study.


                                             Jusuf Anwar
                                             Chairperson
                                             Development Effectiveness Committee

                                             27 August 2004
