                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                   Operations Evaluation Department




                         SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY


                                           OF


                       ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response and the Board of
Directors' Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) Chair's summary of a discussion of the
report by DEC.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: SST: REG 2006-13
Special Evaluation Study
September 2006




Environmental Safeguards




Operations Evaluation Department
                ABBREVIATIONS

ADB     ­   Asian Development Bank
ADTA    ­   advisory technical assistance
AML     ­   Appraisal Mission Leader
BP      ­   British Petroleum
BTOR    ­   back-to-office report
CEA     ­   country environmental assessment
CPCB    ­   Central Pollution Control Board
CRP     ­   Compliance Review Panel
CSP     ­   country strategy and program
DENR    ­   Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DFI     ­   development finance institution
DMC     ­   developing member country
DoNRE   ­   Department of Natural Resources and Environment
EA      ­   executing agency
EAF     ­   environmental assessment framework
ECA     ­   environmentally critical areas
ECC     ­   environmental compliance certificate
ECP     ­   environmentally critical project
EIA     ­   environmental impact assessment
EIS     ­   environmental impact statement
EMP     ­   environmental management plan
EPB     ­   environmental protection bureau
GMS     ­   Greater Mekong Subregion
IAA     ­   Impact Assessment Agency
IEE     ­   initial environmental examination
INRM    ­   India Resident Mission
LGU     ­   local government unit
LEP     ­   Law of Environment Protection
MOEF    ­   Ministry of Environment and Forests Conservation
km      ­   kilometer
MoNRE   ­   Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
NGO     ­   nongovernment organization
NHAI    ­   National Highways Authority of India
OED     ­   Operations Evaluation Department
OEM     ­   Operations Evaluation Mission
PCR     ­   project completion report
PMU     ­   project management unit
PPER    ­   project performance evaluation report
PPTA    ­   project preparatory technical assistance
PRC     ­   People's Republic of China
PSOD    ­   Private Sector Operations Department
RD      ­   Regional Department
RETA    ­   regional technical assistance
RSDD    ­   Regional and Sustainable Development Department
RSES    ­   Environment and Social Safeguards Division of RSDD
SDP     ­   sector development program
SEIA    ­   summary environmental impact assessment
SEPA    ­   State Environmental Protection Administration
SES     ­   special evaluation study
SIEE    ­   summary initial environmental examination
SPC     ­   safeguard policy compliance
TA      ­   technical assistance
                                             NOTE

                                 In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                           Keywords

adb, environmental evaluation, environmental enhancement, safeguards, impact, development
results, effectiveness, lessons learned, transaction costs, china, indian, philippines, vietnamese




Director General       B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director               R.B. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

Team Leader            C.C. Yu, Senior Evaluation Specialist,
                       Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
Team Members           B. Palacios, Senior Evaluation Officer,
                       Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED
                       R.S. Perez, Senior Operations Evaluation Assistant,
                       Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

                          Operations Evaluation Department, SE-70
                                              CONTENTS
                                                                                                   Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                      ii

I.      INTRODUCTION                                                                                   1
        A.    Background                                                                               1
        B.    The Operations Evaluation Department Independent Assessment of Environmental
              Safeguards                                                                               3
        C.    Limitations of the Evaluation                                                            7

II.     ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARD SYSTEMS OF ADB AND FOUR SELECTED DMCS                                  8
        A.    Environmental Safeguards at ADB                                                          9
        B.    Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of the Philippines                   13
        C.    Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of India                             14
        D.    Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of the PRC                           15
        E.    Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of Viet Nam                          16
        F.    Summary and Comparisons                                                                 17

III.    DATA GATHERING AND ANALYSIS                                                                   18
        A.    Document Review and Desk Research                                                       18
        B.    Questionnaire Survey of Appraisal Mission Leaders                                       19
        C.    Interviews with Other ADB Staff and Nongovernment Organizations                         21
        D.    Country Consultations and Project Case Studies                                          25

IV.     EVALUATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT POLICIES: RESULTS AND GAPS                                      34
        A.   Relevance of the Environment Policies                                                    34
        B.   Efficacy and Efficiency of the Environment Policies                                      37

V.      CONCLUSIONS, ISSUES AND LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                          53
        A.   Overall Assessment                                                                       53
        B.   Key Issues and Lessons Identified from ADB's Current Environmental Safeguard and
             Enhancement Practices                                                                    55
        C.   Recommendations                                                                          62

APPENDIXES
1.   Evaluation Matrix                                                                                72
2.   ADB Environmental Policy and Environmental Assessment Requirements                               75
3.   Questionnaire Survey of Appraisal Mission Leaders                                                82
4.   Key Findings from the Country Studies                                                           109
5.   Environment-Related Technical Assistance and Loans                                              128

Attachments:        Management Response
                    DEC Chair Summary

This special evaluation study report is based in part on case study of projects from India, the People's
Republic of China (PRC), Philippines, and Viet Nam. The Director General of the Operations Evaluation
Department (OED) managed the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) operations in PRC during 1993­2004.
The Director OED Division 2 (OED) was involved in ADB's operations in Viet Nam during 2002­2006.
OED has adopted guidelines to avoid conflict of interest in its independent evaluations. The OED Director
General and the Director OED2 did not review the appendix on the PRC and Viet Nam case studies,
respectively. Although the Director General of OED and the Director of OED2 reviewed the report as a
whole, made comments for inclusion and, in the case of the former, approved the report, it is considered
that potential conflicts of interest were adequately managed. Brian Ashcroft (International Consultant),
Ngoc Long Vu (Viet Nam), Chen Dong (People's Republic of China), Ashish Sinha (India), Rasmiah Mayo
(Philippines), and Adele Casorla (Philippines) were the consultants. To the knowledge of the
management of OED, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons preparing this report.
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has three safeguard policies: the policy on
involuntary resettlement (1995), the policy on indigenous peoples (1998), and the environment
policy (2002). Since their adoption, the three policies have guided ADB in the formulation and
implementation of its assistance programs, particularly its lending activities. However, the
evolving developmental context in which ADB is operating, together with the experience
accumulated from applying the policies to ADB's operations, warrant a review and update of the
policies to enhance their effectiveness and outcome orientation, streamline procedures, and
reduce transaction costs.

       In response to a request from the ADB Board's Development Effectiveness Committee,
the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) has undertaken a special evaluation study (SES)
of ADB's Environment Policy with respect to environmental safeguards. This SES was originally
included in OED's 2008 Work Program but was brought forward to 2006 to enable the update of
the Environment Policy, led by the Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD),
to consider its findings. The SES has, therefore, been completed under strict constraints on both
the time and resources.

        The objectives of the SES are (i) to provide an independent assessment of the
effectiveness of ADB's Environment Policy with a focus on safeguards with respect to results on
the ground, particularly in terms of actual environmental impacts of ADB-supported projects and
any positive catalytic impact of environmental safeguards in non-ADB funded projects; and (ii) to
make broad and directional recommendations as to the key areas of improvement needed for
ADB's environmental safeguards to achieve better results.

Methodology and Review Activities

        Environment policies and safeguard issues in general are likely to be contentious, as
different stakeholders have different and often opposing views that are not easy to reconcile. In
recognition of this, the SES has employed several approaches to provide quantitative and
qualitative information on the application of environmental safeguard procedures within ADB's
operations. The range of methods used has helped to develop a broad and balanced
understanding of the issues arising from the environmental safeguard policy.

       However, given the constraints on time and resources, there are important limitations in
terms of methodologies and scope of the evaluation particularly the selection of only four
countries for consultations and case studies. While quantifiable data are used wherever
possible as a measure of performance, in many cases there has been no alternative to reliance
upon feedback from the wide range of professionals and stakeholders involved in the safeguard
process, both within and outside of ADB, to reflect performance and identify issues.
Notwithstanding this limitation, the SES has provided a broad reflection of the performance of
the environmental safeguard system and created a common platform that will facilitate debate
on the strengths and weaknesses of the system in an open and transparent manner. The main
methods applied are outlined below.

        Desk research included review of ADB strategy, associated policy papers and
guidelines, and relevant project documents. The findings from the document review were used
to guide other data-gathering activities and also provided information on the quality and quantity
of ADB's inputs during project preparation and implementation.
                                                                                                  iii


        A questionnaire survey was used to gather views and experience from appraisal mission
leaders, who are on the front line in applying the environmental safeguard procedures to ADB
projects. ADB classifies projects into four categories in accordance with potential adverse
environmental impacts. The survey assessed category A and B projects, approved since 1997,
with most significant environmental impacts. A total of 147 responses were received (67%
response rate), reflecting wide-ranging experience with the use of the safeguard procedures.

       Interviews were held with other ADB staff including environmental safeguard specialists
and sector division directors to gain a wider perspective on the application of the environmental
safeguard procedures. Meetings were held with a small number of representatives of
nongovernment organizations (NGOs) to listen to their views on the effectiveness of the
environmental safeguard procedures and possible improvements.

         Sixteen projects in four countries (Philippines, India, People's Republic of China [PRC],
and Viet Nam) were selected as case studies to assess the performance of the environmental
safeguard system in practice. The four countries selected for case studies represent nearly 45%
of ADB's lending between 1996 and 2005, and account for 46 out of 69 or 67% of category A
projects approved during the period 1997­2005. The projects selected provide a cross section
of ADB's activities, the spectrum of national environmental protection systems, and the
institutional capacities within developing member countries (DMCs). However, given the wide
variability of ADB DMCs in terms of environmental capacities and issues, the inclusion of only
four countries for consultations and case studies may limit the robustness of the evaluation
findings. RSDD should deepen the range of country studies during its work.

Key Findings of the Survey, Interviews, and Case Studies

       The responses to the questionnaire survey by appraisal mission leaders highlighted
several key matters centered mainly on the effectiveness of the environmental safeguard
procedures:
       (i)   The environmental assessment process was felt to be procedural and
             compliance-driven rather than results focused.
       (ii)  There is a mismatch between ADB's Environment Policy with respect to
             safeguards and the resources available to achieve the desired policy outcome,
             and also between the resources allocated for environmental safeguard
             procedures during loan processing compared with the lower resources allocated
             for monitoring and implementation.
       (iii) Transaction costs for some executing agencies (EAs) are unnecessarily high,
             particularly for small and routine projects or subprojects, due to the inflexibility of
             ADB's procedures. ADB's scarce human resources should be focused on
             projects with significant environmental risks but high potential developmental
             impacts.
       (iv)  ADB's value added to the environmental assessment process is generally limited
             for large client countries (e.g., the PRC and India) due to the application of
             uniform procedures to all countries.

       The main messages derived from the interviews with staff centered on the impact of the
reorganization and mainstreaming of ADB's environmental specialists:
       (i)     It was widely acknowledged that there have been some important benefits from
               "mainstreaming" of the environmental safeguard specialists into the regional
               departments (RDs) in terms of internalizing environmental expertise in project
               teams. This was balanced, however, by the general recognition that, as a result
iv


               of mainstreaming, most of the efforts of safeguard specialists in RDs have been
               directed to upstream or loan processing activities.
       (ii)    There was general comment that "mainstreaming" has led to loss of a critical
               mass in the Environment and Social Safeguards Division (RSES), and this may
               have inadvertently led to reduced visibility of "environment" within ADB's strategic
               activities and assistance programs. There was a general concern that the career
               and professional development of environmental specialists in the RDs had been
               marginalized with consequent effect on recruitment and retention.
       (iii)   The accountability mechanism provided by the Compliance Review Panel is
               useful but there is a significant time lag between the inspection results and staff
               evaluation. Also, the fear of being involved in an inspection case provides a
               strong counterincentive for staff to avoid environmentally sensitive projects.

      The feedback from representatives of NGOs focused mainly on external perceptions of
ADB's environmental performance and community engagement issues:
      (i)    There is a need for a greater focus on monitoring and implementation aspects of
             projects, particularly changes in design and scope that sometimes fall through
             ADB's safeguard procedures.
      (ii)   ADB should provide more capacity building and training for NGOs and civil
             society on technical issues related to project monitoring.
      (iii)  While recognizing the need for harmonizing ADB's environmental safeguard
             system with improved national systems, NGOs were concerned about issues
             related to quality, implementation, and corruption.

      The country studies provided information on the effectiveness of the environmental
safeguard procedures in operations at the field level:
      (i)     There is significant diversity among DMCs in terms of the comprehensiveness
              and effectiveness of national environmental systems and in their ability to deliver
              results on the ground. While most DMCs have an established legal framework,
              there remain fundamental differences in terms of resources and capacity but,
              perhaps most importantly, also in the enforcement and application of
              environmental regulations. This is central to any consideration of the progressive
              reliance on national systems.
      (ii)    For the projects visited in the four countries, ADB's value added at the project
              level in terms of improving environmental assessment was mixed. On the one
              hand, ADB has been successful in avoiding major adverse environmental
              impacts of the projects that it has funded. In several projects in PRC, Philippines,
              and Viet Nam, ADB has made a contribution to improved monitoring through
              introducing third-party monitoring mechanisms. On the other hand, for about half
              of the projects in the PRC, Philippines, and Viet Nam, and for all four projects in
              India, ADB's value added in terms of improving impact assessment and
              monitoring at the project level was limited.
      (iii)   ADB's efforts to help the PRC build and improve its environmental assessment
              legal and institutional capacities in the early 1990s paid good dividends, with
              most PRC projects visited having performed better than average in terms of
              environmental assessment and management. In general, there was a consistent
              view that ADB should be focused more on institutional strengthening and
              assisting DMCs in technical innovation rather than emphasizing narrow project
              activities. This issue needs to be considered when assessing options to revise
              the Environment Policy, particularly the focus within ADB's environmental
              resources and programs at ADB and country level.
                                                                                              v



Key Issues and Lessons Learned

      The main issues and lessons drawn from the evaluation are summarized below.
      (i)   The "one size fits all" approach is not effective, failing to add value in many
            cases. There is diversity across DMCs in terms of the environmental issues they
            face, the strength of their environmental legal framework, and their institutional
            and technical capacities. While the 2002 Environment Policy recognizes this
            diversity, it maintains a uniform approach to safeguard procedures across all
            DMCs. This uniformity, referred to as the "one size fits all" approach, is no longer
            appropriate and a fundamental cause of many of the inefficiencies inherent in the
            safeguard system. The "one size fits all" approach does not respond effectively to
            the specific needs of each DMC. It also frustrates the optimal use of the limited
            professional and technical resources available in both ADB and the DMCs. There
            is a need for greater flexibility and targeting in the safeguard procedures and for
            differentiation among the needs and situations within DMCs. ADB's scarce
            environmental resources should be targeted in areas where they can have the
            most impact, i.e., environmental capacity building in DMCs and projects with
            major environmental risks that need to be mitigated.

             One outcome of this is likely to be a greater reliance on national systems to
             support ADB's internal environmental safeguard procedures and resources. Such
             a change in approach would be consistent with the Paris Declaration on Aid
             Effectiveness, which recognizes the need to help strengthen institutional
             capacities in DMCs and the need for increased alignment of funding agency
             systems and procedures with those of DMCs. A progressive shift in emphasis to
             reliance on national procedures would potentially deliver benefits in terms of
             resources and costs but mainly strategic benefits in terms of capacity building
             within DMCs.

             Any move toward reliance on national systems would require a progressive
             transition, targeted first at those countries such as PRC and India that have
             made good progress in institutional development and environmental legal
             frameworks. Two models for integration of technical assessments are offered
             that might be used to align the safeguard procedures. One is development of a
             system of accreditation to ensure that DMC systems are consistent with the
             principles and objectives of ADB's environment policy and that there is
             reasonable implementation and monitoring of the results achieved by the national
             systems. In PRC, the framework for such an accreditation process already exists.
             The other involves use of a joint assessment process. Changing ADB's policy
             and procedures toward greater reliance on national systems will require a
             fundamental redirection of ADB's environmental activities from a project focus to
             capacity building. Any move to a greater use of country systems should be done
             in coordination with other development partners, particularly the World Bank.

             The conclusion that there should be an explicit recognition of the need for greater
             reliance on national systems is likely to be provocative for some stakeholders.
             However, it needs to be recognized that there is already a significant de facto
             reliance on DMC resources and systems to undertake core environmental
             evaluation work due to constraints on ADB resources and time. For example, of
             the six category A projects examined, 100% of the environmental impact
vi


             assessments were prepared by DMC agencies. Such a change in policy should
             be more evolutionary than revolutionary, and should be responsive to the
             changing situation in those DMCs with relatively more developed capacities and
             procedures.

     (ii)    There is an overemphasis on procedural compliance and not enough
             attention paid to results delivery. The application of ADB's environmental
             safeguard procedures has been geared more toward demonstrating procedural
             compliance than achieving results. It needs to be recognized that procedures are
             important for large organizations like ADB and there are important advantages
             associated with a procedure-oriented environmental assessment approach, e.g.,
             being transparent and systematic. ADB's current accountability mechanism very
             much focuses on procedural compliance. Nevertheless overemphasis on
             procedural compliance brings about high transaction costs relative to benefits. A
             more results-oriented approach is needed. This will require a concerted effort
             within ADB to refocus activities to achieve a better balance between project
             processing and project administration activities, including post-construction
             monitoring in some cases, together with program- and country-specific solutions
             targeted to address the specific needs of the DMCs and projects.

             In many situations, the current procedures follow a repetitive "recipe" without
             addressing key project decisions. A new focus within the environmental
             assessment process is needed regarding project decisions--what are the real
             issues, what project decisions arise from these issues, what responses might be
             considered, and what recommendations are useful for the ongoing project. New
             expectations need to be set for ADB staff and EAs. In many cases, no extended
             environmental assessments are warranted; in others, more extensive and
             targeted assessments are needed.

             The level of staff resources and staff motivation are also important issues.
             Moving to a results-oriented focus requires changes in staff perceptions and
             motivation. This is consistent with ADB's efforts to move away from a project
             approval culture to one that focuses on results achievement as stipulated in the
             Medium-Term Strategy II.

     (iii)   Perverse Incentive. The SES identified several situations where lending
             decisions have been actively directed to avoid financing projects that might
             trigger environmental procedures, even though these projects appear to be
             suitable for support. This situation was evident in three of the four sector projects
             examined in India, for which there were clear criteria to exclude category A and B
             sensitive subprojects from the ADB pipeline. In all cases, the motivation of ADB
             and the EA staff was "rational" considering the long potential delays and
             resources constraints. The environmental procedures to be used would involve
             long and difficult negotiations both within ADB and nationally. Consequently,
             "environmentally difficult" sections were dropped from the project scope. This
             solved the immediate problem, but such decisions are at odds with ADB's
             broader development mandate.

             Creating incentives that drive such decisions is a fundamental weakness of the
             current safeguard procedures. In particular, the situation highlights the failure of
             uniform safeguard procedures, which can be inconsistent with national
                                                                                              vii


              procedures and can also be problematic in the context of ADB's own wider
              development objectives. A key conclusion arising from the SES is the need to
              better align ADB's internal procedures (the environmental safeguards) with the
              wider intentions of the Environment Policy and ADB's strategic objectives.
              Achieving better alignment with national systems is a corollary of this finding.

       (iv)   Environmental safeguards and environmental enhancement are two sides
              of the same coin, and one should not be overemphasized at the expense of
              the other. Within ADB, the "Environment Policy" has often been referred to as
              the "Environmental Safeguard Policy," and "Environmental Safeguards" have
              sometimes become synonymous with "avoiding environmental harm." This
              reflects the motivation and expectations of ADB staff. A revision of the 2002
              Environment Policy should result in replacing this negative emphasis with a
              common positive understanding of actively seeking "environmental gain" as the
              objective of ADB operations.

       (v)    "Mainstreaming" but also "marginalizing"? The SES found some benefits
              from the mainstreaming of environmental resources as part of the 2002
              reorganization in terms of internalizing environmental expertise into the RDs. At
              the same time, there is a widely held view within ADB that the mainstreaming
              may have inadvertently reduced the visibility of environmental issues within ADB
              activities. Until 2005, RSES's mandate was almost exclusively focused on
              safeguards, and the environment specialists in the RDs were very much devoted
              to loan processing. This view was echoed by EAs, which perceived a lack of
              focus and leadership for environmental activities within ADB, particularly at the
              broad environmental policy level and strengthening environmental protection
              agency. Staff motivation may have been adversely affected by the
              reorganization, as decentralization has limited career development for
              environmental specialists in RDs if they wish to remain as environmental
              specialists. Being a mission leader for processing lending projects is a key factor
              in career progression in the RDs.

       (vi)   Poor technical quality of environmental impact assessments. The quality of
              environmental assessments was found to be inconsistent and often did not
              reflect current international good practice. The quality and value of the
              environmental safeguard procedures could be improved through procedural
              revisions that would address a range of matters including (a) improved alignment
              of the timing of the assessment with the decision-making process, (b) more
              balanced categorization process, (c) improved monitoring, (d) greater clarity on
              standards, (e) improved use of quantification, (f) greater focus on innovation and
              demonstration projects, and (g) revisions to the documentation and reporting
              format.

Overall Evaluation

        Overall, ADB's Environmental Policy has been found to be relevant to ADB's activities
and the needs of DMCs. There is evidence that ADB's involvement in projects sometimes
added value in terms of improving environmental performance at the project level. However,
such value addition varies markedly from country to country, from project to project, and in
different aspects of environmental assessment. There is also evidence that the 2002
Environment Policy has provided additional impetus to the improvement of the environmental
viii


safeguards toward greater clarity, more emphasis on assessment of project alternatives, and
improved monitoring, notwithstanding the fact that there are still major weaknesses in all these
areas. The current environmental safeguard procedures have been effective in avoiding major
significant adverse environmental impacts from ADB's programs and projects.

        However, the efficiency and sustainability of ADB's current procedures are questionable
due to the high transaction costs and limited benefits. The main cause of this is the uniform
application of a single set of procedures to all DMCs, which is no longer an effective response to
the needs of DMCs or the growing resource constraints faced by ADB. There would be merit in
revising the Environment Policy and associated procedures to address the changing situation in
DMCs. This would likely be focused on the need for greater flexibility in procedures, recognition
of the need for alignment with national systems, a shift to an emphasis on capacity building
rather than project focus, and a shift in emphasis from procedural compliance to results delivery
and cost effectiveness.

Recommendations

        The recommendations to be outlined below are more "for consideration" than "cast in
stone". Many areas require more in-depth and comprehensive assessment in the subsequent
policy update led by RSDD.

        Review of the 2002 Environment Policy and Potential Refinement. The findings of
the SES indicate that, while the principles and objectives of the Environment Policy remain valid
and relevant, the policy should be revised to better reflect current needs and resources within
DMCs and ADB. Among other things, the review of the Environment Policy should consider the
following aspects:
        (i)    refocusing efforts--from front-end loan processing and approval to a balance
               between loan processing and monitoring, implementation, and results delivery,
               and from "safeguards" to "environmental enhancement";
        (ii)   achieving better integration and alignment with national procedures;
        (iii)  broadening the focus from "the project" to "building environmental capacity"; and
        (iv)   integrating of environmental and social safeguards to provide a stronger focus on
               sustainable development.

        Strengthening Organizational Effectiveness. There is a need to study issues related
to the 2002 reorganization, particularly the need to consolidate environmental resources within
ADB. Such a consolidation should aim to strengthen technical leadership, provide stronger
multidisciplinary technical skills, and provide a clearer career path within the discipline. The
consolidation does not necessarily imply a return to the original centralized Environment
Division; the lost synergy between environmental safeguards and capacity building may be
achieved through some "intermediate" steps. The 2005 reorganization within RSDD to expand
RSES's mandate to serve the function of both an environment division (corporate home for
environment) and safeguard division is a step in this direction. Another "intermediate" step that
can be taken is to consolidate the safeguard specialists and consultants in the sector divisions
in each RD in a safeguards unit under the directors general. Consideration should also be given
to stronger integration of the social and environmental resources within ADB to encourage a
more integrated and wider view of project assessments and to build and promote a stronger
focus on sustainability. Any review of resources or structure should consider the need to
strengthen the environmental capability in resident missions. This should be a priority in those
countries where increased reliance on national systems is to be actively considered. ADB may
                                                                                                   ix


consider variable institutional setups with respect to environmental safeguard specialists for
different RDs faced with different types of environmental issues.

         Improving the Quality of ADB's Environmental Assessment Process and Lowering
Transaction Costs to Make It More Cost-Effective. The majority of the technical weaknesses
identified in the environmental assessment can be addressed through a systematic review and
update of matters such as categorization, scope, quantification, standards, and improving
technical methodologies. Three areas that need attention are (i) issues related to environmental
classification, i.e., the tendency to avoid environmentally sensitive projects, and ADB should
consider dropping its "B sensitive" category, which is unique to ADB and fuels an impression
that it is trying to avoid dealing with potential category A projects; (ii) high transaction costs of
preparing summary initial environmental examinations (SIEEs) at the subproject level for sector
and emergency loans; and (iii) the need for a new focus (as well as format) of environmental
assessment to identify the real issues, decisions, and recommendations that are useful for the
ongoing project.

        Improving the Partnership with NGOs and Civil Organizations on Environment.
The Environment Policy and its implementation are a regular focus for NGO comment. The
interest of NGOs in mitigating environmental problems has sometimes resulted in the
achievement of better development results by creating pressures for continued ADB monitoring
after project completion. Typically, ADB monitoring ceases after the project completion report is
written. ADB's requirements for public consultations are consistent with international
conventions and best practices, and are cited as a major value addition to the national
procedures in Viet Nam and the PRC. However, several potential and existing issues arising
from the public disclosure and consultation requirements need attention in the review and
update of the Environment Policy. These include (i) consideration of whether the 120-day
disclosure rule, which mandates the posting of summary environmental impact assessments for
category A projects and SIEEs for B sensitive projects on the ADB website 120 days before
Board consideration for project approval should be maintained--it seems to have few benefits
and sometimes results in adverse impacts on loan processing; (ii) improving the transparency
and independence of the environmental assessment process; and (iii) increasing reliance on
national procedures and heightened role of NGOs in monitoring and implementation.

         Moving Toward Adoption of Improved Country Systems and Harmonization with
Other Development Partners in Selected DMCs. The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness
provides strong guidance on greater harmonization between funding agencies and partner
countries on environmental assessment. Significant progress has been made in Viet Nam,
where ADB has been working with other development partners on comparing differences and
similarities of the domestic systems with those of the aid agencies and exploring possibilities to
harmonize them. ADB has been playing a lead role in these harmonization efforts in Viet Nam.
The Viet Nam experience may provide useful lessons on the framework needed to guide the
harmonization process more widely. To move towards adopting the improved country systems
in a phased and concerted manner, the DMCs may be divided into at least three groups: (i)
countries with well developed systems that embody most of the objectives and principles of
ADB's policies and with a reasonable track record in implementation, (ii) countries with semi-
developed legal/institutional/policy frameworks and some capacities for environmental
safeguards but all requiring substantial strengthening, and (iii) countries with weak systems and
capacities. The SES has identified the PRC, India, and, to a lesser extent, Philippines as the
countries in the first two categories and with the greatest opportunity for harmonization. Any
move towards adopting country systems should not be achieved through watering down ADB's
current environmental safeguard standards.
x



        Developing an Action Plan to Implement the Revised Environment Policy. ADB in
the past has adopted policies without having a clear understanding of the resources needed for
implementing the policies. The Environment Policy may be another example. It is very similar to
the corresponding World Bank policy. However, the findings of the SES suggest that in some
countries, the World Bank is better resourced, particularly in the resident missions, to implement
environmental safeguard policies. ADB, perhaps led by RSDD, should develop an action plan to
implement the revised Environment Policy, and any plan to be developed must involve an
assessment of ADB's resources at headquarters and in the field for implementing environmental
safeguards and possibly a benchmark of ADB's resources with those of the World Bank on a
country-by-country basis, adjusting for the volume and type of projects. If the analysis shows
that ADB is under resourced, the tradeoffs would need to be considered involving a combination
of actions in three areas: (i) increasing the resources within the context of ADB's overall human
resource planning; (ii) revising the policy requirements downward to bring them into line with
available resources recognizing that this might result in ADB accepting less stringent
environmental safeguards than the World Bank; and (iii) improving the cost effectiveness of
ADB's environmental safeguards through a range of measures including, but not confined to,
delegating more authority and accountability to DMCs through greater use of country systems
and third party monitoring. Alternative consequences may include an increasing number of
projects being subjected to the compliance mechanism and a growing view among civil society
that in some cases ADB does not adequately identify and mitigate environmental risks and
impacts. All these will increase reputational, if not legal, risks to ADB if the policy and procedural
requirements for environmental safeguards and resource allocation, both financial and staff, are
not aligned.




                                                              Bruce Murray
                                                              Director General
                                                              Operations Evaluation Department
                                          I.       INTRODUCTION

A.        Background

          1.      Environmental Safeguard Policy Update

1.     The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has three safeguard policies: (i) the policy on
involuntary resettlement,1 (ii) the policy on indigenous peoples,2 and (iii) the environment policy.3
Since their adoption, the three policies have, to varying degrees, guided ADB formulation and
implementation of its assistance programs, particularly its lending activities. However, the
evolving developmental context in which ADB is operating and the experience accumulated
warrant a review of the policies to enhance their effectiveness and outcome orientation,
streamline procedures, and reduce transaction costs. This review is timely because of the
recommendation within the 2002 Environment Policy that a review should be completed within 5
years of its adoption. The results of this evaluation will feed into a formal review to be
undertaken by the Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD).

2.     ADB's recent client-oriented initiatives, including consultations in the context of the
Middle Income Countries and Ordinary Capital Resources Country Partnership, and the
Innovation and Efficiency Initiative, have highlighted the desire of some of ADB's major client
countries to introduce procedural flexibility in the application of safeguard policies and to
increase country ownership/capacity in delivering safeguard outcomes. Ongoing efforts to
improve harmonization of procedures among the multilateral lending agencies and the 2005
Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness also place emphasis on the desirability of development
partners harmonizing their practices and procedures around specific country systems, including
the safeguard systems.

3.      A range of factors triggered the review of the safeguard policies. There is growing
awareness that the safeguard policies as currently written, while specific in some areas, may
lack clarity in others. The safeguard policies are also heavily procedure oriented, particularly
during loan processing and formulation, and with relatively less, and perhaps inadequate
attention paid to safeguard issues during project implementation. In addition, the policies were
mostly written in the context of ADB's traditional public sector assistance, with focus on the
infrastructure sectors. While such assistance remains one of the main pillars of ADB's
assistance programs, new instruments/modalities have been introduced. The application of the
safeguard policies to these new instruments/modalities needs to be assessed and clarified.
Some of ADB's key client countries are calling for more client-specific safeguard policies.
Nongovernment organizations (NGOs) and affected persons have monitored some ADB-
financed projects and have pointed out, sometimes forcefully, that environmental and livelihood
risks were sometimes not properly identified, and the mitigation measures were either
inadequate or not fully implemented.

4.      The updating of the three safeguard policies, led by RSDD, will cover seven areas:
(i) improving coherence and clarity, (ii) balancing procedural requirements with a focus on
implementation, (iii) responding to changing and diversified client requirements, (iv) responding
to new lending instruments and financing modalities, (v) private sector applications,
(vi) harmonization and capacity building, and (vii) country safeguard systems.

1
    ADB. 1995. Involuntary Resettlement. Manila.
2
    ADB. 1998. The Bank's Policy on Indigenous Peoples. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2002. Environment Policy of the Asian Development Bank. Manila.
2




           2.       Brief History of ADB's Environment Policies and Procedures

5.       Environmental assessments have been required for ADB-supported projects for more
than two decades. In December 1979, a Board paper entitled Environmental Consideration in
ADB Operations made specific recommendations on how a systematic approach to
environmental issues might be incorporated into ADB's operations. This was followed in 1986
by the Review of ADB's Environmental Policies and Procedures. That paper recommended,
among other things, that ADB (i) strengthen the institutions in developing member countries
(DMCs) dealing with the planning and management of the environment, together with agencies
charged with monitoring and enforcing environmental laws and regulations; (ii) review projects
and mitigate any significant environmental effects; and (iii) support projects with important
environmental benefits. The operational directions for ADB's environmental activities were
formalized in a 1987 report, Implementation of ADB's Policies and Procedures and its Future
Activities. This report outlined ADB's future activities, which included, among others,
(i) integrating environmental and natural resource planning and management into country
economic and sector work, (ii) involving NGOs in the project cycle, and (iii) paying greater
attention to ecologically sensitive areas during project formulation and processing.

6.      The 2002 Environment Policy is the latest and most comprehensive policy statement to
date of ADB's environmental compliance procedures and goals. There are five elements of the
policy, each comprising one or several specific areas of concern (Table 1).

                         Table 1: Five Elements of the 2002 Environment Policy

    Policy Element                                                  Operational Content
    1. Environment Interventions for      a. Protection, Conservation, and Sustainable Use of Natural Resources
       Poverty Reduction                  b. Environment Quality Improvement
                                          c. Reducing Vulnerability to Natural Hazards and Preventing Disasters

    2. Mainstreaming Environmental        a.    Policy Integration
       Considerations in Economic         b.    Integrated Economic and Environment Development Planning
       Growth                             c.    Strengthening Regulatory Systems and Environmental Governance
                                          d.    Market-Based Instruments and Other Policy Instruments
                                          e.    Promoting Education and Public Awareness

    3. Maintaining Global and Regional    a. Responding to Multilateral Environmental Agreements
       Life Support Systems               b. Supporting Regional and Subregional Cooperation on Environment

    4. Building Partnerships              a. Developing Partnerships with Other International Financing and
                                             Development Institutions
                                          b. Increasing Harmonization of Environment Policies and Processes

    5. Integrating Environmental          a.    Country Strategy and Program
       Considerations into ADB            b.    Lending Operations
       Operations                         c.    Public Consultation and Information Disclosure
                                          d.    Implementation, and Monitoring and Evaluation
                                          e.    Environmentally Responsible Procurement
                                           f.   Performance-Based Allocation of Asian Development Fund Resources
Source: Asian Development Bank.

7.     In 2002, as the Environment Policy was being formulated, ADB adopted fighting poverty
in the Asia and Pacific region as its overarching goal4 and undertook a major reorganization.
4
     ADB. 1999. Fighting Poverty in Asia and the Pacific: The Poverty Reduction Strategy of the Asian Development
     Bank. Manila.
                                                                                               3


Consequently, two prominent features of the Environment Policy were poverty reduction and
mainstreaming environmental considerations in ADB's operations. Organizationally, this was to
be achieved by splitting the staff of the former Environment Division into two groups. One group
was mainstreamed into the regional (operational) departments (RDs), and the other group was
assigned to the centralized Environment and Social Safeguards Division (RSES) of RSDD. The
environment specialists in the operational departments are responsible for helping client
countries and ADB operational staff in meeting the safeguard policy requirements. RSES is
responsible for assisting the operational departments in interpreting the policy requirement for
specific projects, providing operational support, and monitoring and reporting on compliance.

B.     The Operations Evaluation             Department      Independent      Assessment      of
       Environmental Safeguards

       1.     Rationale and Objective

8.      The role of the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) is to assess the results or
impact of ADB projects, programs, and policies. The ADB Board's Development Effectiveness
Committee requested OED to undertake a special evaluation study (SES) of ADB's
Environment Policy with respect to environmental safeguards. This SES was originally included
in OED's 2008 Work Program but was brought forward to 2006 to enable it to identify issues
that should be considered in RSDD's update of the Environment Policy. The objectives of the
SES are to (i) provide an independent assessment of the effectiveness of ADB's Environment
Policy with a focus on safeguards with respect to results on the ground, particularly in terms of
actual environmental impacts of ADB-supported projects and any positive "catalytic" impact of
environmental safeguards in non-ADB funded projects; and (ii) identify the key areas where
improvement is needed for ADB's environmental safeguards to achieve better developmental
results. The evaluation is designed to identify issues that need to be considered in RSDD's work
rather than to offer definitive policy prescriptions.

9.     OED's value added in the update of the 2002 Environment Policy lies in its assessment
of the results from implementing safeguard measures. Such an assessment complements
RSDD's review by addressing a series of questions related to the relevance, efficacy, efficiency,
and sustainability of ADB's environment policies and the environmental safeguard procedures
that underline such policies. The specific questions are given in the evaluation matrix (Appendix
1). Two central questions are given below:
       (i)     Has ADB's involvement in projects enhanced the environmental safeguard
               measures of DMCs? In other words, without ADB's support for the projects, how
               would DMCs implement the environmental safeguards using their own systems
               (i.e., with or without ADB involvement)?
       (ii)    Has the 2002 Environment Policy enhanced the effectiveness of environmental
               safeguard of ADB-supported projects (i.e., before and after the policy)? In
               particular, has the policy influenced how environmental safeguards and
               enhancement are integrated into the project cycle?
4




          2.       Scope of the Special Evaluation Study

10.     The scope of the evaluation goes beyond the 2002 Environment Policy to include the
environmental policies and procedures since 1993, when ADB published a set of environmental
guidelines for various types of projects. However, 2002 was regarded as a benchmark year,
when ADB undertook a reorganization and adopted its 2002 Environment Policyboth events
have had a significant impact on how environment is integrated into ADB's operations. Due to
practical constraints in terms of record keeping and institutional memories, the surveys and the
case studies have targeted those projects approved since 1997.

11.     The initial intent of the SES was to focus on environmental safeguards,5 as reflected in
the approach paper for the SES, which clearly stated that the fifth element, Integrating
Environmental Considerations into ADB Operations, was to form the focus of the SES (Table 1).
However, as the evaluation progressed, the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) realized that
environmental safeguards cannot be treated in isolation from other aspects of ADB's
environmental activities and programs, namely, environmental enhancement and capacity
building. They are related in at least two ways. One is the intrinsic linkage between "safeguards"
and "enhancement and capacity building" in that environmental safeguards may be best
achieved and sustained only if the DMCs' overall environmental quality and capacities have
been improved. In this regard, it should be clarified that even the fifth element of the
Environment Policy goes beyond "safeguard". It consists of six sub-elements: (i) country
strategy and program (CSP); (ii) lending operations; (iii) public consultation and information
disclosure; (iv) implementation, and monitoring and evaluation; (v) environmentally responsible
procurement; and (vi) performance-based allocation of Asian Development Fund resources.
CSP and the last two sub-elements on procurement and performance-based lending were
clearly intended for achieving wider development gains through better incorporating
environmental considerations into ADB's operations.

12.     The important linkage between environmental safeguard and enhancement/capacity
building is through institutional structure and synergy as well as competition for the same
financial and staff resources that can be expected from the departments/divisions that carry out
both types of activities concurrently. RSES was created as a result of the 2002 reorganization. It
was given a clear mandate and terms of reference to focus on environmental safeguards, and
the responsibilities for environmental enhancement and capacity building programs were largely
shifted to the RDs. However, the drawbacks of this structure, in the form of loss of synergy and
a focal point for environment, became increasingly evident. In 2005, another reorganization
within RSDD expanded RSES's mandate to become the corporate home for environment and to
serve the function of both an environment division and a safeguard division.

13.     In view of the intrinsic linkages between environmental safeguards, and enhancement
and capacity building, the scope of the SES was set to assess the first four sub-elements of the
fifth element of the Environment Policy. The scope has a clear focus on environmental
safeguard issues but also touches upon wider strategic and program issues as to how the
environment policies may have affected ADB's lending program and capacity building programs.

14.   With respect to country coverage, the SES is concerned with activities in all DMCs within
ADB's sphere of operations. However, four DMCs, the People's Republic of China (PRC), India,

5
    Environmental safeguards refer to both the relevant policy element, i.e., part of the fifth element of the 2002
    Environment Policy and the environmental procedures supporting the Policy.
                                                                                                            5


Philippines, and Viet Nam, were selected for more detailed country consultations and project
case studies. These countries were selected based on several considerations including existing
and potential portfolio size, the scale of environmental impact of ADB's operations, geographic
representation and proximity, and time and budget available for the evaluation. PRC and India
are two of ADB's largest and most important customers. Together they account for about 45%
of the current lending portfolio in value terms. These countries probably represent the highest
level of all ADB's DMCs in terms of the development of country environmental safeguard
systems and implementation capacities. The Philippines, even though having a smaller portfolio,
also has a relatively complete environmental safeguard system. Viet Nam was selected
because it has been used as a "model country" for developing the harmonization of national
procedures for procurement and safeguard with those of funding agencies. This is a joint
initiative by five bilateral and multilateral development partners operating in Viet Nam, viz.,
World Bank; ADB; and the Japanese, French, and German aid agencies.

15.     The SES also has a limited scope in terms of types of projects covered. The SES is
centered on category A and B projects within the ADB environmental classification system, as
these projects have the most environmental impact and trigger environmental impact
assessment (EIA) or initial environmental examination (IEE) reports. Focus has been given to
physical investment projects and the investment components of sector development programs
(SDPs) rather than policy-based lending, i.e., program loans and the policy components of
SDPs. Although policy-based lending may have environmental impacts, and environmental
assessments are required, it accounts for a relatively small proportion of the total lending, and
most direct environmental impacts of ADB's assistance programs come from investment
projects. The SES targeted mostly public sector lending: 15 of the 16 projects chosen for case
studies were public sector loans, and only one was a private sector loan. Private sector
operations at ADB have expanded significantly, including its environmental portfolio in terms of
financing of environmentally sensitive projects. Environmental issues in private sector
operations require special and separate attention. Another area that is not covered in a
substantive way in this evaluation is development finance institution (DFI) loans. In this regard,
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which has a more significant DFI loan
portfolio, has recently completed a special study to evaluate the effectiveness of achieving its
environmental mandate through financial intermediaries, which is potentially useful for ADB's
review of its environmental procedures for DFI loans.6 The Medium-Term Development Strategy
II classifies DFIs as a Group III sector meaning ADB is expected to phase out its operations in
this area.

          3.      Approaches to Evaluation

16.     Evaluations are most effective if the results are available in time to contribute to decision
making. To be useful for decision-making purposes, the results of this SES must be available by
the third quarter of 2006. This tight timeframe has dictated the "rapid assessment" nature of the
evaluation, and imposed practical constraints on the methodologies able to be used. For
example, the timeframe limited the number of country case studies that could be undertaken,
the number of projects that could be reviewed; and depth of the public consultation process. A
broader public consultation process is planned as part of the RSDD review. To try to
compensate somewhat for the latter, the Approach Paper for the evaluation was made publicly
available through OED's web page, and comments were invited. However, few substantive
comments were received.

6
    European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 2006. Achieving the Bank's Environmental Mandate through
    Financing Intermediaries. Special Study. OPER No. PE05-326S. London.
6




17.     Another consideration for the study's design was that environment policies and
safeguard issues in general are likely to be contentious, as different stakeholders have different
and often opposing views that are not easy to reconcile. In recognition of this, and given the
time and resource constraints, the SES employed several approaches to provide quantitative
and qualitative information and data on the application of environmental safeguard procedures
within ADB's operations. The range of methods used has helped to develop a broad and
balanced understanding of the issues arising from the environmental safeguard policy. In
particular, it created a common platform that will facilitate debate on the strengths and
weaknesses of the system in an open and transparent manner.

18.     The principal research questions and methods applied in the SES are outlined in the
evaluation matrix (Appendix 1). The questions and methods have focused on gaining insight
into the relevance, efficacy, and efficiency of developing and implementing the environmental
safeguard policies. The key lessons learned from the evaluation of safeguard procedures
pointed to issues that need to be addressed to improve the cost effectiveness and outcomes of
the environmental safeguard policies. A series of research questions under each criterion was
defined. The primary focus of this evaluation, as with most other results-based evaluations
conducted by OED, is on the outcomes on the ground. The policy statements and procedures
are evaluated against the key criterion of whether they have facilitated the desired outcomes.

19.     The main methodologies used in the SES included (i) desk research and review of
documents; (ii) consultations with stakeholders, including governments, executing agencies
(EAs), NGOs, and other development agencies; (iii) a questionnaire survey of ADB appraisal
mission leaders (AMLs) for selected category A and B projects approved since 1997 for all
DMCs and sectors consisting of more than 200 projects; (iv) interviews with selected directors of
ADB's sector divisions, environmental safeguard specialists, and heads of project administrative
units; and (v) project case studies comprising site visits and interviews with EAs of selected
ongoing projects with potentially significant environmental impacts (i.e., in categories A and B)
in the four DMCs selected. Meetings were held with NGOs and other development partners in
the four countries during the course of the SES. The evaluation also drew on the findings of
OED's past evaluation studies on environmental safeguards and on similar efforts by other
development agencies, particularly the World Bank.

20.     For the project case studies, several ADB-financed projects were chosen in each
country, ongoing or completed, in sectors of major ADB involvement, e.g., energy and transport.
To help establish the "without-ADB involvement" scenario and assess ADB's value addition, it
was intended that, for some ADB-supported projects, a "shadow" project in the same sector but
with different financing (e.g., domestic financing) would be selected and studied. This could not
be implemented as fully as intended, mainly due to the time constraint. However, wherever
possible, comparisons were made between ADB-financed and domestically-financed projects. A
comparison was also made between ADB's environmental safeguard policies and procedures
and international "best practices" for EIAs.

21.    The study considered the differences in outcome over time as a result of changes in
environmental safeguard procedures and organization. Differences were analyzed in terms of
inputs and outputs. Inputs were assessed in terms of percentage of category A and B loans
approved, procedural requirements and process of environmental review, and time and
resources spent on mitigation measures compared with those used for preparation and review
of the environmental assessment. Outputs assessed included the quantity and quality of the
EIAs/IEEs (including summary environmental impact assessments/summary initial
                                                                                                 7


environmental examinations [SEIAs/SIEEs]), number and amounts of technical assistance (TA)
grants and loan projects, etc. Outcomes assessed included the environmental impacts of ADB-
supported projects; the catalytic role of ADB's environmental safeguard procedures in terms of
raising and maintaining the environmental safeguard standards of the countries in general, and
improvement in the capacities of DMCs in EIA preparation and implementation.

C.     Limitations of the Evaluation

22.     While ex-post evaluations generally have deficiencies related to data availability and
methodologies, particularly for constructing a framework for assessing the counterfactual or
with- and without-intervention scenarios, this SES was constrained by the short timeframe
available for the study. This has a number of ramifications in terms of scope of the assessment,
data availability, and methodological constraints. The scope of the evaluation is limited in
several ways. In particular, the 2002 Environment Policy has five main elements, but the
evaluation is mostly directed toward the fifth element, which has a clear focus on environmental
safeguards but also touches upon wider strategic and program issues related to environmental
enhancement and capacity building. Other elements of the policy that are mostly related to
ADB's proactive environmental agenda are important but were not assessed. The time
constraint also led to the inclusion of only four DMCs for in-depth assessment, with a positive
bias in favor of larger DMCs, which often have better capacities. This is a major limitation of the
study due to the wide variability of ADB's DMCs in terms of legal and institutional framework,
capacity, and environmental issues and challenges faced. The field work undertaken for
RSDD's policy review should be structured to fill this gap by covering more countries, especially
those with weaker environmental management capacity. This additional analysis will be
necessary to test the robustness of OED findings across a wider range of countries.

23.     The SES also suffered from limited data availability and in some case biased data. The
evaluation team could not locate some of the key environmental documents such as the original
IEE or EIA reports partly due to the fact that ADB does not have a centralized filing system to
collect and retain these documents (footnote 42). The project case studies were limited by the
number of projects that were "ready" and available for review. For example, a category A project
in Viet Nam was initially chosen but later excluded because, even though it had been approved
3 years ago, implementation had not yet started. For the projects reviewed or visited, the
duration for each project visit was often not more than 2 days, including site visits. Information
obtained in such a way is inevitably superficial and has the risk of being biased in the sense that
some EAs or individuals might have chosen to present certain information and not others. The
issue of biased information and fading memories associated with passage of time may be
particularly acute for the questionnaire survey and interviews. Most of the questions asked were
related to the respondents' perceptions or opinions, which may or may not reflect the "reality."
The questionnaire survey in particular was a self-evaluation of the projects by AMLs, some of
whom may have had an incentive to present a "positive" picture, while others may have
exaggerated the negative aspects of ADB's environmental procedures, which were perceived by
many to be cumbersome and not adding value. The weaknesses associated with the limited and
rapid consultations with affected persons and civil society should be offset by the much wider
consultation process planned as part of RSDD's work.

24.     A related point is that the time and methodological constraints as well as the nature of
the study meant that the SES is not able to address all aspects of environmental safeguard and
enhancement adequately. During the course of the evaluation, there were opposing views from
different ADB departments and individuals about what the priority areas of the SES should be.
One of the conscious decisions made earlier by the OEM is that the study would focus on
8


assessing ADB's overall value addition at the outcome level rather than investigating whether
each particular mitigating measure recommended had been implemented. The latter is the task
of ADB's monitoring and review missions, including safeguard reviews, loan reviews, and
project completion missions.

25.    Despite its limitations, the SES has identified a number of major issues to be considered
in RSDD's planned policy review and update. The preliminary findings of the evaluation point to
general directions for the policy review and update and the areas where more assessment is
needed. Nevertheless, much remains to be accomplished through the RSDD policy review and
update in a number of key areas including, but not confined to, wider public consultations and
more detailed assessment of the capacities of individual countries/sectors.

II.     ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARD SYSTEMS OF ADB AND FOUR SELECTED DMCs

26.    This chapter describes and compares the key features of the environmental safeguard
systems of ADB and the four selected DMCs. ADB-supported projects in the DMCs typically
have to comply with both ADB's and the host country's environmental requirements. The
description and comparison will provide necessary background information for the ensuing
discussions and evaluation of ADB's experience with respect to environmental safeguards in the
four DMCs. Within ADB business practices and most national systems, there are four key
stages to the environmental assessment process.
       (i)     Categorization. The first stage in the process is to assign an appropriate
               environmental category or classification to the project. This reflects the
               importance of potential environmental concerns and determines the time and
               resources to be allocated for assessing the impacts and devising proper
               environmental management plans (EMPs). This is a critical step, as resources
               within ADB and the DMCs are limited and must be used to best effect.
       (ii)    Scoping. The second stage is to scope the environmental assessment and
               target it at priority issues and key decisions. Depending on the severity of
               impacts, the assessment can range from a quick qualitative assessment (typical
               of an IEE) to detailed quantification of impacts (typical of a full EIA). A common
               concern in this activity is that the scope of the assessment should be appropriate
               to the project, define future activities clearly to ensure that they will provide
               adequate and reliable information to support decisions that are targeted, helpful,
               and relevant to the project. Setting the scope of the assessment is critical in
               influencing resource requirements. It is important to appreciate that an over
               enthusiastic scope is as disadvantageous as a conservative scope, particularly in
               terms of the allocation of resources and increased costs of the safeguard system.
       (iii)   Assessment. The third stage involves undertaking the environmental
               assessment. To be useful, the assessment tasks must be supported by reliable
               data in terms of both the existing environment and the project. Timing is a key
               factor in undertaking the environmental assessment. Gathering baseline data on
               the existing environment can take extended time. Information on the project is
               essential, but often the design has not progressed in tandem with the
               assessment process.
       (iv)    Implementation and monitoring. The final stage is implementation and
               monitoring, making sure that the agreed upon environmental mitigation and
               enhancement measures are implemented effectively and that the project
               responds to any changes in the project that have further environmental effects.
                                                                                                 9


27.    Despite the commonalities, there are some important differences among these systems
at each stage. The sections below describe ADB and the four national systems, followed by a
comparison of the systems.

A.     Environmental Safeguards at ADB

28.     Environmental assessments have been required for ADB-supported projects in DMCs
for more than two decades. ADB's environmental policies and procedures have also evolved
over time to address the varying needs of its stakeholders. Following the 2002 Environment
Policy, ADB's environmental procedures were further revised and made more comprehensive
and specific. Appendix 2 presents the main changes between the old and the new procedures
as specified in ADB's Operations Manual.

29.    The 2002 Environment Policy requires that environmental considerations be
incorporated into all stages of ADB's business processes from CSP development through
project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA) and loan processing to completion and
evaluation. ADB requires the use of country environmental assessments (CEAs) to integrate
environmental concerns at the programming level. However, the coverage, format, and detail of
the CEAs vary significantly and their link to ADB operations is often not clear. During PPTA/loan
preparation, all loans are subject to environmental categorization, impact assessment,
safeguard compliance, and preparation of loan covenants. During loan implementation and
supervision, ADB loan review missions are to be undertaken to review the progress of
implementation of the mitigation and monitoring requirements outlined in EMP. During project
completion and evaluation, reports are prepared to document the actual environmental impact
and the degree of implementation of the EMP, and to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the
EMP in reducing and preventing adverse environmental impacts.

30.      The first and very important step in ADB's environmental safeguard procedures is
environmental categorization of the project. Classifying all loan projects into four environmental
categories in accordance with potential environmental impacts should help to efficiently allocate
ADB's limited resources for environmental assessment. As ADB-supported projects typically
have multiple components, the determination of the environmental category is based on the
most environmentally sensitive component of the project. ADB's environmental categories are
the following:
         (i)    Category A. Projects are categorized as "A" if they could have significant
                adverse environmental impacts. An EIA is required to address significant impacts.
         (ii)   Category B. Projects are categorized as "B" if they could have some adverse
                environmental impacts, but of lesser degree or significance than those for
                category A projects. An IEE is required to determine whether significant
                environmental impacts warranting an EIA are likely. If the EIA is not needed, the
                IEE is regarded as the final environmental assessment report.
         (iii)  Category C. Projects are categorized as "C" if they are unlikely to have adverse
                environmental impacts. No EIA or IEE is required, although environmental
                implications are still reviewed.
         (iv)   Category FI. Projects are categorized as "FI" if they involve a credit line through
                a financial intermediary or an equity investment in a financial intermediary. The
                financial intermediary must apply an environmental management system unless
                all subprojects will result in insignificant impacts.

31.    In recent years, ADB has made a subcategory in category B, viz., B sensitive. Although
both the 1997 and 2003 operations manuals have offered descriptions of the B sensitive
10


subcategory, it is not well defined, particularly with respect to distinctions between category A
and B sensitive (Appendix 2).7 However, it has gained increasing usage to characterize those
category B projects with "sensitive" environmental issues. Some procedural requirements for B
sensitive projects are similar to those for category A projects except that an IEE, not a full EIA,
is required for B sensitive projects.

32.     The environmental assessment requirements depend on the environmental category.
Category A projects have the most stringent requirements and need the highest level of effort
and resources; category B has less stringent requirements, and category C has minimum
requirements. Figure 1 illustrates the environmental assessment and review process for
category A projects. While there are requirements at all stages of the project cycle, from
predesign, to project design, loan processing, and implementation, from the diagram it is clear
that the procedural requirements are "front heavy" in that most of the requirements are
frontloaded during project design and loan processing.

33.     Several key documents are generated in the process. During project design, EIAs and
SEIAs, including an EMP, are produced, which form the basis for all related documentation.
One of the more important documents during loan processing is the safeguard policy
compliance (SPC) memo, to be signed off by the chief compliance officer. The SPC memo is
issued to guide the RDs and Management on outstanding compliance issues that need to be
addressed before appraisal or loan negotiation. Several additional documents are produced
before and after Board approval, including environmental loan covenants, which specify the
specific measures to be taken by the EAs for environmental mitigation and monitoring, and the
project administration memorandum. Generally, however, the level of attention to environmental
matters diminishes rapidly once the project is approved and implementation starts. ADB relies
heavily on the implementation and monitoring of the EMP by the EAs. ADB's inputs at this stage
are mostly confined to loan review missions and reviewing progress reports. Environment
monitoring is but a small part of the overall reporting and documentation during loan
administration and is often not undertaken by environment specialists.

34.     An important step during loan processing is the disclosure of the SEIA to the public
through ADB's website. As indicated in Appendix 2, both the old (1997) and new (2003)
procedures require that the SEIA for category A projects and the SIEE for B sensitive projects
be circulated to the Board and the general public at least 120 days before Board approval of the
project. The 2003 procedures have very specific requirements on public consultations. For
category A and B projects, the borrower must consult with groups affected by the proposed
project and local NGOs as early as possible. For category A projects, such consultations must
occur at least twice, i.e., once during the early stages of EIA field work, and once when the draft
EIA is available.

35.     The Compliance Review Panel (CRP) under the ADB Board provides a key
accountability mechanism to ADB's safeguard procedures by conducting inspections of projects
in response to alleged violations of the safeguard policies. The need for CRP is justified by the
fact that ADB's lack of, or inadequate, monitoring during project implementation contributed to
exposure of ADB to various implementation-related risks, both legal and moral in nature. Even
with CRP, staff accountability for such risks has been weak in the sense that staff's promotion

7
    The 1997 OM20 defined B sensitive projects as Category B projects that involve deforestation or loss of
    biodiversity; involuntary resettlement issues; processing, handling, and disposal of toxic and hazardous
    substances; or other activities that are likely to be of interest to a wide external group of persons. The 2003 OM20
    further specified that B sensitive projects are subject to the 120-day disclosure rule and an EMP is required.
                                                                                          11


and compensation are rarely linked to the actual performance of projects, including
environmental and social performance. One reason is that there is a significant time lag
between loan approval and the follow up of specific incidents of noncompliance. However, it
needs to be recognized that there is another side to these issues: The compliance mechanism
may have provided a perverse incentive for staff to avoid environmentally sensitive projects.
                                     Figure 1: Environmental Assessment and Review of Category A Projects




                                                                                                                                                                                 12
          Project Cycle                                 Environmental Process Steps                                       Consultation and Documentation
      PPTA/Loan Processing


    Pre Design                                         Environmental Categorization                               Environmental Categorization
                                                                                                                  REA Checklist
                                                         Terms of Reference for EA
                                                                                                                                                       Public
                                                                                                                                                     Consultation


    Project Design                                       Environmental Assessment                                 EIA and SEIA Reports
                                                                                                                         Environmental Management Plan
                                                      Review of EIA and SEIA Reports
                                                                                                                                           Implementation
                                                  Preparation of Implementation Manual                                                     Manual



    Loan Processing                                     SEIA Circulated to ADB Board
                                                                                                                                     RRP
                                                        SEIA Disclosed to the Public                                                   Environment Section



                                                        Environmental Review of RRP
                                                                                                                                     SPC Memo
                                                                                                                                     (prior to MRM)
                                                   Environmental Category Reconfirmation


                                                Preparation of Safeguard Compliance Memo                                             Loan Agreements

                                                  Preparation of Environmental Covenants


                                                               Board Approval



   Implementation
                                                  Review of Environmental Management Plan                         Project Administration           Revised
                                                               Implementation                                     Memorandum                       Environmental
       See Flowchart                                                                                                                               Management Plan
       EA Procedures
       Changes in Scope        Yes
                                                               Change in Scope?                                        Progress, BTOR and Mission Reports


ADB = Asian Development Bank, BTOR = back-to-office report, EIA = environmental impact assessment, EA = executing agency, MRM = Management Review Meeting, PPTA = project
preparatory technical assistance, REA = rapid environment assessment, RRP = report and recommendations of the President, SEIA = summary environmental impact assessment, SPC =
safeguard policy compliance.
                                                                                              13


B.     Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of the Philippines

36.     Eleven laws and provisions instituted the implementation of the environmental impact
statement (EIS) system for development projects in the Philippines. In determining the scope of
the EIS, two factors are considered: (i) the nature of the project and its potential to cause
significant negative environmental impacts, and (ii) the sensitivity or vulnerability of
environmental resources in the project area.

37.     Like the ADB system, the Philippine safeguard system classifies projects into four main
categories in accordance with their potential environmental impact, even though there are
differences between the two sets of categories. The Philippine categories include:
        (i)    Category A. Environmentally critical projects (ECPs) with significant potential to
               cause negative environmental impacts. Projects under this category are required
               to secure an environmental compliance certificate (ECC) and to submit an EIS.
        (ii)   Category B. Projects that are not recognized as ECPs but that may cause
               negative environmental impacts because they are located in an environmentally
               critical area (ECA). Projects under this category are required to secure an ECC
               and to submit an IEE.
        (iii)  Category C. Projects intended to directly enhance environmental quality or
               address existing environmental problem; not falling under category A or B.
               Projects under this category are required to secure an ECC and to submit a
               project description.
        (iv)   Category D. Projects unlikely to cause adverse environmental impacts. Projects
               under this category are required to secure a certificate of noncoverage and to
               submit a project description.

38.     The Philippine system is comprehensive and tailored to its own needs. For example,
recognizing the Philippines' geological conditions, the Government recently introduced a new
regulation that requires all development projects to produce an engineering, geological, and
geohazard assessment report as an additional requirement to the ECC application to minimize
potential landslide risks and ensure the safety of residents.

39.    A 1996 regulation stipulated that "The EIS/IEE may be prepared by the proponent's
technical staff or a professional group commissioned by the proponent, provided that only
EIS/IEE preparers duly accredited by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR) in accordance with its accreditation procedures shall be allowed to actually prepare the
EIS/IEE." This system was abolished in 2001. However, there are plans to reestablish an
accreditation program through training institutions.

40.    All projects covered by the EIS system and issued ECCs are subject to periodic
monitoring by DENR. As a minimum requirement in compliance monitoring, the activities to be
monitored by DENR and the proponent correspond to the conditions provided in the ECC.
Additional monitoring includes compliance with the EMP as provided in the EIS and its
modifications as approved by the Environment Management Bureau or the summary matrix of
impacts in an IEE. A multipartite monitoring team is to be organized immediately after the
issuance of an ECC pursuant to an EIS. The team is principally tasked to undertake monitoring
of compliance with the ECC conditions; the EMP; and applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
14


C.       Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of India

41.      The responsibility of the Government of India to protect and improve the environment is
enshrined in the Constitution under the 42nd amendment, adopted in January 1977. The
Environment (Protection) Act of 1986 provides umbrella legislation for the protection of the
environment, established through various preceding laws with responsibility to administer the
legislation jointly entrusted to the central Ministry of Environment and Forests Conservation
(MOEF) and the State Pollution Control Board, coordinated by the Central Pollution Control
Board (CPCB). In addition, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act of 1981, Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act of 1974, Environmental Impact Assessment Act of
1994, Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 as well as various earlier acts all provide for some level of
regulation and control. In addition to legal acts, relevant policy statements include the National
Water Policy, 1987; National Conservation Strategy and Policy Statement on Environment and
Development, 1992; and Policy Statement for Abatement of Pollution, 1992.

42.     The proponent of a new project or of modernization (rehabilitation) of an existing project
may need to undertake an EIA/EMP and apply to the Impact Assessment Agency (IAA) of
MOEF for clearance. The application includes an EIA report; an EMP; and, for some projects
with potentially significant adverse impact on the environment and people, details of public
hearings,8 prepared in accordance with the guidelines issued by MOEF. The project proponent,
IAA, and CPCB (which serves as a field formation and provides technical services to MOEF)9
and its state level counterparts are to monitor the implementation of conditions stipulated in the
environment clearance.

43.     Only projects meeting certain screening criteria are required to have environmental
clearance. The criteria are defined by either sector (types of projects) or amount of investment,
which are independent of each other. With respect to the sector criteria, a total of 30 types of
projects/activities10 require environmental clearance. Environmental clearance is required if a
proposed investment is more than Rs1 billion for a new project and more than Rs500 million for
an expansion or modernization project, even though the project may not fall into the listed
30 types of projects.

44.     Unlike ADB and the other three countries included for this review, India does not have
an explicit environmental classification system. Rather, distinction is made in terms of types of
EIAs, i.e., a comprehensive EIA or a rapid EIA, depending on the anticipated impacts of the
proposed projects. The difference between the two lies mainly in requirements of the time-scale
of the data supplied. While both types of EIA require inclusion of all significant environmental
impacts and their mitigation, rapid EIA achieves this through the collection of "one-season" (other
than monsoon) data only to reduce the time required. This is acceptable if it does not compromise
the quality of decision making. The related guidelines do not specify what types of projects are
eligible for rapid EIA. Rather, the decision is left to the reviewer of the rapid EIA submissions,

8
   Public hearings are not required for (i) small-scale industrial undertakings located in (a) notified/designated
   industrial areas/industrial estates, or (b) areas earmarked for industries under the jurisdiction of industrial
   development authorities; (ii) widening and strengthening of highways; (iii) mining projects (major minerals) with
   lease area up to 25 hectares; (iv) units located in export processing zones or special economic zones; and
   (v) rehabilitation of existing irrigation projects.
9
   The principal functions of CPCB are (i) to promote cleanliness of streams and wells in different areas of the states
   by prevention, control, and abatement of water pollution; and (ii) to improve the quality of air and to prevent,
   control, or abate air pollution in the country.
10
   The 30 types of projects/activities include nuclear power and related projects, river valley projects including
   hydropower, major irrigation, and their combinations including flood control, ports and airports (except minor ports
   and harbors), highway projects, and a series of industrial projects.
                                                                                                                     15


who will decide whether a comprehensive EIA is warranted or not. The project proponent may
submit a rapid EIA first, followed by a comprehensive EIA if requested by IAA.

45.     Besides the sector classification, some projects require separate site clearance from
MOEF. These include mining, pit-head thermal power stations, hydropower, major irrigation
projects and/or their combinations, including flood control, and ports and harbors (excluding
minor ports). Separate guidelines have been developed for river valley, thermal power plants,
mining, railroads and highways, ports and harbors, and new townships, indicating specific
issues to be addressed in the environmental assessment. Consideration of alternatives is
mandated. For industrial projects, analysis of alternative technological processes is also
required. The geographical scope of EIA is defined as 20 kilometers (km) radius for industrial
projects and 7 km radius for other projects. On monitoring, semiannual compliance reports are
required to be prepared by project proponents and submitted to CPCB.

46.     In terms of institutional framework for environmental safeguards and its capacities, India
is one of the stronger countries among ADB's DMCs in terms of its engineering and EIA
capacities. However, the monitoring mechanism is relatively weak. The pollution control boards
at both the central and state level are poorly equipped and lack necessary expertise, particularly
in some specialized impact assessment fields.

D.         Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of the PRC

47.    The Environmental Protection Law is the main law for environmental protection in the
PRC. It includes the basic principles for coordinated development between economic
improvement, social progress, and environmental protection, and defines the rights and duties
of government at all levels and of individuals in society in regard to environmental protection.
There are also several special laws on environmental protection as well as laws on natural
resources, including those on EIA, Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, Prevention and
Control of Air Pollution, and Prevention and Control of Environmental Pollution by Solid Wastes.
In addition, the government has enacted more than 30 administrative decrees regarding
environmental protection.

48.     The Environmental Impact Assessment Law (EIA Law, 2003) clarifies environmental
requirements associated with project development. EIA refers to the analysis, projection, and
evaluation of potential environmental impacts caused by the implementation of a plan or an
investment project. The assessment must propose measures and countermeasures to prevent
or mitigate adverse environmental impacts, and suggest methods to carry out project impact
monitoring.

49.     Depending on the anticipated severity of environmental impact of a proposed investment
project, there are three possible levels of analysis and reporting.11
        (i)     Category A. Where the potential impact is substantial, a comprehensive EIA
                report is required. The developer must hold a public hearing or seek comments
                and suggestions from experts and the public before submitting the environmental
                impact statements for approval. Government approval or disapproval must be
                issued within 60 days.



11
     Detailed criteria for project environmental classification is prepared, published, updated periodically by the State
     Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA).
16


       (ii)    Category B. Where moderate or minor environmental impacts are expected, the
               law requires completion of an EIA form. Government approval or disapproval
               must be issued within 30 days.
       (iii)   Category C. For projects with minimal environmental impact, the EIA Law
               requires completion of an environmental impact registration form for which
               government approval or disapproval is issued within 15 days.

50.      The comprehensive EIA report or EIA form for each project should be prepared by the
certified EIA institutions, which may be research/design institutes, companies, or universities.
They should obtain EIA certificates from the State Environmental Protection Administration
(SEPA) or provincial environmental protection bureau (EPB) for different certification levels,
which will qualify them to conduct EIAs for designated types and scales of projects. Presently
973 organizations have been certified to prepare EIAs, including 201 organizations with class A
certificates and 772 with class B certificates.

51.     In terms of EIA reviewing and approving authorities, SEPA is responsible for major
projects of national importance, including nuclear facilities, projects impacting more than one
province, and projects that require review and approval by the State Council or ministries. Local
EPBs are responsible for review and approval of all other projects. The proponent is required to
resubmit the EIA documents for reapproval if any major changes occur in the nature, scale, site,
production process, or pollution control measures of the proposed project. The proponent must
resubmit the EIA documents for reexamination if project implementation does not commence
within 5 years of the initial document approval. The environmental protection bodies including
SEPA and the EPBs are required to monitor the actual environmental impact during project
implementation and operation, and, as appropriate, to report on causes and liabilities of
environmental and ecological incidents, particularly major catastrophes.

52.    The PRC system is continuing to evolve, with new regulations and innovations regularly
added to the existing structure. Two databases have been developed, one for basic data for EIA
and the other for EIA experts. A significant development in 2006 was the adoption of the Interim
Guidelines for Public Participation in EIA, which mandates information disclosure and public
involvement in the EIA process. While so far public participation has always been considered a
weak link in the PRC environmental safeguard system, the Guidelines have brought the PRC
system one step closer to international best practices.

E.     Key Features of the Environmental Safeguard System of Viet Nam

53.     Viet Nam has a number of laws and decrees that form the legal basis of its
environmental safeguard system. The most important piece of environmental legislation is the
Law on Environment Protection (LEP), which was first promulgated in 1993. A new LEP was
passed by the National Assembly in November 2005 and will come into force in July 2006. The
new LEP aims to both broaden and deepen the scope of environmental management in Viet
Nam. Key areas of improvement include integration of measures to bring Viet Nam in line with
its international environmental agreements and requirements for access to environmental
information by the public.

54.    The institutional framework for the environmental safeguard system has evolved over
the years. A significant change was the establishment of the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment (MoNRE) in 2002. Prior to the establishment of MoNRE, many environmental
issues were part of the mandate of the then Ministry of Science, Technology, and Environment.
The creation of MoNRE was heralded by the government as a major milestone, because the
                                                                                                17


new ministry raised the profile and authority of environmental management in Viet Nam.
However, the capacities of MoNRE remain weak relative to its mandate and scope of work. For
example, there are only 12 people at the central level responsible for EIA appraisal. MoNRE is
supplemented and supported by the departments of natural resources and environment
(DoNREs) at the provincial level, which have been recently established in each of the nation's
provinces and all four urban areas under central government management.

55.    Projects are classified into environmental categories in accordance with their potential
environmental impact, i.e., A, B, and C. The responsibilities of reviewing the EIAs are divided
between MoNRE and the DoNREs, with projects larger than $10 million, which are subject to
the National Assembly's approval, requiring environmental clearance by MoNRE.

56.      Viet Nam has embarked upon a major effort, through working with its key development
partners and funding agencies active in the country, toward harmonization and simplification of
procedures for planning, design, implementing, and monitoring and evaluating externally funded
projects. This is best exemplified by the Hanoi Core Statement on Aid Effectiveness, which,
among others, commits the Government and the key development partners to align their
development strategies and to use strengthened country systems. Specifically, by 2010, 100%
of EIAs and social impact assessments under externally funded projects must be implemented
to international standards, with at least 30% of these carried out using government systems.
However, considerable gaps exist between Viet Nam's environmental safeguard system and
those of the development partners. Two key differences are (i) timing of the preparation of EIA
under the national system, typically conducted at the detailed design stage or, in some cases,
even after the construction activities have started, being too late to influence the decision on
project approval or disapproval; and (ii) insufficient attention by the government system to public
awareness and consultations. Although the new LEP will start to address both of these gaps, its
full enforcement is likely to take time, and the aforementioned 2010 goals may not be realistic.

F.     Summary and Comparisons

57.      There are similarities and differences among the environmental safeguard systems of
ADB and the four selected DMCs. The first similarity is that all of them employ an environmental
classification scheme that helps determine the amount of resources to be used for
environmental assessment. However, the specific categories and criteria vary considerably. The
Philippines, for example, has designated a category for directly enhancing environmental quality
or addressing existing environmental problems. India, on the other hand, does not have an
explicit distinction between category A and B. Rather, distinctions are made between the types
of EIA required, i.e., rapid or comprehensive EIA. The PRC appears to have the most stringent
environmental classification system in that projects with "substantial" adverse impacts are
classified as A, while category B is used for those projects with "moderate or minor"
environmental impacts expected. Under such criteria, most infrastructure projects, either
greenfield or rehabilitation, are classified as category A. Compared with the other three
countries, Viet Nam has the least developed environmental classification system, for which
criteria are not clearly defined.

58.     The differences in criteria for environmental classification are an important cause for the
seemingly non-uniform treatment of ADB-supported projects in different countries. The wording
of the criteria is invariably "vague" and subject to interpretations. The World Bank has tried to
18


make its classification criteria more specific to minimize the chances for misclassification.12 This
issue will be further discussed in the ensuing chapters. On a more general note, while a detailed
comparison of the ADB and the World Bank environmental safeguard system is beyond the
scope of the SES, and it is understood that the two systems are broadly similar, there are
important differences, such as the classification criteria for environmental categorization and the
way that the 120 day disclosure rule is being applied (para. 220). The institutional mechanisms
and capacities for implementing the safeguards policy and procedures are also different.

59.      Another important lesson from this comparative analysis of the environmental safeguard
systems of ADB and the four DMCs is that all the selected DMCs except Viet Nam have a well
developed environmental safeguard system with strong legal basis that are designed to meet
the specific demands of the respective countries. However, monitoring and implementation
appears to be a relatively weak link in the national systems examined. However, the same
criticism also applies to ADB's environmental safeguard system. Much less attention is paid to
monitoring and implementation compared with the front-end requirements during project
preparation.

                              III.     DATA GATHERING AND ANALYSIS

60.     The SES used several data gathering approaches including document review and desk
research, questionnaire survey and personal interviews with ADB staff, and country consultation
and case studies. Each particular methodology is constrained in its own way. The use of
multiple methodologies has been employed to supplement each method with respect to
covering different stakeholders and different stages of the project cycle, as well as soliciting
both quantitative and qualitative information and assessment, in order to derive a broad
understanding of the issues from a wide range of perceptions.

A.       Document Review and Desk Research

61.    Document review and desk research included a review of ADB's strategy and policy
papers, including the Environment Policy, Poverty Reduction Strategy, and Long-Term Strategic
Framework, and various versions of environmental assessment guidelines (1993 and 2003). For
selected countries and projects used for case studies, the following materials were also
reviewed: reports and recommendations of the President, SEIAs or SIEEs, CEAs, 13 CSPs,
comments made by RSES and the former Environment Division on SEIAs/SIEEs, back-to-office
reports (BTORs) of environmental safeguard review missions conducted by RSES staff, project
completion reports (PCRs), project performance evaluation reports (PPERs) and other
evaluation studies, and other related internal and external documents.

62.      The findings from the document review were used to guide other data-gathering
activities (the questionnaire survey, interviews, and country case studies) and also provided
information on the quality and quantity of ADB's inputs during project preparation and
implementation. Findings from the review are presented in Chapter IV. ADB's documentation of

12
   The World Bank defines category A projects as "likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are
   sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. These impacts may affect an area broader than the sites or facilities subject
   to physical works." Category B projects are defined as "having potential adverse impacts on human populations or
   environmentally important areas ­ including wetlands, forests, grassland, and other natural habitats ­ which are
   less adverse than those of category A projects. These impacts are site-specific; few if any of them are irreversible;
   and in most cases mitigating measures can be designed more readily than category A projects."
13
   CEAs are available only for Philippines and Viet Nam. The CEAs for PRC and India are still being produced and
   are expected to be completed in 2007, which will feed into the preparation of the next CSP papers.
                                                                                                                   19


environmental procedures has covered all stages of the project cycle starting at the policy and
strategic level, to country programming, project formulation and design, and monitoring during
implementation. However, ADB does not have a centralized filing system that collects and
keeps the original IEE or EIA reports, which makes locating such files by both internal and
external users difficult. A better way must be found to store and retrieve such key documents as
part of ADB's knowledge management processes.14

B.       Questionnaire Survey of Appraisal Mission Leaders

63.    AMLs are in the front line of ADB's environmental safeguard procedures for its projects.
Mission leaders are central to how effectively the environment is considered and integrated
during project conception, design, and formulation and are a key influence on how
environmental measures are implemented and their outcomes. The questionnaire survey was
designed to capture the perceptions and experiences of mission leaders with respect to the cost
and effectiveness of ADB's environmental safeguard policies and procedures and their
implementation.

64.     The questionnaire was tested within ADB and, after being refined, was distributed to
mission leaders via the ADB's intranet. The questionnaire was designed to assess projects
approved since 1997. Projects approved prior to this were affected by poor record keeping and
fading institutional memories (as many mission leaders had retired or otherwise left ADB). The
survey covered all 220 category A and B public sector loans completed over the period except
for private sector projects and program loans. 15 One hundred forty-seven (147) completed
questionnaires were received, giving a response rate of 67%.16

65.     Detailed survey results are presented in Appendix 3. The survey was an opportunity for
"self-evaluation" by AMLs on the costs and effectiveness of environmental safeguards in the
projects they appraised. Where possible, the survey results have been considered in
association with other information such as country case studies and review of documents to
provide a more complete and accurate picture.

66.      While only 14% of ADB's AMLs received any environment-related training, most of them
were confident that their project teams had adequate environmental expertise via inclusion of
environmental specialists or consultants. The lack of environmental expertise by the mission
leaders may partly determine their relatively low expectations from the environmental
assessment process. The survey investigated, among others, perceptions of the benefits of the
IEE/EIA process. Most AMLs had a positive perception, with 44% of respondents indicating that
the environmental assessment process was "useful." The perceived benefits included the
identification and response to potential environmental issues and improved quality of project
implementation without major changes to planning and design. A further 12% indicated that it
was "very useful," leading to changes in design and a better project. One third (33%) were
neutral, while about 11% believed it was "not useful" in that it did not identify important issues


14
   In comparison, the World Bank scans all the IEE or EIA reports for its projects and discloses them on the Internet.
15
   Private sector loans were excluded from the survey mainly because the appraisal process is different from that of
   public sector loans. However, the number of ADB's private sector projects is growing rapidly. During 2002, the total
   number of category A projects from the Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) exceeded the total number
   of category A projects from all the public sector departments combined. The case studies include a private sector
   project. Program loans were excluded from the survey, since the impact assessment and monitoring procedures
   for program loans are very different from those for project loans.
16
   The 220 projects were processed by 130 mission leaders, averaging 1.7 projects per person.
20


and was just a procedural requirement, or "negative" in that it served to complicate issues and
increased delays and costs of the project.

67.     The main output during loan processing, as part of the PPTA, is a SEIA for category A
projects and a SIEE for category B projects, based on the EIA or IEE prepared by the borrower
if they are available. The survey found that a prior EIA or IEE was available for about a quarter
(23%) of the projects. Of those projects with prior EIAs/IEEs, about half were from the PRC and
another 18% were from India. The average time spent by PPTA consultants on environmental
assessment was 3.4 person-months for SEIAs and 2.6 person-months for SIEEs. The time
allocated for SEIAs does not appear to be significantly higher than that for SIEEs. This is
surprising, as SEIAs are intended to be considerably more comprehensive than SIEEs. The
answer lies partly in the breakdown of the category A projects by country. The PRC accounted
for nearly half of the category A projects for which there were estimates of the time allocation,
and all of them had prior EIAs. It was, therefore, possible to draw heavily from the national EIA
to prepare the SEIA. The average time input by ADB's PPTA consultants for the preparation of
the PRC SEIAs was 2.4 person-months, which is even lower than the average for preparing
SIEEs (2.6 person-months) for all category B projects.

68.     The majority of respondents felt that ADB has provided important added value in terms
of "assessing the adverse impacts of ADB-supported projects and devising mitigating
measures" (73%) and "implementing the mitigating measures and monitoring the environmental
impact during implementation and operation" (61%). Clearly, the perception is that ADB's value
added is greater during processing than implementation. The survey identified some major
issues facing ADB's environmental safeguard policies and procedures that have adversely
affected their effectiveness. First, there is a mismatch between ADB's environmental safeguard
policies and the resources available to achieve the desired policy outcome. Second, within the
limited resources available, far more resources have been allocated for environmental
safeguard procedures during loan processing than for monitoring and solving problems during
implementation or in the post-construction phase. Third, the IEE/EIA process is more procedural
compliance driven than results based. This has led to relatively uniform attention paid to all
projects (with the exception of a few highly sensitive ones). This has resulted in high transaction
costs for some EAs, particularly for small and routine projects or subprojects, rather than
focusing ADB's efforts on projects with significant environmental risks and impacts. Finally,
ADB's inputs and value added to the environmental assessment process is limited for large
client countries including the PRC and India due, in part, to the application of uniform
procedures to all countries.

69.     The survey sought suggestions on how ADB should improve the effectiveness of its
environmental safeguards through addressing the major issues identified above. Many
respondents pointed to the desirability of adopting country-specific environmental safeguard
procedures while taking into account the realities and the capacities of the EAs as a potentially
effective measure. When asked if ADB could have adopted the environmental safeguard system
of the country and achieved satisfactory results for the project, 82 (56%) felt it was possible to
do so, with or without additional efforts by ADB to improve monitoring and enforcement and
perhaps with an accreditation system in place. In terms of the preparedness of countries to
adopt national systems, of the four countries selected for case studies, the Philippines received
the highest confidence (4 of 4 projects; 100%), followed by the PRC (17 of 21 projects; 81%),
India (10 of 14 projects; 71%), and Viet Nam (3 of 9 projects; 33%).

70.   Some of the comments received are included below to provide a flavor of the responses.
The themes reflected include the need for more specialist resources, greater focus on
                                                                                             21


implementation, issues of timing, focusing effort on the projects with potentially major adverse
environmental impacts, and increasing flexibility in the application of the environmental
safeguard procedures. These themes reflect many of the principal findings of the SES and are
addressed in Chapters IV and V in more detail:
       (i)    "ADB can improve the effectiveness by being serious about environmental
              staffing: reinstate the Environment Division, staff it with 10­20 specialists by
              hiring qualified staff with substantial field experience."
       (ii)   "We have adequate procedures in place during processing. What is needed is
              more resources and support for monitoring environmental safeguard during
              project implementation."
       (iii)  "On the procedural requirements, it would be beneficial if the 120-day circulation
              rule could be reduced to, say, 45 days. This would allow more time to prepare
              and complete the EIA and the SEIA."
       (iv)   "The policy does not allow resources to be focused on projects that have major
              impacts/risks. Meeting policy requirements for projects with marginal or routine
              impacts requires significant resources for limited returns, whereas complex
              projects are starved of resources."
       (v)    "The procedure should be flexible and basically should follow each country's
              procedures as long as the objectives of environmental safeguard can be
              achieved. Each country has different approval procedures. There may be a gap
              between the ideal procedures and the country procedures. Then, ADB should
              provide advice and support to fill the gap, but should not be lazy with just
              imposing ADB's procedure. This is where ADB can provide value addition to
              DMCs."

C.     Interviews with Other ADB Staff and Nongovernment Organizations

71.     Apart from AMLs, several other stakeholders within ADB have interest and involvement
in the review of environmental safeguards. Personal interviews were conducted with a sample
from each key stakeholder group.

       1.     Environmental Safeguard Specialists

72.    Ten environmental safeguard specialists were interviewed, comprising six in the RDs
and four in RSES. There was also informal communication with several other environmental
safeguard specialists regarding the evaluation and the cost-effectiveness of ADB environmental
safeguard procedures. Several trends emerged from these interviews:
       (i)    There have been some important benefits from "mainstreaming" the
              environmental safeguard specialists into RDs, centering on better access to
              environmental knowledge by project staff.
       (ii)   Virtually all the effort of safeguard specialists in RDs has been directed to
              upstream or loan processing activities through joining fact-finding and/or
              appraisal missions. None of the environmental specialists interviewed had
              conducted a separate environmental compliance review mission, although some
              had joined loan review missions to monitor environmental compliance for
              ongoing or completed projects.
       (iii)  Some interviewees suggested that, as ADB does not have clear definitions of
              different environmental categories, the determination of environmental categories
              for projects can sometimes reflect issues like pressure to meet end-of-the-year
              loan-processing deadlines.
22


       (iv)    Several safeguard specialists in the RDs interviewed felt that mainstreaming can
               also mean marginalization in terms of the specialists' career development and
               their impact on improvement of project quality. This follows from the clear priority
               of the RDs to progress loan programs. Proven experience as a mission leader
               has a significant influence on career advancement in RDs. On the other hand,
               the terms of reference for the environment specialist are so rigid and focused on
               safeguards that one interviewee suggested that even what was conventionally
               considered as an environmental improvement project in his division was led by a
               poverty reduction specialist, and the environment specialist could participate only
               as a safeguard specialist. This practice not only limits the career development of
               environment specialists, but also results in low client satisfaction due to the poor
               knowledge base of the mission leader in the environmental field.

73.     The safeguard specialists in RSES commented on different issues that can hinder the
effectiveness of their work. Their main challenge appears to stem from the fact that RSES, as
an independent compliance advisor, has been detached from operations and is, in principle,
barred from joining loan processing and review missions. Although RSES has been conducting
operations support missions, these are on a special request basis. RSES has no budget for
these missions, and the expenses are covered by the RDs that request the service. As a result,
RSES' main inputs during project processing are confined to reviewing and commenting on
environment-related project documents including SIEEs/SEIAs. The lack of access to first-hand
information on projects through site visits and joining project missions can handicap the ability of
the specialists to provide effective and practical comments and inputs that add value. This
problem is accentuated because some of the safeguard specialists do not have project
processing experience.

74.     This view is held despite the fact that on average each environmental safeguard
specialist in RSES conducts two safeguard review missions of selected ongoing projects per
year. The safeguard review missions have provided a valuable and much needed field level
exposure for RSES on environmental management and compliance with loan covenants on
environmental mitigation. However, because of the relatively small number of such review
missions and their limited scope (with a clear focus on procedural compliance), the impact of the
review missions may be moderate in terms of improving results on the ground. Recognizing this
situation, RSES has recently started to conduct operations support missions.

75.     Compared with their counterparts in RDs, the safeguard specialists in RSES may not
face the same marginalization in terms of career development. However, comments were made
on a loss of critical mass compared with the former Environment Division. RSES currently has
seven environment specialists (including the director), which is about half the number of
environment specialists that the former Environment Division had. As the name of the division,
Environment and Social Safeguards Division, suggests, at least half of the staff resources are
directed to safeguard-related activities. There was also a view that the synergy between serving
as ADB's focal point for environmental assistance to DMCs, as the former Environment Division
did, the environmental safeguard function has been lost. This view was echoed in interviews
with client agencies during country studies (Section D and Appendix 4).
                                                                                                                     23




           2.       Sector Division Directors

76.     The sector division directors play an important role in the effectiveness of ADB's
environmental safeguard procedures in two aspects: (i) through direct participation in designing
projects based on environmental considerations, and (ii) through allocation of staff resources
during project processing and implementation to address environmental issues. Eight sector
division directors were interviewed, including two from country coordination divisions. While the
directors interviewed were generally environmentally minded, there were clear differences in
terms of the level of awareness, concern, and response among them. For all sector division
directors, the operational priority is loan processing. "Environment" for many directors means
"safeguards," i.e., to do what is necessary to comply with ADB's safeguard policies and
procedures rather than actively looking for opportunities to improve the environment. To be
compliant, some acknowledged that they had explicitly sought projects or subprojects with
minimal environmental risks for ADB financing and tended to avoid those that presented
substantial risks and/or might require a longer time for loan processing and approval. This trend
appears to be particularly evident in India, where ADB financed only one category A public
sector project between 1997 and 2005 compared with 43 category B projects during the same
period.

77.     Since 2005, ADB has taken on an increasing number of category A projects in its private
sector operations. In an interview, the Director of the Infrastructure Finance Division of PSOD
indicated that in 2005 the number of category A projects from PSOD, i.e., about 10, exceeded
the number of category A projects for all public sector loans combined, and 2006 is continuing
with the same trend.17 Despite this trend, ADB's safeguard policy and procedures have been
primarily public sector oriented. PSOD does not have any environment specialists on its staff
and relies entirely on environmental consultants.

78.     Nearly all directors acknowledged that they find it difficult to evaluate the performance of
an environmental safeguard specialist against other sector specialists in their division. Some
directors commented that, given the constraints in budget and quota for higher level positions
(levels 5 and 6), priority for promotion should be given to sector specialists rather than
safeguard specialists. Several directors mentioned the difficulty of recruiting lower level
environmental safeguard specialists and retaining them. As a result, they often rely on
appointment of long-term environmental safeguard consultants.

           3.       Project Management Units

79.     In most cases, once loans are approved, the AMLs will be involved in loan administration
for a relatively short time (on average, 20 months) before the loan is turned over to a project
management unit (PMU) or a resident mission (RM). Two PMU heads were interviewed
regarding the monitoring of the implementation of environmental mitigation measures.
Environmental monitoring (on compliance with loan covenants related to environmental
mitigation) has been increasingly integrated as part of the loan review missions. However, the
nature of the loan review missions does not allow them to conduct in-depth inspection on
environmental compliance issues. It was also evident, both from these interviews and from
project reviews in country, that many EAs, particularly larger corporations and entities in

17
     This is mostly because private sector infrastructure and industrial projects tend to be more environmentally
     polluting or sensitive. For example, for the power sector, the private sector tends to focus on generation projects,
     which are more polluting than transmission projects, which are typically financed through public sector loans.
24


infrastructure sectors, have developed their own environmental monitoring units and that these
are playing an increasing role. In neither of the two PMU heads' experience have they included
environmental specialists in their review missions to assess the implementation of the EMP and
help solve any problems during implementation.

           4.      Nongovernment Organizations

80.     The OEM met with a small number of selected NGOs in the Philippines, India, and Viet
Nam to get their views on the environmental safeguard policies of development partners
including ADB. The interviews were designed to identify potential areas where NGOs may help
ADB improve the effectiveness of its measures. The two NGOs in India and Viet Nam had little
prior knowledge about ADB's environmental policies and safeguard procedures. The NGO
based in Manila, the NGO Forum on ADB, is closely monitoring ADB's environmental policies,
safeguard procedures, and particularly implementation-related issues. Much of the discussion
centered on issues and lessons that can be learned from the Southern Transport Development
Project, 18 which was inspected by the CRP. 19 The project was assigned category A, and a
significant portion of the road goes through wetlands. An EIA was prepared for the 3-km corridor
of the chosen route. However, following approval of the project and during implementation,
there was a significant change of the route which, in accordance with ADB's environmental
safeguard procedures, should have triggered another EIA for the new route. However, the
scope change apparently did not draw sufficient attention from ADB, in part due to the poor
monitoring of project implementation. Thus, the supplementary EIA was not prepared. The new
route has caused significant changes in the local environment and in the livelihood of 74
families.

81.     Ways that NGOs can help ADB to improve its environmental safeguard procedures,
particularly during implementation, were also explored. Several key points emerged: (i) ADB
should increasingly employ third-party monitoring mechanisms for environmental compliance
and impacts of its projects, (ii) ADB should provide more capacity building and training for
NGOs and civil society at large on technical issues related to project monitoring, and (iii) the
safeguard system should be increasingly streamlined in line with improved country safeguard
systems. For example, the Sri Lanka environmental safeguard system has improved
significantly over the years. ADB could work with the government to improve the remaining
weaknesses (e.g., monitoring and implementation) to work toward the eventual goal of adopting
it for ADB-supported projects. ADB should have an accreditation system for environmental
consultants engaging in EIA implementation. NGOs felt that presently the client relationship with
the EAs and the terms of reference for consultants prohibit them from looking into certain
aspects of adverse environmental impact, i.e., there is lack of independence in the process.

82.      NGOs have traditionally played an important role in helping ADB and other development
institutions monitor the environmental and social impacts of large and environmentally sensitive
projects such as dams (Box 1).




18
     Loan 1711-SRI(SF): Southern Transport Development Project, for $90 million, approved in November 1999.
19
     ADB. 2006. Annual Monitoring Report 2005-2006 to the Board of Directors on CRP Request No. 2004/1 on the
     Southern Transport Development Project in Sri Lanka. Manila.
                                                                                                            25




             Box 1: Role of NGOs in Monitoring Impacts of Environmentally Sensitive Projects

        Large and environmentally sensitive projects such as dams represent a major challenge for ADB due to
the magnitude and irreversible nature of their potential adverse environmental and social impacts. The World
Commission on Dams (WCD), in its 2000 publication entitled Dams and Development: A New Framework for
Decision Making, summarized the worldwide experience in building large dams and reached the following
conclusions:
        (i)    While dams have made an important contribution to human development, and the benefits derived
               from them have been considerable, large dams display a high degree of variability in delivering
               predicted water and electricity services and related social benefits--with a considerable portion
               falling short of physical and economic targets.
        (ii)   Large dams generally have a range of extensive impacts on rivers, watersheds, and aquatic
               ecosystems. These impacts are more negative than positive and in many cases have led to
               irreversible loss of species and ecosystems. Efforts to date to counter such negative impacts have
               had limited success owing to the lack of attention to anticipating and avoiding impacts, the poor
               quality and uncertainty of predictions, difficulties of coping with all impacts, and the only partial
               implementation and success of mitigation measures.
        (iii)  Even the traditional environmental "benefits" of dams compared with thermal power plants, i.e.,
               avoidance of greenhouse gas emissions, are now questionable, as increasing evidence indicates
               that dams are an important source of greenhouse gases due to rotting vegetation and carbon
               inflows from the catchment.

        NGOs have been particularly concerned about the adverse environmental and social impacts of dams. A
 2005 publication by the NGO Forum on ADB entitled The Asian Development Bank and Dams outlined ADB's
 involvement in projects with dams as components and in particular focused on three of ADB-supported dams
 projects, viz., the Theun-Hinboun hydropower project and the Nam Leuk hydropower project in the Lao People's
 Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), and the Kali Gandaki hydropower project in Nepal. The main environmental and
 related social impacts identified included:
        (i)       loss of drinking water source due to increased turbidity of the water,
        (ii)      declining fishery catch,
        (iii)     uncontrolled deforestation, and
        (iv)      loss of natural habitats and ecological impacts.

         OED has carried out several recent independent evaluations of ADB-supported dam projects, including
 the Theun-Hinboun and the Nam Leuk hydropower projects in the Lao PDR and the Hunan Lingjintan
 Hydropower Project in the PRC. The findings suggest that, while the economic benefits of the dam projects are
 significant, there have been some significant "unresolved" environmental and social issues, including declining
 fish catches, increased flooding in certain areas, declining income, and poor livelihood restoration for affected
 persons. A common theme was a lack of adequate baseline data.

         Because of the complexity of large and environmentally sensitive projects and difficulties in accurately
 forecasting all the adverse impacts, there is a strong need for close monitoring of the negative impacts and the
 effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures during project implementation and operation. ADB is
 constrained in its staff resources, and monitoring has been a weak link in its environmental (and social)
 safeguard systems. NGOs are well positioned to play this critical role in helping ADB monitor the impacts and
 implementation of the mitigation measures and in providing real-time feedback, particularly after the project is
 commissioned and the ADB monitoring ceases.
    Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

    D.      Country Consultations and Project Case Studies

    83.  Sixteen projects in four countries were selected for case studies. The review of project
    documents included various appraisal documents, available EIA or IEE reports, and BTORs of
26


loan processing and review missions. Meetings in the field included key responsible government
agencies, EAs, and project management offices. Site visits were made for selected projects.
The findings are summarized in Appendix 4, with the most important conclusions highlighted
below. The four countries selected for case studies represent nearly 45% of ADB's lending
between 1996 and 2005, and account for 46 out of 69 or 67% of category A projects approved
during the period 1997­2005. They also provide a cross-country coverage of the spectrum of
environmental safeguard systems, as well as of institutional capacities in EIA preparation,
review, and monitoring and implementation.

84.     Two main issues were identified as the central concern in the country studies: (i) the
comprehensiveness and effectiveness of the country's environmental safeguard system in
terms of capability to deliver results on the ground, and (ii) ADB's contribution or value addition
to improving the system and results delivery. Environmental assessment is a process, and the
main purpose throughout the process is to help in making key decisions on a project. These
decisions range from "go" to "no go" with respect to the proposed project; and in the case of
"go," how to improve the design of the project to make it better in terms of socioeconomic costs
and benefits and environmental performance. The usefulness of the environmental assessment
process hinges on the quality of work at the four stages of the process. This has formed the
basis for the review of the environmental assessment process within ADB's safeguards.

           1.       Appropriateness of Environmental Classification

85.      Table 2 indicates that, between 1997 and 2005,20 632 public sector loans were approved
by ADB. Of these, 69 projects (11%) were designated as category A, and 353 projects (56%)
were designated as category B. Of the 69 category A projects, 43 (62%) were from the PRC, 1
from India, 2 from Viet Nam, and none from the Philippines. The very skewed distribution of
category A projects raises concerns about the consistency and integrity of the application of the
classification system across RDs.

86.     Of the four countries included in this review, the PRC is the most "assertive" in terms of
assigning projects to category A, which requires a full EIA. Forty-three (74%) of the 58 ADB-
supported projects in the PRC since 1997 were designated as category A, including the
6 projects chosen as case studies. There are two main reasons for this: (i) most PRC projects
supported by ADB have been large greenfield infrastructure projects for which the
environmental classification under both the PRC and ADB systems is unambiguously category
A; and (ii) the PRC system is, compared with other national systems, relatively strict and
proactive. Most large projects have been classified as A, and a full EIA has usually been carried
out during the early stages of project preparation, sometimes before ADB's involvement. These
EIAs are funded by the EA and must be approved by the concerned environmental agency as
part of the PRC's internal processes. Certification that this process has been completed is
necessary before the Government team can be authorized to participate in loan negotiations
with ADB. ADB is not involved in the preparation of these EIAs. The second reason is important,
since one of the principal concerns of ADB's AMLs is that, if a project is classified as A and
triggers a full EIA, the time and resources required to complete the EIA would be unmanageable
within ADB's loan approval schedule. In most countries without prior environmental assessment,
many months would be required to complete the EIA. In the PRC, the national EIA already
available saves time and resources and provides an information base for ADB assessment. For


20
     Projects before 1997 were excluded from the survey and the case studies due to fading institutional memories and
     poor record keeping.
                                                                                     27


some PRC projects, the ADB-financed SEIAs identified a few areas where the environmental
analysis and mitigation measures needed to be strengthened.

  Table 2: Number of Projects by Environmental Category and by Country, 1997­2005

                                                Category
  Country                           A       B          C        FI          Total
  Afghanistan                       0       5              3    1             9
  Azerbaijan                        0       3               0   0             3
  Bangladesh                        4      25               7   4            40
  Bhutan                            1       6               2   0             9
  Cambodia                          0      16              10   0            26
  People's Republic of China        43     15               0   0            58
  Cook Islands                      0       3               0   0             3
  Fiji Islands                      0       4              0    0             4
  India                             1      43               2   0            46
  Indonesia                         4      21              25   0            50
  Kazakhstan                        0       5              2    0             7
  Kiribati                          0       1              0    0             1
  Republic of Korea                 0       0               2   0             2
  Kyrgyz Republic                    0     10              11   0            21
  Lao PDR                            3     16               5   0            24
  Malaysia                           0      0               1   0             1
  Maldives                          0       6               3   0             9
  Marshall Islands                  0       3              2    0             5
  Federated States of Micronesia    0       4               1   0             5
  Mongolia                          0      10              11   0            21
  Nauru                              0      0               1   0             1
  Nepal                              2     13               9   0            24
  Pakistan                          3      31              30   1            65
  Philippines                       0      18              12   1            31
  Papua New Guinea                  0      10               5   0            15
  Samoa                             1       1               4   0             6
  Solomon Islands                   0       1              2    0             3
  Sri Lanka                         4      29              14   0            47
  Tajikistan                        0      10              6    0            16
  Thailand                           0      4               5   0             9
  Tonga                              0                      1   0             1
  Tuvalu                            0       2               1   0             3
  Uzbekistan                        0      11               7   0            18
  Vanuatu                           0                       2   0             2
  Viet Nam                          2      25              14   0            41
  Regional                           1      2               3   0             6


  Total                             69    353          203      7           632
  Source: Asian Development Bank.
28


87.     The 120-day disclosure rule applicable to category A and B sensitive projects further
adds to the reluctance for some RDs to be involved with category A projects, as it adds more
time pressure for early completion of the SEIAs to meet loan processing schedules. This partly
explains the more typical situation in the other three countries where there has been none or
only one or two category A projects approved since 1997. This outcome suggests an unstated
but dominant influence within ADB's operations to avoid "environmentally sensitive projects" that
would trigger full EIA requirements. This was most apparent in India, where three of the four
projects reviewed showed signs that avoiding environmentally sensitive or category A
subprojects had been an active consideration in project selection and development. All of the
India projects reviewed had been designated as category B, to the extent that some highway
projects had been split to exclude environmentally sensitive sections from ADB funding and
others had been realigned or rerouted to avoid environmentally sensitive areas. While the
motives of ADB and EA staff are "understandable" in the context of maintaining the loan
program, this approach may potentially create a situation wherein ADB is at considerable risk.
Excluding the most sensitive sections of the project (those passing through national parks or
protected areas) and leaving these to government financing without any ADB involvement is a
very "transparent" response that would likely be exposed by NGOs should the project cause any
serious impact.

88.     Table 3 compares the number of category A and B projects for both ADB and the World
Bank between 1997 and 2005. The environmental classification of ADB's portfolio in India forms
a sharp contrast to that of the World Bank. Since 1997, the World Bank has approved 59 loan
projects with category A or B in India, of which 16 or 27% were category A. This is partly the
result of clearer World Bank definitions of category A and B (para. 58), and perhaps more
stringent enforcement by the World Bank compared with ADB. A more detailed examination of
the World Bank category A projects showed that their scopes were not significantly different
from the scopes of many ADB category B projects. For example, of the 16 category A projects,
many were in the transport sector (mostly road projects), and almost all of them were road
rehabilitation projects, which ADB typically classified as "B." A further point is that for many ADB
sector loans, the environmental criteria for selecting subprojects clearly exclude category A or B
sensitive subprojects. In contrast, many World Bank transport sector projects were category A.
Other World Bank category A projects included water supply and sanitation, energy, and
agriculture and irrigation. With one exception, a liquefied natural gas pipeline project, all of the
other similar projects funded by ADB were categorized as B.

 Table 3: Comparison of the Environmental Categories of ADB and World Bank Projects
                                    (1997­2005)

                                       ADB                                  World Bank
Country                 Category A            Category B            Category A      Category B
PRC                        43                    15                     57              35
India                       1                    43                     16              43
Philippines                 0                    18                      3              18
Viet Nam                    2                    25                      9              24
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Sources: Asian Development Bank databases and http://www/worldbank.org.

89.     Although the deliberate avoidance of environmentally sensitive projects is most evident
in India, the tendency cannot be ruled out in ADB-supported projects in Philippines and Viet
Nam. In the Philippines, project documents indicate that ADB agreed to downgrade Loan 1769-
PHI: North Luzon Tollways Project from the initial category A to category B because the project
                                                                                                               29


was for rehabilitation of an existing road rather than for a major new highway project.21 In Viet
Nam, ADB has had only 2 category A projects and 25 category B projects since 1997. In
contrast, the World Bank has financed 9 category A projects and 24 category B projects. The
inference is that either ADB staff are consciously choosing less sensitive projects, or the rigor of
the categorization process has been compromised in some regions. RSDD should undertake
similar comparisons of World Bank and ADB environmental classifications in other countries to
determine whether ADB's environmental classification system is being rigorously applied. It
would be very troubling if this system has been systematically compromised.

90.     In some cases, ADB staff have implicitly allowed the desire to minimize environment-
related risks and delays to dictate its financing policies. Rather than aligning environmental
benefits with poverty reduction as one of the drivers of ADB's lending policy, the safeguard
procedures tend to direct lending to "safe" projects. This appears to be a perverse outcome of
ADB's efforts to strengthen its environmental safeguards. Arguably, ADB's greatest
contributions to achieving development results would be to be involved in mitigating potentially
serious environmental risks, particularly those that impact on the poor. A consequence of this
approach is that ADB has not maximized its value added for DMCs through participating in
environmentally sensitive projects and playing a "leadership" role in mitigating adverse impacts.

91.      In the three countries other than the PRC, the main reason used for justifying a category
B rating for many ADB-supported projects was that they involved rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure rather than greenfield projects for which new right-of-way was needed. An added
reason for Indian projects is that the Indian national system does not explicitly differentiate
between category A and B projects. However, some of these "rehabilitation" projects were
substantial, with significant direct and indirect environmental consequences. Category A
projects are largely limited to projects that impinge on protected areas. In other cases, B
sensitive, instead of category A, is used for those rehabilitation projects with more sensitive
environmental issues. A more prudent approach to assigning environmental category would be
to presume the higher category if there is genuine uncertainty on the environmental impacts
associated with a project. However, there are projects where circumstances justify a lower
classification. This is true for sector loans involving smaller project elements. In some cases, it
may be fully justified and practical to downgrade the environmental category. It is imperative,
however, that these decisions are clearly presented and supported, not on the grounds of
saving time and maintaining loan approval schedules, but because the environmental issues
and the project justify this decision. The real issue is that decisions on environmental
categorization appear to be lowering the categories to circumvent the safeguard procedures.
This area requires some focus in the wider review to be undertaken. Options for response
include adopting the higher category whenever there is genuine uncertainty on a project,
requiring greater analysis and documentation at the categorization stage, and dropping the B
sensitive category, as it fuels an impression that ADB is trying to "whitewash" its
environmentally sensitive projects.22




21
   The project was also categorized as B by the International Financing Corporation as a cofinancing agency. The
   country case studies indicated that the project has affected the drainage and increased flooding for some areas
   (Appendix 4).
22
   None of the four sample countries nor the World Bank has the B sensitive category.
30


       2.      Scoping--Focusing Environmental Assessment on Decision Making

92.     Neither the domestic nor ADB's environmental assessment process was likely to have
contributed explicitly to a "go" or "no go" decision by the government for the projects reviewed.
Typically, such decisions have already been made based on other considerations, i.e., technical,
economic, social, or political considerations. However, ADB's environmental assessment
process can influence its decision on whether or not to support a project. For the 16 case study
projects, it evidently provided adequate information for ADB's Management to authorize
processing and for ADB's Board of Directors to approve the loans. In comparison to contribution
to a "go" or "no go" decision, the potential value of the environmental assessment process is
more likely to be in improving the project design and implementation. This needs to be reflected
in the scoping of the EIAs, which should be targeted at practical means to mitigate impacts or
capture environmental improvements. There were several good examples of this in practice,
including several greenfield road and railway projects in the PRC, for which route selection and
designs had taken into account environmental considerations identified in the EIA process.
These included proximity to national parks and historic sites, tunneling requirements, access to
construction materials, and biological measures for protection of slopes.

93.     Realizing such design benefits, however, requires that the environmental assessment
process can influence project design. In addition to collecting and presenting relevant and useful
information, it also implies that the project design must be sufficiently advanced to permit
meaningful review and refinement, but that it is not so far advanced that changes cannot be
made, effectively preventing useful environmental input. There are important implications of the
timing of environmental assessment and design in each DMC. To be effective in the key role of
influencing design decisions, ADB's environmental safeguard and assessment process must be
integrated into national procedures. Presently, for some projects in the PRC or India, where the
project design and domestic environmental assessment has been effectively completed before
ADB's involvement, ADB's environmental assessment contributes little to improving the project
design and minimizing environmental impacts.

94.      ADB's 120-day disclosure rule exerts considerable pressure to complete EIA/IEE for
category A and B sensitive projects at the feasibility study stage. Typically, this is before a
useful level of design information is available. Consequently, some specific impacts cannot be
predicted and assessed, nor can practical recommendations on mitigation/enhancement be
made. As a result, the SIEEs/SEIAs often consist of general statements on generic impacts and
principles for mitigation rather than any specific proposals for improving design. Frequently, the
original EIAs/IEEs themselves are also based on general, rather than specific, baseline and
project information, greatly reducing the value of the process. By contrast, in Viet Nam, EIAs are
often carried out too late, after the project design is finalized and sometimes even well after the
start of construction, when virtually all the key decisions have already been made.

       3.      Quality of Environmental Assessment and Management Plans

95.    The quantity and quality of EIA and management plans available before ADB's
involvement in projects varied markedly across countries and projects. EIAs had been prepared
by domestic consultants for all six PRC projects before ADB's involvement. The quality of the
available EIA reports varied but was generally satisfactory. The SEIAs, based on the original
EIAs, contain abbreviated but sufficient information on predicted impacts, assessed qualitatively
and quantitatively, and suggest mitigating measures. For the other three countries, IEEs were
prepared for only a small proportion of the projects before ADB's involvement. Typically, ADB's
PPTAs prepared IEEs for the projects and/or selected core subprojects. For the four India
                                                                                                31


projects, while the IEEs reviewed are generally detailed (in providing background information)
and the quality is satisfactory, the SIEEs are very brief, tend to be "recipe" in approach, and
often fail to provide sufficient information on the location and magnitude of the predicted impacts.
The mitigating measures tend to be generic. For the sector loans in Philippines and Viet Nam,
ADB's PPTA consultants prepared the SIEEs for the initial core subprojects, and the quality is
generally satisfactory. However, again, the approach follows a basic recipe with little focus on
addressing the specific issues and decisions faced by the project.

96.     For sector loans, apart from the SIEEs for the initial core subprojects, a separate
environmental assessment framework (EAF), alternatively referred to as the environmental
assessment review procedures, is also prepared to serve as the framework for the selection,
environmental assessment, review, and implementation of eligible subprojects. While the
selection criteria contained in the EAF typically exclude category A and B sensitive subprojects
in sector loans, the cost of preparing IEEs for sector loans with many individual subprojects can
be high, particularly when assisted by international consultants. This is illustrated by Loan 1888-
VIE: Provincial Roads Improvement, which has more than 80 subprojects, each of which
required a separate IEE. In these cases, where the safeguard procedures require a repetitive
assessment approach, which does not deliver any clear value, the overall credibility of the
safeguard system is brought into question. This point was raised by EA representatives in all
countries.

97.     As part of ADB's environmental assessment process, an EMP is explicitly required by
the 2003 Guidelines for category A and B sensitive projects (Appendix 2). However, for category
B projects, an EMP is not explicitly required, though some SIEEs opt for inclusion of an EMP,
but the vast majority do not. This has led to a situation where, for two major ADB-supported
road projects in India averaging $200 million, no EMP is included in the SIEEs, even though the
EA-prepared IEE documents include EMPs as required by government regulations. The EMPs
specify the types of monitoring required, timing (frequency), and responsible parties. The quality
of the EMPs reviewed varies substantially across countries and projects but is generally
satisfactory. As an example of good practice, the EMP for Loan 2152-IND: Power Grid
Transmission (Sector) Project is comprehensive and specific and offers a good framework for
monitoring. However, generally, the OEM noted a tendency that the monitoring activities
recommended tend to focus on in-situ impacts that are directly caused by project construction.
For example, for Loan 2032-PRC: Gansu Clean Energy Development Project, the
recommended monitoring as implemented by the local EPB, was mostly on impact of the
construction on water quality of the river (e.g., oil spill) and noise level. For both parameters,
these should be relatively minor concerns, considering the nature of the work and the relatively
isolated location. Potentially more significant impacts, such as impacts of the access road and
the cascade hydropower development scheme and resulting reduced river flow on the local
ecological environment, received relatively less attention.

98.    Several common issues characterize most IEEs/EIAs, including SIEEs/SEIAs, reviewed:
       (i)   presentation of extraneous information on the background (baseline)
             environment without any clear indication on how it is related to the project; the
             information is often irrelevant to any project issues or decisions;
       (ii)  cursory assessment of project alternatives;
       (iii) insufficient (or no) use of quantitative tools for impact assessment, almost all
             conclusions being based on qualitative conclusions;
       (iv)  failure to identify and address the specific environmental issues facing each
             project and recommend how these are to be addressed; and
32


       (v)    a tendency to focus on in-situ direct impacts during construction and operation,
              (e.g., noise, air, and water pollution; and waste disposal) with scant attention paid
              to community, secondary, offsite, or cumulative impacts, particularly of the impact
              on the livelihoods of affected people.

99.    The quality of ADB's SEIA/SIEE depends on the quantity and quality of data gathered at
the EIA/IEE stage if the EIA/IEE is available, because ADB PPTAs typically have no time and
budget allocated for original data collection. In the case where an EIA/IEE was not prepared by
the EA, data shortage could be more acute due to the resources and time constraints faced by
the PPTA consultants.

100. Overall, there appears to have been relatively slower progression in ADB's approach
compared with international best practice. Nor is there any identifiable increase in the
expectations of mission leaders or others reviewing the documents. In some situations,
depending on the individual staff, the process is delivering real benefits. In (too many) other
situations, the environmental assessments appear to be achieving little except creating a
document trail to demonstrate that the process required for compliance has been completed.
This is despite the fact that, for several projects in the PRC and Viet Nam, ADB's involvement,
although at a later stage in some cases, has contributed to improvement of public consultation
processes and socioeconomic assessment. Nevertheless, in many cases, ADB's environmental
assessment process is separate from the mainstream project design activities. As such, it often
does not contribute substantially to useful improvement in project design. In short, the value
addition of ADB's environmental assessment, particularly to several larger client countries
including the PRC and India, is limited in part because these countries have progressively
improved their environmental safeguard systems and have gained increasing environmental
assessment capacities. The value addition appears to be more significant for several projects in
Philippines and Viet Nam for which there were no prior IEEs. Overall, the results have been
mixed, but significant improvement can be made if ADB's environmental assessment is better
aligned with national procedures and with EAs' project formulation and design processes.

101. Irrespective of the quality of the IEE/EIA documents, which were typically prepared by
the EAs, the SIEEs and SEIAs are often the only documents reviewed by ADB's Board of
Directors and the general public. To a large extent, the SIEEs and SEIAs are ADB's main
contribution to the overall environmental assessment process. Consequently, their quality is of
the prime concern for the SES as poor quality of SIEEs or SEIAs indicates low value addition by
ADB and/or provides a weak basis for decision making by ADB Board of Directors and the
general public.

       4.     Monitoring and Audit--Following Through to Achieve Results

102. Monitoring is a critical component of all environmental safeguard systems. The extent
and quality of the implementation of the mitigating measures are important for delivering results
on the ground in terms of environmental safeguards. The foundation of any monitoring program
is the development of a practical and targeted schedule of activities that check and confirm
implementation of the recommendations. For ADB-supported projects, these monitoring
activities, schedules, and responsibilities are summarized in an EMP, which will be captured in
the project administration manual, loan covenants, and bidding and contract documents.

103. Generally, monitoring is a weak link in the safeguard systems of all four countries visited.
Monitoring can be conducted at several levels, i.e., contractors and project supervision
companies, the EA's own monitoring units, government environmental monitoring bodies, and
                                                                                                 33


ADB review missions. Generally, there are more resources and capacities available for
monitoring within the larger corporate entities and projects. POWERGRID in India, the National
Transmission Corporation and Manila North Tollways Corporation in the Philippines, and the
expressway and railway companies in the PRC each established a professional in-house
capability and have growing experience in conducting environmental monitoring programs. The
monitoring capacities of governments' environmental agencies, e.g., CPCB in India, DENR in
the Philippines, SEPA and local EPBs in the PRC, and MoNRE in Viet Nam, are often weak in
terms of both capability and resources compared with the number of projects to be monitored.
This deficiency is a major consideration in considering whether it is possible for ADB to place
greater reliance on national systems and resources.

104. ADB has carried out at least one safeguard review mission (by RSES) for one of the 16
case projects (Box 2). ADB's loan review missions have generally not paid much attention to
                                                    environmental monitoring, as indicated by the
       Box 2: Environmental Safeguard Review        review of the BTORs for loan review missions.
    Loan 1959-IND: Madhya Pradesh State Road
             Sector Development Project             However, ADB has provided significant impetus
                                                    to improve environmental monitoring of several
  The October 2005 review mission, which            ADB-supported projects through introducing the
  comprised two RSES environment specialists,       third-party monitoring mechanism and through
  was satisfied with the good overall progress on
  monitoring and implementing the EMP and
                                                    international resident engineers. These projects,
  attributed the satisfactory performance to the    to a degree, have served as "demonstration"
  implementing agency's understanding of the        projects and were well received by EAs and
  Government's       environmental     regulations, national institutions alike. This approach,
  procedures, and standards. The review mission     whereby ADB supports monitoring of projects,
  recommended, continuing and strengthening the
  current monitoring efforts after the loan is      would appear to be a necessary and desirable
  completed and during operation.                   element of any approach to have greater reliance
                                                    on national systems. ADB loan covenants include
  The environmental management of the project,      assurances that agreed upon environmental
  relies almost entirely on the government's
  procedures and standards. However, ADB's
                                                    measures for funded projects will be implemented.
  involvement strengthens the monitoring of the     ADB's participation also has wider benefits
  enforcement of the Government's regulations and   through providing precedents to improve
  standards.                                        domestic policies and standards. For example,
                                                    for Loan 1769-PHI: Manila North Tollways
                                                    Corporation and Loan 2063-PHI: Development of
Poor Urban Communities Sector, ADB provided TA for environmental monitoring during
implementation, which has played a critical role for the implementation of the EMP. ADB
provided similar assistance to Loan 2116-PRC: Dali-Lijiang Railway. For Loan 1851-PRC:
Guangxi Roads Development Project and Loan 2094-PRC: Guangxi Roads Development II
Project in the PRC, and Loan 1888-VIE: Provincial Roads Improvement Sector Project, the
OEM observed that the international resident engineers played a critical role in monitoring and
introducing international good practices in environmental management.

105. While environmental practices and the implementation of mitigating measures varied
across projects and countries, in many cases ADB-supported projects are performing better
than similar types of projects financed by domestic sources. ADB could have achieved greater
impact, however, if it had greater capacities in its field offices. At the time of the OEM visits,
none of ADB's resident missions in India (INRM), the PRC, or Viet Nam had a designated
environment specialist, with only INRM having an environmental consultant. By comparison, the
World Bank's Delhi office had a team of eight consultants led by a staff specialist in charge of
environmental and social safeguard issues. Similarly, the World Bank's Hanoi office had six
consultants led by a staff specialist. With much larger staff resources, the World Bank RMs are
34


able to conduct more frequent monitoring and address issues as they emerge. These staff also
help to "add value" by helping clients improve their capacities in project design and
implementation.

     IV.    EVALUATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT POLICIES: RESULTS AND GAPS

106. This chapter addresses the key questions of the relevance and efficacy/efficiency of the
environmental safeguard systems.

A.     Relevance of the Environment Policies

       1.     What were the goals, explicit and underlined, of the various environmental
              policies, and how have they evolved? What was the external environment
              in which the policies were formulated?

107. Since the first Board paper on Environmental Considerations in Bank Operations in 1979,
ADB has produced a number of papers on its environmental policies. The goals and objectives
of the environmental policies have also evolved over the past two decades. The initial focus was
on strengthening the capacities in DMCs in planning and environmental management,
promoting environmental awareness, and building the environmental capacity within ADB. This
developed to include integrating environmental and natural resources planning and
management into country economic and sector work, and paying greater attention to
ecologically sensitive areas during project implementation and processing. The focus of the
early policy papers was on ensuring that "no significant harm" to the environment would result
from ADB's activities. The main tool to achieve this was the environmental assessment process,
aimed at assessing and mitigating potential adverse environmental impacts of ADB-supported
projects. This established the foundation of the current "environmental safeguard system."

108. Several papers in the late 1980s and early 1990s led to emphasis on increased
assistance for environmental improvement. A report entitled The Asian Development Bank in
the 1990s, which charted ADB's strategic directions for the decade, stressed the need for ADB
to balance its focus on economic growth in DMCs with support for protection of the environment,
along with social infrastructure development, improvement of the living standards of the poorest
groups, and a reorientation of public sector assistance to meet these new priorities. ADB's
Medium-Term Strategic Framework for 1995­1998 went one step further; it advocated not only
protecting the environment as one of the five strategic development objectives of ADB (in
addition to promoting economic growth, reducing poverty, supporting human development
including population planning, and improving the status of women), but also mandated that at
least 50% of projects in the public sector in terms of number, and 40% in terms of lending
volume, would have social or environmental objectives either as primary or secondary
objectives. While the pros and cons of setting lending targets for environmental improvement
may be debated, the 1990s witnessed a shift of strategies and assistance programs from
ensuring "no significant harm" to trying to "do better" in terms of environmental and social
objectives.

109. Entering the new millennium, the Poverty Reduction Strategy set poverty reduction as
ADB's overarching goal and stressed the need for sustainable pro-poor economic growth.
Social development, good governance, and sustainable pro-poor economic growth are
considered the key elements of the framework for poverty reduction. As in the Medium-Term
Strategic Framework for 1995­1998, the Poverty Reduction Strategy also sets specific lending
targets: no less than 40% of all public sector lending for poverty interventions. ADB's long-term
                                                                                                           35


strategic framework23 has three core strategic areas of intervention consisting of sustainable
economic growth, inclusive social development, and governance for effective policies and
institutions. It also has three cross-cutting strategic themes: promoting the role of the private
sector in development, supporting regional cooperation and integration for development, and
addressing environmental sustainability.

110. The 2002 Environment Policy is grounded in these strategic initiatives. At the time,
unlike the 1990s, protecting the environment was no longer one of ADB's strategic development
objectives (or a core strategic area of intervention). Rather, environmental protection is
embedded as a prerequisite for sustainable pro-poor economic growth and one of the three
cross-cutting themes. While the importance of poverty reduction for a multilateral development
agency like ADB is not disputed, the changes that this strategic shift brought in terms of impact
on environmental institutional capacity and assistance programs cannot be underestimated. In
reality, the Environment Policy, which has five pillars, was often interpreted as an
"environmental safeguard policy." The focus of ADB's environmental assistance was once again
increasingly on its cross-cutting aspect--ensuring that ADB-supported projects cause no
significant harm--and "environmental improvement" as an independent area of intervention may
have been weakened. The recently approved Medium-Term Strategy II 2006­2008 may have
addressed this issue by making "managing the environment" one of ADB's five strategic
priorities, which also include catalyzing investment, strengthening inclusiveness, promoting
regional cooperation and integration, and improving governance and preventing corruption. The
strategy places emphasis on environmentally sustainable growth and investments that will
support "green growth." 24

        2.      Were the environmental goals and compliance procedures already
                embedded in ADB's various sector policies, country operational strategies
                and programs, and operational guidelines before 2002? What was the
                expected value added by the 2002 Environment Policy in terms of
                achieving better environmental safeguards and the developmental goals of
                ADB and DMCs?

111. ADB started to integrate environmental considerations into its operations from the 1980s.
The environmental safeguard procedures have improved over time. Sector policies including the
Water Policy and Energy Policy have addressed environmental issues related to a particular
aspect of the environment, e.g., air and water. At the corporate level, environment has been a
main theme in ADB's operational strategies and programs since the 1980s and particularly
during the 1990s but the translation of this into operational realities at the country level has been
weak. The availability of these other policies calls into question the added value provided by the
2002 Environment Policy within the wider policy framework.

112. This question may be addressed from several aspects. The Environment Policy
consolidated and expressed ADB's position on key environmental issues related to its
operations, and presented this in a global context. The policy statements commit ADB, in an
open and transparent manner, to a series of sound principles with respect to mainstreaming
environmental considerations into ADB's operations and global environmental issues.



23
   ADB. 2000. The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the Asian Development Bank (2001­2015). Manila. This target
   was subsequently abolished in the review of the Poverty Reduction Strategy in 2004.
24
   ADB. 2006. Medium-Term Strategy II (2006­2008). Manila.
36


113. The 2002 Environment Policy was written in response to the new wider policy
environment where poverty reduction has become the overarching goal. As such, there was a
need to realign the limited resources for other strategic goals or areas of intervention, including
environmental protection, to achieve the poverty reduction goal. In a way, following the lead of
the Poverty Reduction Strategy, the 2002 Environment Policy also officially noted the end of
environmental protection as one of the ADB's key development objectives as was the case in
the mid-1990s. It remains to be seen if focus on the environment in the Medium-Term Strategy
II will succeed in addressing this issue.

       3.      Do ADB's environmental safeguard policies and procedures conform to
               international good practices while taking into account the realities of legal
               frameworks, institutional capabilities, and levels of economic development
               in the DMCs?

114. Environmental assessment as a tool for decision making has evolved over the past two
decades. Environmental agencies, academia, and major multinational corporations have led the
way in the development of new approaches and scientific tools for impact assessment and
environmental management. Increasingly, the focus of environmental assessment has moved
away from the traditional "safeguard" or "do no harm" concept to integrating environmental
assessment into the full project cycle from project conception, to design, implementation, and
operation. Technically, it has evolved to be a process based on science and engineering rather
than value judgments. The 2002 Environment Policy recognizes environmental assessment as
a process. However, the SES found a number of areas where current practice in ADB is falling
below international best practice and reasonable expectations. Deficiencies are evident at each
key stage of the process--categorization, scoping, assessment, and implementation. The main
causes are lack of resources, lack of a clear focus, poor integration with national systems
(particularly regarding timing), and reliance on qualitative assessment methods.

115. The environmental safeguard procedures for multilateral development agencies,
including ADB and the World Bank, have generally been modeled on the "best practices"
pioneered in the developed countries. A major challenge for ADB when adopting such practices
is the lack of capacity and resources available to support this process, both within ADB and in
the DMCs. ADB has 17 environmental safeguard specialists, all based at Headquarters. A small
proportion of the TA budget is allocated to environmental safeguard issues. Most of these
resources are focused on loan processing, with much less attention being given to project
implementation. This situation has, in practice, necessitated heavy reliance on national
environmental safeguard systems and resources, particularly for monitoring the implementation
of projects and associated mitigating measures. Information obtained from the surveys,
interviews, and case studies suggests that ADB's environmental assessment is procedurally
oriented and contributes little to project decision making. The technical quality of environmental
assessment is poor and lacks quantitative analysis of specific issues useful for improving project
quality. On the other hand, the transaction costs are high as the EAs typically have to comply
with both ADB and government environmental regulations and requirements.

116. Some multinational companies, including both Shell and British Petroleum (BP), have
established useful precedents on how better integration of international and national systems can
be achieved. Both companies have strong corporate policies that recognize the need to adopt
national systems and standards, but also apply an overarching reliance on the World Bank
system as the corporate requirement. In the PRC, both companies have completed EIAs for major
projects that effectively combined these dual systems within a single assessment process and
documentation. The procedures and working relationships require a high level of commitment
                                                                                                                        37


from both national and international sides. Scoping becomes an especially important task to
define very clearly the specific standards and methodologies to be adopted to ensure that full
compliance to both systems is achieved and demonstrated. The need for international standards
tends to push local expectations and performance higher. The need to adopt local standards
helps avoid duplication of effort by permitting rationalization of activities.25 This dual approach
provides one possible model that might be adopted to overcome some of the current general
deficiencies. In particular, it may provide assistance in addressing the core issues of resources
and timing. It would provide obvious benefits in capacity building and also be very effective in
providing demonstration projects as a catalyst for further improvement and innovation.

117. This approach would require careful consideration of specific issues on a country-by-
country basis to develop a practical and mutually acceptable framework for implementation of a
joint system for application to ADB projects. One specific concern would be ADB's policies on
public disclosure, which are generally in line with international good practices. In PRC and Viet
Nam, ADB's public consultation procedures were complimented by EAs and domestic
consultants for adding more community orientation to the environmental assessment process.
The two countries, which are both weak in public consultation for public investment projects,
have been steadily improving their national procedures with respect to public consultation. On
the other hand, ADB's 120-day rule has been widely cited as causing delays but adding little
benefit. In the PRC, the country with the largest number of category A projects, EAs considered
that they have completed the public disclosure as part of the domestic environmental
assessment process and the 120-day requirement is an "additional" burden of using ADB
financing. It is also rare for useful comments to be received by ADB from publishing
SEIAs/SIEEs on the internet.26 While limited specific feedback is received on the SEIAs/SIEEs,
there is clear public interest in reading some of them. The reconciliation of adequate public
disclosure and effective community consultation capable of meeting both ADB and national
objectives is considered possible only if addressed on a country- by-country basis and
considered the most appropriate language for disclosure.

B.       Efficacy and Efficiency of the Environment Policies

118. This section assesses the effects of the environmental policies by comparing the
scenarios for (i) with and without ADB's involvement in the projects, i.e., to assess the value
added of ADB's involvement for DMCs; and (ii) before and after the 2002 Environment Policy,
i.e., to assess the added value of the 2002 Environment Policy. Two distinctive but related
aspects of the environmental policies are differentiated: environmental safeguards and
environmental improvement. Although the focus of this SES is on environmental safeguards, in
reality the two aspects are difficult to separate, as environmental safeguard measures should
not be confined to ensuring "no significant harm" but should also aim for "doing better."



25
   In the case of Shell, the environmental and social impact assessment completed for the Shanbei Gas Pipeline was
   awarded a Gold Medal by the PRC Academy of Sciences--the first award ever given to an environmental
   assessment, and an indication that the outcome was considered very beneficial.
26
   Information received from ADB's webmaster indicates that, for April 2005, SEIAs and SIEEs on the ADB
   homepage received from 1 to 323 visits. The top five in terms of number of visits were all SEIAs, including a natural
   gas project in India (323 visits), a gas and oil field development project in Indonesia (252 visits), an airport terminal
   project in the Philippines (161 visits), a power generation project in the Philippines (152 visits), and a power
   generation project in Thailand (140 visits). The average is 44 visits per month for all the SEIAs/SIEEs combined. It
   is clear that SEIAs for category A projects received a higher number of visits, but the exception may be the PRC,
   for which SEIAs received on average of 20-40 visits. Language may be a factor, as most PRC citizens do not read
   English.
38


       1.      Has ADB's involvement in projects enhanced the environmental safeguard
               measures for these projects? In other words, without ADB's support for the
               projects, would the same results be achieved using the national
               environmental safeguard systems?

119. This question is central to the evaluation. What is the added value of the environmental
policies and procedures to the improvement of the environmental performance of ADB-supported
projects through direct interventions at the project level? More widely, what is the added value to
other similar projects in DMCs in general, through improving the environmental safeguard system
at the sector level and through the "demonstration" effects of ADB-supported projects?

120. The questionnaire survey revealed that most of the respondents felt that ADB had
provided added value in impact assessment and implementing and monitoring. In many cases,
this was partly due to the relatively low environmental awareness, as perceived by the AMLs, of
government and EA officials. The levels of concern for the potential adverse impact of ADB-
supported projects varied significantly across stakeholders, countries, and environmental
categories. Across countries, the PRC projects were of higher concern to key stakeholders with
the exception of NGOs and the general public, in part due to the much larger number of category
A projects in the PRC. Some AMLs suggested that ADB's environmental assessment process had
encouraged the participation of government counterpart staff and raised their awareness of
potential adverse impacts. These findings were confirmed by the country consultations and case
studies. Many government and EA officials felt that ADB's involvement in projects had heightened
their attention to environmental issues compared with the scenario without ADB financing.

121. ADB's inputs to the environmental assessment process and outputs vary from country to
country and from project to project. The main outputs of ADB's environmental procedures are the
SEIAs for category A and SIEEs for category B projects. In about 25% of ADB-supported category
A and B projects, there were existing IEEs or EIAs prepared by the EAs before ADB's
involvement. Around 60% of these were from PRC and India, and 80% were considered by the
AMLs as good to excellent. For these projects, the SEIAs or SIEEs were based largely on the
IEEs or EIAs prepared by the EAs, and were submitted to the ADB Board as part of the project
approval process. For those projects without prior IEEs/EIAs, i.e., about 75%, ADB consultants
and staff prepared the IEE or EIA, as well as the SIEE or SEIA. In some cases, only the SIEE or
SEIA was prepared by ADB consultants without the original IEE or EIA.

122. In terms of the scoping of the environmental assessment, Box 3 indicates that the
attention paid to different aspects of the environmental assessment was uneven. The low
attention paid to assessing project alternatives and
secondary and induced impacts of the projects,         Box 3: Scoping in ADB's Environmental
which is also confirmed by the country case                          Assessment
studies, is particularly alarming, as they are the
key areas where the environmental assessment         Seventy-eight percent of survey respondents
could have contributed to the improvement of         believed that moderate or substantial
                                                     attention had been given to construction
project design and quality. However, there are
                                                     impacts, 65% for operational impacts, 47%
some indications of improvement in these areas       for assessing alternatives to the project, 43%
after 2003.                                          for assessing secondary or induced impacts,
                                                      53% for assessing cumulative impacts, 70%
123. The OEM reviewed the technical quality of        for assessing effects on local people, and
the SEIAs and SIEEs for case studies. Generally,      80% for making sure mitigating measures
the SEIAs, all of which are from the PRC, are         were implemented through monitoring.
comprehensive and informative, reflecting both
                                                                                                                    39


qualitative and quantitative assessment of potential impacts and providing a detailed EMP. The
quality of the SIEEs is generally lower and more variable across countries and sectors. For
example, for Loan 1944 and Loan 1959, two road projects (both category B) in India included in
the case studies, the SIEEs comprised only three pages, and no EMP was included. The
government's own procedures require an EMP. In comparison, Loan 2152-IND, a power
transmission project in India, was supported by an 18-page SIEE that contained a detailed
assessment of the potential environmental impact and a detailed EMP. This inconsistency in the
quality of SIEEs seemed to be related to the environmental awareness of ADB AMLs. Some
documents were so poor that it is doubtful they should have been accepted. In the case of
Philippines and Viet Nam, similar inconsistency also exists and also reflects the capacity of the
EA and whether ADB provided assistance in preparing the SIEEs.

124. For projects with prior IEEs/EIAs, ADB's value added was limited. The PRC is a good
example. Virtually all PRC projects, including the six projects visited for the case studies, had an
IEE/EIA carried out before ADB's PPTA. The main input of the PPTA consultants was to
translate and reformat the reports to produce the SEIA or SIEE to meet ADB's requirements.
With the exception of public participation and socioeconomic impact assessment, there is
usually little substantive change as a result of ADB's participation in terms of better assessment
of impacts or development of mitigating measures. Most changes are to ensure conformity with
ADB's prescribed structure. This is a key point, because it shows that in these countries ADB
already places heavy reliance on the national system. In these situations, the current approach
is not serving to either improve quality of outputs significantly or provide wider benefits. The
process is largely about demonstrating compliance with ADB requirements. Some EAs in the
PRC suggested that ADB could have contributed more to improving the quality of the EIAs by
examining some specific unresolved issues and providing examples for technical innovation and
improvement (e.g., including landscape management in highway projects, use of remote
sensing to improve impact assessment, introducing techniques for evaluation of biodiversity).27

125. ADB's value added for projects without a prior IEE or EIA was more significant. Overall,
73% of the AMLs considered that ADB had provided moderate to significant value added. By
comparison, 61% of the AMLs believed that ADB had added value in respect of monitoring and
implementation. The country case studies provide evidence that in some cases ADB helped
improve monitoring during implementation. In Philippines and PRC, ADB introduced the third-
party monitoring mechanisms for environmental monitoring in its projects. This assisted in
enforcing the governments' own environmental laws and standards. In the Philippines, ADB's
participation also helped reduce corruption. In Viet Nam, ADB-supported road projects had
better monitoring, through resident engineers, compared with similar government-financed
projects (Appendix 4).

126. However, ADB's efforts on monitoring are sporadic at best and predominantly rely on the
semiannual monitoring reports submitted by the EAs. None of the environmental safeguard
specialists in the RDs interviewed had conducted any environmental monitoring mission, although
some joined regular loan review missions. RSES staff conducted approximately 10 independent
safeguard reviews for selected projects per year. The safeguard review reports are of varying but
generally good quality and are specifically focused on compliance with environmental covenants
by the EAs. Safeguard review remains the most important direct monitoring mechanism that ADB
27
     Although not fully evident through the case studies, information provided by concerned ADB staff suggested that
     ADB staff and consultants are assisting the PRC in developing the necessary capacities and project documentation
     through project assistance and advise on a number of issues that PRC environmental authorities are striving to find
     solutions for. These areas are wastewater treatment and effluent management, dredged sludge disposal, solid and
     toxic wastes disposal, and air quality and issues related to urban river basin management.
40


has for environmental monitoring. However, it has several limitations: it is conducted only for
relatively small numbers; therefore coverage is limited. Furthermore, the review almost entirely
focuses on checking on compliance. The nature and duration of the missions do not allow more
efforts on value addition for clients. As an example, Box 2 summarizes the key findings of a recent
environmental safeguard review mission conducted for Loan 1959-IND, one of the case projects
for this evaluation (Appendix 4).

127. Other monitoring mechanisms include project performance reports (PPRs) for ongoing
projects and PCRs and PPERs for completed projects. A review of these documents for all the
projects in the four countries approved since 1997 shows that environmental issues and
compliance were discussed for about 60% of the projects in India, the PRC, and Viet Nam, and
for one third of the projects in the Philippines. However, most of the discussion was routine
reporting on procedural compliance such as "environmental covenants being included in
contractor's contracts, engagement by the EAs of environmental monitoring consultants," etc.
Few, if any, reported lack of, or insufficient, substantive compliance with the environmental
covenants. An examination of a limited number of BTORs for loan review missions also shows
similar lack of substantive discussions on environmental issues. The conclusions on lack of
efforts on substantive environmental monitoring
by ADB's project administration missions are          Box 4: Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project
consistent with OED's recent finding on the                       in the Lao PDR
decreasing number of days of ADB staff on
project administration missions since 1995,         The project was the first large hydropower
despite the increasing ratio of the number of       development project in the Mekong River in the
                                                    Lao PDR since the World Commission on
professional     staff   to     project    under
                                                    Dams Report and attracted substantial
implementation from 1.6 in 1995 to 2.1 in           international publicity. ADB provided a
2004.28                                             combined sovereign and private sector loan of
                                                            $50 million to partly finance the government's
128. Despite some positive impacts, ADB                     equity participation in the project in addition to
has not maximized its potential for value                   a political risk guarantee of up to $50 million.
addition to client countries such as India, where
ADB funding decisions have sought to avoid                  The project was classified as environmental
including environmentally sensitive subprojects             category A, i.e., having potentially significant
in its sector loans. In these cases, ADB has                impacts if the appropriate mitigating measures
                                                            are not properly implemented. The project
avoided opportunities to play a "demonstration"
                                                            triggered ADB's involuntary resettlement, the
role. Some NGOs would argue that ADB adds                   indigenous peoples, gender and development,
greatest value in such sensitive projects. In the           and environmental policies. The project is
Nam Theun Hydropower project in the Lao                     expected     to    bring   about      significant
PDR,29 ADB and World Bank participation has                 development impacts in poverty reduction and
made a significant contribution to the                      environmental conservation programs.
improvement of social and environmental risk
mitigation measures The participation of ADB                The project is an example of high risks, high
and the World Bank in the project has provided              transaction costs, and possibly high returns for
a needed comfort level for private investors and            ADB in terms of developmental impact. NGOs
                                                            played an important role in front-end project
a framework to more effectively mitigate
                                                            preparation and continue to play such a role in
environmental and social risks than would have              monitoring environmental and social impacts
been the case without their involvement (Box 4).            during project implementation and operation.

28
   ADB. 2005. Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance Portfolio Performance for the Year Ending 31
   December 2004. Manila.
29
   Loan 2162-LAO: Greater Mekong Subregion: Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project, for $20 million, approved in April
   2005.
                                                                                                               41




129. There was a view from the AMLs that environmental safeguard issues would be better
addressed at the sector level through separate interventions, e.g., TA to improve the country
safeguard systems including monitoring, rather than project-level interventions. To a large extent,
the OEM concurs with this view. ADB has helped improve the environmental legal and institutional
frameworks in DMCs through its TA and other assistance programs. Between 1997 and 2005,
ADB provided 302 environment-related TAs, averaging 34 per year. These included 125 advisory
TAs (ADTAs), 108 PPTAs, and 69 regional TAs (RETAs). Of the four countries selected for case
studies, the PRC was the largest recipient of environment-related TAs (67, including 34 ADTAs
and 33 PPTAs); followed by India (18, including 8 ADTAs and 10 PPTAs); Philippines (9, including
5 ADTAs and 4 PPTAs); and Viet Nam (8, including 6 ADTAs and 2 PPTAs).

130. The OEM reviewed the scope of the environment-related TAs, particularly ADTAs for the
four countries. The PRC, being the largest recipient of environmental TAs, received the most
diverse assistance in terms of environmental thematic issues addressed. ADB provided a series
of seven TAs beginning in 1988 with SEPA (or the former National Environmental Protection
Agency) as the EA to improve the country's environmental assessment legal and institutional
framework and capacities.30 The most notable examples were TA 1436, TA 1988, and TA 2975,
which provided three training programs on environmental assessment. Cumulatively, the three
TAs trained nearly 1,000 environmental professionals across the provinces on EIA and
environmental planning. The TAs also provided assistance in developing EIA regulations,
environmental standards, and monitoring and supervision. Both self-evaluation and OED's
independent evaluation found that these TAs achieved their objectives and contributed to the
overall improvement of the PRC's environmental safeguard systems and capacities.31

131. Compared with the PRC, ADB's environmental TAs in the other three countries were
fewer in number and less focused on environmental assessment and capacity building. An ADTA
was provided to India in 1995 to strengthen EIA capacity and environmental legislation.32 Similar
TAs were provided to Philippines33 and Viet Nam.34 The TA completion reports for all three TAs
suggested that they contributed to the improvement of the capacities in the three countries to
carry out and review EIAs. ADB's environmental TAs in all four countries in more recent years
have moved away from the traditional national level EIA capacity building to addressing either
thematic issues (e.g., strategic EIA) or capacity building at the regional or sector level. This may
be an unintended outcome of the 2002 reorganization. With the disbanding of the Environment
Division, there was no longer a natural focal point in ADB to deal with environmental policy and
safeguard issues. The focus of the environmental specialists that were mainstreamed shifted to
sectoral environmental issues. Compared with the former Environment Division, the priorities of
30
   TA 987-PRC: Institutional Strengthening of National Environmental Protection Agency, for $340,000, approved in
   June 1988; TA 1436-PRC: Environmental Impact Assessment Training, for $600,000, approved in December 1990;
   TA 1988-PRC: Environmental Impact Assessment Training Phase II, for $900,000, approved in November 1993;
   TA 2505-PRC: Strengthening Environmental Standards and Enforcement Policies, for $600,000, approved in
   December 1995; TA 2975-PRC: Environmental Impact Assessment Training and Curriculum Development (Phase
   III), for $600,000, approved in December 1998; TA 3290-PRC: Capacity Building in Ministerial Status
   Responsibilities in the SEPA, for $810,000, approved in November 1999; TA 4741-PRC: Institutional Development
   of SEPA's Regional Supervision Centers, for $550,000, approved in December 2005.
31
   ADB 1997. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected TAs in the Environment Sector to the
   People's Republic of China. Manila; and ADB 2003. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected
   Environmental Advisory Technical Assistance in the People's Republic of China. Manila.
32
   TA 2296-IND: Strengthening EIA Capacity and Environmental Legislation, for $500,000, approved in February 1995.
33
   TA 1632-PHI: Improving the Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment, for $336,000, approved in
   December 1991.
34
   TA 2128-VIE: Strengthening Environmental Planning and Environmental Impact Assessment Capabilities, for
   $600,000, approved in August 1994.
42


RSES were somewhat limited in terms of environmental staff resources, and the focus was also
less on capacity building in environmental assessment and more on project-level safeguards.

132.     Compared with project-level interventions, improvements in the country safeguard
system have an overarching impact on all projects rather than only ADB-supported projects. In
the PRC, for example, the environmental legal and institutional framework has improved
significantly. Both ADB and the World Bank contributed to this improvement. The improvement
in the national environmental safeguard system has contributed to the relatively better
performance of the six case study projects in the PRC compared with the other three countries.
In India and Philippines, there has also been significant progress in improving environmental
safeguard systems, although the capacity in these two countries is somewhat lower than in the
PRC. The World Bank appears to have played a more significant role than ADB in these two
countries in EIA capacity building.

133. Overall, ADB has made some positive impacts on the environmental performance of
both ADB-supported projects and the environmental safeguard systems of the DMCs. The case
studies in particular suggest that on average ADB-supported projects are more environmentally
sound than similar projects financed by domestic sources, and ADB has been successful in
avoiding major adverse impacts caused by its projects. However, ADB has clearly not reached
its potential in terms of being a role model for improving environmental assessment and
management in the DMCs.

           2.      How have ADB's operations in terms of inputs, outputs, and outcomes
                   changed in accordance with its environmental safeguard policies? Has the
                   2002 Environment Policy significantly enhanced the effectiveness of
                   environmental safeguard of ADB-supported projects?

134. In 1993, ADB published a set of environmental guidelines for various types of projects
including infrastructure, industrial and power development, and agricultural and natural resources
development. The guidelines, which have been widely used, are comprehensive and provide
detailed checklists and instructions to assist in scoping environmental assessment and developing
mitigation measures for different types of projects. Following the 2002 Environment Policy, a new
set of Environmental Assessment Guidelines was published in 2003,35 which incorporated the
changes mandated by the 2002 Environment Policy. The most important changes included
extended public consultation for category A projects, emphasis on environmental assessment as
a dynamic process, the need to conduct CEAs and strategic EIAs by RDs, and the need to
conduct an annual review of environmental aspects of category A and B sensitive projects by RDs
(Appendix 2). About 80% of the AMLs surveyed indicated that the various environmental
assessment guidelines were useful. Of those who have used both the 1993 and 2003 guidelines,
about 60% felt that the new procedures and guidelines were clearer, stricter, and/or more effective.
The 2003 revision can, therefore, be judged to have been well received, if not overwhelmingly so.

135. The effect of the 2002 Environment Policy on actual ADB inputs to, and outputs of,
projects during project processing was assessed. Table 2 indicates that there is conspicuous
lack of category A projects in all countries except the PRC, a trend that has continued after
2003. Neither the 2002 Environment Policy nor the 2002 reorganization, which has changed the
categorization review process with the creation of an independent RSES and a Chief
Compliance Officer, had any influence in changing the predominance of category B projects in
countries outside of the PRC up to 2005. There are indications that in 2006, the number of

35
     ADB. 2003. Environmental Assessment Guidelines. Manila.
                                                                                                                43


category A projects may increase. A total of 32 determined or potential category A projects are
either in the pipeline or have been approved, including 12 from PSOD. However, the PRC
continues to dominate category A projects for public sector lending, followed by the South East
Asian and the Mekong regions.

136. The case studies and the interviews with environmental safeguard specialists and sector
division directors suggested that in countries other than the PRC there is an active tendency to
avoid category A projects, a tendency that had not abated as of the end of 2005. This is
because of the longer processing time required. In some cases, the government preferred ADB
not to become involved in environmentally sensitive projects in order to minimize potential
delays and consequently higher interest payments or commitment charges. As such,
environmental safeguards have been interpreted as a de facto policy to "play it safe" in
determining what projects or subprojects ADB should finance. In addition to the aforementioned
reasons, several other factors also contribute to this: (i) in some countries (e.g., India), there are
many other opportunities for ADB financing not involving environmentally sensitive components;
and (ii) perceived inspection-related risks for staff due to the strengthened accountability
mechanism by the CRP.

137. There was no recognition of the deliberate avoidance of category A projects by the
mission leaders surveyed. Almost four out of five (77%) AMLs believed that the environmental
category assigned to their projects was appropriate. Another 14% believed that the category
overestimated the adverse environmental impacts, and only 3% felt that it underestimated the
adverse impacts. In open comments, none identified the apparent lack of category A projects as
a concern. Neither were comments offered on the discrepancy between lending activities in the
PRC and elsewhere. This points to an important underlying concern--the mission leaders in
those countries may genuinely believe that the intention of the safeguard policy is to avoid
environmentally sensitive projects.

138. Environmental classification is important in determining the resources allocated for
environmental assessment. Since 1997, ADB has provided PPTAs for 84% of category A and B
projects. Preparation of a SEIA/SIEE was included as part of the consultant's terms of reference
for 78% of these projects. Comparing these indicators before and after the 2002 Environment
Policy, about 90% of the projects since 2003 had PPTAs, compared with 81% before 2003.
Nearly all (97%) of the PPTAs for projects from 2003 onward included preparation of a SIEE/SEIA,
compared with 71% before 2003. The 2002 Environmental Policy may be partly responsible for
the increase in ADB assistance in preparation of SIEEs/SEIAs during project processing.36

139. On average, ADB PPTA consultants spent 3.4 person-months preparing a SEIA and
2.6 person-months for an SIEE. The average time has not changed for SEIAs since 2003.
However, for SIEEs, the average time has increased to 3.1 person-months, compared with 2.1
person-months before 2003. The increased time for SIEEs may reflect more stringent
requirements such as inclusion of EMPs for some SIEEs. The 2002 Environment Policy may
have resulted in an increase in resources applied to environmental assessment.

140. The OEM assessed the scoping process (Box 3) and changes over time as perceived by
the AMLs surveyed. Comparing the indicators over time, i.e., before and after 2003, there are
across-the-board increases for the indicators. The most significant changes were observed with
"making sure mitigating measures were implemented through monitoring" (19% increase),
"considering alternatives to the project" (13%), and "secondary and induced impact" (11%). This

36
     However, the increase could also be partly caused by fading memories associated with the older projects.
44


increased attention as perceived by the AMLs is unlikely to be only the direct result of the 2002
Environment Policy. Other factors such as a general increase in environmental awareness and
fear of the compliance mechanism may also have contributed.

141. The OEM reviewed the SIEEs/SEIAs for the 16 projects chosen for case studies.
Although the quality of the SEIAs/SIEEs reviewed may have improved somewhat over time,
there continue to be common weaknesses with all SEIAs/SIEEs. Most projects visited were
approved before 2003. The case studies have not provided enough evidence to indicate
differences, or lack thereof, in the environmental outcomes of ADB-supported projects before
and after the 2002 Environment Policy. There is evidence of improvement in the PRC, where
there have been demonstrable improvements in environmental management for infrastructure
projects, e.g., Loan 1851-PRC: Guangxi Roads Development Project and Loan 2094-PRC:
Guangxi Roads Development II Project. It is not possible, however, to attribute these only to
ADB's 2002 Environment Policy and more stringent procedures after 2003.

142. Overall, there is a perception that the 2002 Environment Policy has resulted in some
positive changes in the environmental assessment process through clearer and more effective
procedures, increased time inputs for preparation of SIEEs/SEIAs, greater attention to
assessing project alternatives, and increased focus on monitoring during implementation.
However, there continues to be evidence of a de facto policy continuing after the 2002
Environment Policy to avoid category A projects in all countries except the PRC. In addition,
ADB's environmental safeguards remain dominated by procedural compliance rather than
outcome. The results at the outcome level in terms of improving the environmental performance
of ADB-supported projects are less certain than at the input level.

       3.     Have the 2002 Environment Policy and the division of environment specialists
              into two groups, viz., the operational departments and RSES, served to
              strengthen environmental safeguards through mainstreaming as intended?

143. ADB has a limited number of professional staff with environmental qualifications--
currently about 17 environment specialists. A recurring issue within the SES has been the
impact of the 2002 reorganization on the effective use of ADB's limited staff resources.
Mainstreaming environmental expertise into RDs with a separate and independent RSES
charged with compliance audit was well intended. To a degree, the mainstreaming has
generated benefits in terms of making the environmental expertise more readily available within
the RDs. The closer interactions between the mainstreamed environment specialists and other
project team members have created a better learning atmosphere for incorporating
environmental issues early in the project cycle.

144. However, there is a widely held view within ADB, reflected both through the questionnaire
survey and in the interviews, that the reorganization has not worked as effectively as envisaged,
and some consider that it has had an adverse impact on the effectiveness of ADB's safeguard
procedures. As one respondent pointedly expressed, "The decision to cut environmental
operations staff capacity via cutting the Environment Division, "mainstreaming" of environmental
staff, and eventual loss of focus are the operational problems. ADB has never recovered." To a
certain extent, the interviews with the environmental safeguard specialists in the RDs and the
sector division directors, as well as interviews with EA and government officials during country
studies, echoed this view. There are five key views regarding the reduced effectiveness of ADB's
current organizational structure for environmental safeguard specialists, compared with the
previous structure of having a central Environment Division:
                                                                                                 45


       (i)     The mainstreamed safeguard specialists in the RDs have played a positive role
               in terms of better access to environmental expertise by RDs.
       (ii)    There is a loss of critical mass and synergy associated with having all the
               environmental and social safeguard specialists consolidated in one division.
       (iii)   The safeguard specialists have been to a certain extent marginalized in terms of
               their career development and their presence in an otherwise loan processing-
               driven culture within the RDs. Their performance is also evaluated against other
               project staff, and the criteria for evaluating performance are likely to be biased in
               favor of project processing. Several more "successful" mainstreamed
               environment specialists in the RDs in terms of promotions became more
               "successful" not necessarily because of their "safeguards" work but because of
               their success in becoming mission leaders for loan processing.
       (iv)    From the viewpoint of clients (governments and EAs), there was a loss of focal
               point within ADB in terms of providing national policy/capacity building
               environment-related assistance; ADB's limited environmental expertise is spread
               too thin across different divisions and departments.
       (v)     The mainstreamed environmental specialists have lost an element of independence.

145. There is also a view that the independent policing function of RSES has not been as
effective as intended. Some AMLs complained that some safeguard specialists at RSES have not
been able to provide needed inputs to improve project design and have focused too much on
procedural compliance. This has contributed to the undesirable situation of too much attention being
paid to projects with minimal environmental impact but not enough attention to projects with more
significant impacts. Although this opinion is not necessarily shared by the majority of the people
surveyed, it is nonetheless worth RSES's attention in order to improve its role in the process.

146. An important observation in the survey results was that, because of concerns about the
independence of the safeguard specialists, they do not gain valuable experience by joining loan
processing or review missions. This has two important consequences: the best use of limited
resources may be compromised; and the value of the independent review may be reduced, as the
independent RSES staff do not have field knowledge. Staff lose opportunities for much needed
project exposure and experience. RSES's comments on projects to rely largely on secondary
information presented to them by project teams. The independent safeguard review missions and
operations support missions conducted by RSES, while helpful in terms of both gaining project
exposure and monitoring of compliance for selected projects, have their own limitations.

147. One of the key reasons is that ADB's limited base of professional expertise in the
environmental sector may not be suitable for adopting such a decentralized institutional
structure. Compared with the World Bank, ADB's total staff resources for environmental
safeguard, in terms of both quantity and quality, are limited and focused at Headquarters.
Fragmentation of this limited professional resource, in terms of management and roles, has
exacerbated this situation, not helped it. Consolidation of the skills base in terms of
management would lead to greater flexibility in the use of the resources, more effective
prioritization, better allocation of individual skills, better staff development, and better career
opportunities for environmental specialists. However, the crucial issue is ADB's minimal staff
resources in country offices. This is a fundamental constraint. Essentially, ADB has adopted
environmental policy and safeguard procedures that are very similar on paper to those of the
World Bank without making the same investment in staff resources. Ways must be found to
better balance the mandates required by ADB's environmental policy and business practices
with staff resources. Not to bring expectations into line with staff resources entails a credibility
46


risk for ADB with DMCs, civil society, and affected persons, and a risk of increased application
of the compliance mechanism.

           4.       What are the impacts of ADB's environmental safeguards on transaction
                    costs and the market appeal of ADB financing? Are the transaction costs of
                    implementing the environmental safeguard procedures too high for DMCs
                    relative to the benefits and to the financing capabilities of EAs?

148. There was a perception both within ADB and in DMC institutions, which is supported by
evidence gathered by the SES, that ADB's environmental safeguard system is overly focused
on procedures and compliance. This gives rise to high transaction costs37 with little benefit or
value added. Many criticized the system as not being focused on achieving results on the
ground--either in terms of better projects or longer term capacity building. Relatively higher
transaction costs for limited improvements on the ground have reduced the competitiveness of
ADB's financing as opposed to alternative sources of financing. A typical situation for the EAs of
ADB-supported projects is the need to comply with two separate sets of environmental
safeguard requirements, particularly during project preparation. About 60% of the AMLs
believed that ADB procedures took more time for EAs compared with only 7% who believed
government procedures required a longer time. EAs consistently complained that ADB's
procedures were a major and costly burden. Some streamlining of the procedures, and in
particular reducing the extent of duplication with country systems, is clearly desirable.

149. When asked if they consider that ADB's environmental safeguard procedures make ADB
financing less attractive relative to alternative financing sources, 54% of AMLs said "no," and 36%
said "yes." The following quote from a respondent highlights what may be a typical situation for
many ADB-supported projects: "The Government only saw ADB's environmental policy
requirements as something that had to be complied with to get the loan. From their perspective, the
environmental impacts of road construction were minor, and ADB's requirements were perceived
purely in terms of causing unnecessary costs (e.g., international supervision consultants) and
potential delays." This attitude is undoubtedly widespread within EAs. The comments are of most
concern where, due to a lack of flexibility, ADB procedures are being applied repetitively with little
practical benefit.

150. The compliance-driven safeguard system and consequent "high" transaction costs are
well illustrated in the cases of ADB's sector loans or sector development programs with multiple
subprojects, where the procedures are applied to individual subprojects. Some ADB sector
loans have a large number of subprojects. Conducting SIEEs for each subproject can be time
consuming and expensive but produce very limited benefits. Fifty-one (35%) of the projects in
the survey fell into this category, and for half of these some or all of the subprojects required
EAs to complete a separate SIEE. The average time required was 2.2 person-months per SIEE.
The information provided in SIEEs was often too general to be useful for project decision
making and project monitoring, and the value in terms of on the ground improvements was
limited. About 45% of respondents felt that subproject-level SIEEs remain necessary but should
be simplified; and 19% believed that a project-level SIEE (e.g., an expanded EAF) should have
been adequate, with no need for subproject-level SIEEs.


37
     Transaction costs associated with environmental safeguards refer to costs incurred, directly and indirectly, to meet
     ADB's environmental safeguard procedures. These include both tangible and intangible costs. The examples of
     tangible costs include cost of hiring consultants to prepare IEEs required by ADB. The examples of intangible costs
     include costs associated with delays caused by the review and approval of the IEEs in the form of forgone benefits
     of projects.
                                                                                                47


151. The two Asian Development Fund (ADF) case studies included in Viet Nam highlight
issues related to the tangible transaction costs of environmental safeguards for small-budget
ADF projects (Appendix 4). For Loan 1888-VIE: Provincial Roads Improvement Sector, the
value of a typical subproject contract was $300,000­$500,000. An IEE was required for each of
more than 80 road contracts. These were to be produced by a team of consultants, led by
international consultants, who were also responsible for project supervision. ADB environmental
safeguard, together with social safeguard procedures, added substantial transaction costs to the
overall cost of the project. As an indication of these transaction costs, the total cost of the
project implementation consultancy exceeded $7 million, more than 10% of the loan amount.
The scope of work included project supervision, preparation of the IEE, resettlement plans, and
ethnic minority development plans.

152. Intangible transaction costs in the form of delayed approvals from both the government and
ADB, which are more difficult to quantify, can be more significant than the value of time used for
preparing IEEs. All four projects in the India country studies were sector loans. Reviewing and
approving subproject documents including SIEEs caused a major workload for INRM, which had
only one environmental consultant. Delays in approvals are causing serious concerns for ADB's
emergency loans for tsunami relief and rehabilitation, which comprise many small project
components. These components often have limited environmental impacts, especially compared
with the devastation caused by the tsunami. However, an informal communication with a consultant
suggested that the cumbersome safeguard procedures have made some people in Indonesia
conclude that ADB is not "suitable" for implementing emergency loans.

153. There is a need for a greater focus on results-based environmental safeguard
procedures. These procedures need to be responsive to the capacity constraints and needs of
the DMCs. The procedures should facilitate ADB achieving results on the ground rather than
simply being able to demonstrate compliance with internal procedures in a uniform and routine
fashion, irrespective of the actual environmental impact of the projects or subprojects. The
current procedures are relatively inflexible in being able to respond to the different situations
presented by a wide range of projects in widely different national contexts. This inflexibility in
approach has often caused relatively high transaction costs that are out of balance with the
benefits achieved and the capacities of the DMCs and ADB. The 2002 Environment Policy has
made some progress in reducing transaction costs, for example, by setting a specific "free limit"
for requiring an IEE for sector loans. However, addressing this weakness would require a
fundamental change in the Environment Policy, which explicitly requires uniform application of
the safeguard procedures across all ADB operations and all DMCs.

       5.      Has the Environment Policy influenced how environmental safeguards and
               enhancement are integrated at the country strategy and program level
               through conducting comprehensive and thorough country environmental
               analyses that will help identify the environmental needs of the DMCs and
               ADB's strategic environmental goals in the DMCs? Have the actual
               assistance programs reflect changed in accordance with such needs?

154. There is a concern within ADB that, under the 2002 Environment Policy, environmental
improvement is no longer one of ADB's key development objectives, and this may adversely
impact on ADB's proactive environmental agenda aimed at environmental capacity building and
environmental enhancement. Similarly, the 2002 reorganization was also feared to have a
similar negative effect. All previous questions were related to environmental safeguards, i.e., not
to cause significant harm to the environment, which is the focus of the SES. Another important
aspect of the fifth element of the Environment Policy is the integration of environmental
48


considerations into ADB's operations. This explicitly requires that a CEA be conducted as an
input to a CSP. This section aims to cast some light on any potential impact of the 2002
Environment Policy, through mandating CEAs, on ADB's assistance program at the input and
output levels. It should be cautioned that the assessment is preliminary, and a much more
thorough study, which would include reviewing ADB's full environmental agenda, is needed to
arrive at a more definite conclusion.

155. CEAs have been completed or nearly completed for 11 countries, including Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, Cambodia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, Tajikistan,
Uzbekistan, and Viet Nam (draft).38 The Philippines CEA and draft Viet Nam CEA were reviewed for
the SES. The CEAs for PRC and India are in preparation.39 Both the Philippine and Viet Nam CEAs
contain substantial information on the state of the environment and current environmental
challenges facing the countries. However, the OEM did not find a strong sense of purpose about the
need to prepare such a document. Much of the information presented is general and macro in
nature, and is readily available from environmental textbooks or state-of-the-environment reports.
Furthermore, in the case of the Philippines, a review of the CSP for 2005­2007 shows little evidence
that the CEA, completed in 2004, has had any major influence on the thrusts of ADB assistance in
the country. In the case of Viet Nam, the draft CEA has addressed the main environmental
challenges and issues facing the country and assessed the impact of the project components of the
2006­2008 CSP (still in preparation). However, it is not clear to what extent the CEA has influenced
the drafting of the CSP. The directors of the
coordination divisions interviewed confirmed              Box 5: Core Environment Program and
that CEAs have not become main thematic               Biodiversity Conservation Corridors Initiative
studies that contribute significantly to the CSP         in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS)
process. It is clear that, for the CEA to be useful,
                                                     The RETA was designed to support the
it must acquire a stronger "mission" or              sustainable development agenda of the GMS
"purpose." For example, in view of the               countries by mainstreaming the environment in
increasing      need      for     aligning   ADB's   the GMS Economic Cooperation Program
environmental safeguard systems with national        through providing technical, operational, and
systems, greater emphasis should be given in         financial   assistance   for   upgrading     the
the CEAs to assessing the comprehensiveness          environmental       management       strategies,
and gaps, compared with international good           programs, and projects under the Strategic
practices, of the national environment policy        Development Framework and the Regional
and safeguard systems and the underlying             Cooperation Strategy and Program.
institutional structures and capacities. More
                                                     The TA, which involves all GMS countries, was
efforts should also be made by ADB's country         cofinanced by the governments of Netherlands
teams to integrate the CEA process and               and Sweden and by the Poverty Reduction
findings into the CSP process and content.           Cooperation Fund. Main components of the TA
                                                           include environmental assessment of the
156. To illustrate the impact, or lack thereof,            economic      sector    strategies;  biodiversity
of the 2002 Environment Policy on ADB's                    conservation;     environmental     performance
environment-related assistance programs,                   assessment and sustainable development
Figures 2 to 6 present information on the                  planning; development and institutionalization of
number and value of environment-related TAs                GMS capacity for environmental management;
                                                           and program development, delivery, and
and loans since 1997. The detailed breakdown
                                                           sustainable financing.
by country, year, and type of TAs (ADTA,
38
   There is some uncertainty about the exact number of CEAs completed or being prepared. The number presented
   here was taken from the ADB website. The latest RSES figure indicates that 21 CEAs have been prepared.
39
   In the case of the PRC, there was a deliberate decision to delay CEA preparation, since the World Bank had just
   completed its CEA for the PRC and ADB decided to use the World Bank's document at the time instead of
   preparing its own. This could also be true for some of the other countries for which CEAs are not yet completed.
                                                                                                          49


PPTA, and RETA) is given in Appendix 5. Figures 2 and 3 indicate that the total number and value
of environment-related TAs were steady until 2002, but both have increased since 2003. It
appears that ADB has strengthened its inputs in terms of environment-related technical capacity
building and project preparation. This has run contrary to the perceived lower priority on
"environment" within ADB as shown by the questionnaire survey and interviews. While a detailed
assessment of ADB's environmental TA program is needed to determine how it has evolved over
time, preliminary assessment indicates that this increase in environmental TAs may be partly
explained by the lack of clear criteria for "environmental TAs," which are based on thematic
classification and have no quantitative targets as to the percentage of the TA cost on
"environmental" component. Some of the more recent TAs, including Uttaranchal Power Sector
Capacity Building for India and Strengthening the Water Supply Sector Program for Kazakhstan,
perhaps should have not been classified as "environmental" TAs. More recent environmental TAs,
particularly after 2002, were more focused on operations-related and sector-specific issues such
as energy generation from wastes, nonpoint (agricultural) source pollution, renewable energy
development, etc., rather than "environmental capacity building." A good example is the GMS
Core Environment Program,40 which largely explains the dramatic increase in the value of TAs in
2005 compared with 2004. This TA scope went well beyond "environment" through integration of
regional cooperation and economic development with resources management (Box 5).

157. One of the reasons for more sector-oriented environmental TAs after the 2002
reorganization is that the TAs have been administered mostly by the RDs rather than RSES or
the former Environment Division. Notwithstanding the important contribution that ADB has made
in building overall environmental assessment and monitoring capacities at the national and
subnational levels in major client countries, including the PRC, India, Philippines, Viet Nam, and
several Central Asian republics, Figure 4 indicates that the total number of ADTAs with
components on environmental capacity building has decreased since 2000 (albeit some
fluctuations), after remaining more or less steady for much of the 1990s. This may reflect the
evolving needs of the DMCs for different types of assistance, but it may also reflect the
changing focus within ADB following the adoption of the Poverty Reduction Strategy in 1999.
Overall, the issue is not whether the number or amount of environmental TAs has been
increasing or decreasing, but rather what the TAs have been designed to achieve and whether
they have stayed focused enough to achieve impact on the ground in terms of improving the
environmental capacities of the DMCs. Table A5.4 in Appendix 5 indicates the range and the
frequencies of the DMCs that received the TAs. With a few exceptions of high "priority"
countries, including the PRC, Lao PDR, and Indonesia, most of the countries received one such
TA. The environmental assessment capacities for majority of these countries remain relatively
weak despite assistance from ADB and other development partners.

158. In contrast to the TA program, Figures 5 and 6 suggest that both the total number and
value of environment-related loans (see Appendix 5 for classification criteria) has declined from
2000. There are some signs of a rebound since 2002, but the 2005 level of environmental
lending (about $600 million) is only at two thirds of the peak level of 1999. Data by country
shows that the drop was caused mostly by a decline in borrowing by India and several other
countries. The PRC has been the mainstay in environmental borrowing, maintaining $200­300
million per year. Unlike TA programs, which are more influenced by ADB's policies,
environment-related lending activities are more related to demand from DMCs. It is not clear if
the decline since 2000 is attributable to ADB's adoption of the poverty reduction strategy in
1999 and a realignment of resources to aim at this overarching goal.

40
     TA 6289-REG: Core Environment Program and Biodiversity Conservation Corridors Initiative in the GMS, for
     $24,970,000, approved in December 2005.
50




159. One possible cause for the declining environmental loan amount is that the classification
criteria for "environmental" loans are not clear, despite the fact that the criteria contain
quantitative targets such as "not less than 20% of the total loan cost" for the environmental
component. The question remains for many loans: What is an "environmental component"? For
example, in several loans approved in the 1990s for the PRC, industrial and energy efficiency
projects were also referred to either as an environmental improvement project or an acid rain
control project. It is difficult to judge whether money spent on new equipment with better energy
efficiency and thus lower emissions can be considered "environmental." These same projects
also have the primary or secondary classification of economic growth. Today, with a different
policy priority, the RDs would probably be more inclined to classify the same types of projects
as economic growth or even poverty reduction projects, as this would be perceived more
favorably during project processing and approval. However, with the approval of the Medium-
Term Strategy II which included "managing the environment" as one of the five strategic
priorities and specified promoting energy efficiency and developing urban infrastructure as two
key areas of intervention (para. 110), it is foreseeable that "environmental" loans will embark an
increasing trend.

160. Overall, the potential impact of the 2002 Environment Policy on CSPs appears to be
more significant on TAs than loans at the input level. One reason is that TAs are provided
mostly on a grant basis, over which ADB has greater control. In comparison, environmental
loans are more subject to a government's willingness to borrow for environmental improvement.
The decrease in the amount of environmental loans in recent years may also be, at least partly,
the result of the lack of clear classification criteria for "environmental improvement." There is an
incentive for projects to be classified into categories that would fit the particular policy
environment of the time, e.g., economic growth or environmental improvement. Despite the
resources spent on preparing CEAs, their impact on CSPs appears to be limited to date. There
is a risk that CEAs will become another "box ticking" exercise required for the preparation of
CSPs.41




41
     In addition to CEAs, ADB's business practices also require the preparation of poverty, governance, private sector,
     and gender assessments during the preparation of CSPs.
                                                                                    51




                  Figure 2: Number of Environment-Related TAs
 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

  0
        1997      1998    1999      2000     2001     2002    2003    2004   2005

                                             Year

Source: Asian Development Bank.




                  Figure 3: Total Amount of Environment-Related TAs
                                       ($ '000)


  50,000
  40,000
  30,000
  20,000
  10,000
        0
               1997   1998   1999     2000    2001     2002   2003   2004    2005
                                               Year



 Source: Asian Development Bank.
52




                         Figure 4: Number of ADTAs Related to Environmental
                              Assessment Capacity Building, 1990­2005

     6
     5
     4
     3
     2
     1
     0
          1990          1992      1994    1996       1998     2000      2002          2004
                                                  Year

     Source: Asian Development Bank.




                               Figure 5: Number of Environment-Related Loans
         14

         12

         10

          8

          6

          4

          2

          0
                 1997     1998     1999    2000     2001    2002     2003      2004      2005
                                                  Year

     Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                53




                    Figure 6: Total Amount of Environment-Related Loans
                                              ($ `000)
        1,000
            900
            800
            700
            600
            500
            400
            300
            200
            100
              0
                   1997   1998   1999     2000     2001   2002    2003    2004     2005
                                                 Year




       V.         CONCLUSIONS, ISSUES AND LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.     Overall Assessment

161. Relevance. ADB has progressively developed and extended its environmental
safeguard policies and procedures since the early 1980s. From the mid-1990s, environmental
protection was recognized as one of ADB's strategic development goals. In 2002, the
Environment Policy and several other sector policies were prepared to support ADB's adoption
in 1999 of poverty reduction as its overarching goal. The 2002 Environment Policy placed
environment in the context of poverty reduction as one of the five policy elements aimed at
protecting natural resources and promoting environmental improvement and sustainable
development. The policy is the most comprehensive statement to date of the policy intent and
guiding principles to be adopted by ADB to address five key environmental challenges facing
ADB at that time (Table 1). MTS II identified environmental management as one of ADB's five
strategic priorities. Environmental challenges are still relevant and important for ADB's
operations. The policy is comprehensive and remains relevant to the needs of DMCs and ADB's
operations. Overall, ADB's environmental policies, including the 2002 Environment Policy and
safeguard procedures, are considered "relevant."

162. Despite the relevance of ADB's environmental policies and procedures, there is concern
among ADB staff and other stakeholders that the environmental safeguard aspect of the policy, i.e.,
ensuring that ADB-supported projects cause no significant environmental harm, has come to
dominate all other policy elements. The Environment Policy has become widely known as the
Environmental Safeguard Policy. In many aspects of policy implementation the focus on
environmental safeguard practice has taken on this much narrower intent than is the broader intent
of the Environment Policy. In particular, ADB's "environmental improvement" loans have
experienced a decline since 2000 following the introduction of the Poverty Reduction Strategy, and
ADB's attention to "environmental capacity building" also appears to be less focused compared with
the balance of effort through the 1990s. Another weakness in the Environment Policy is the
54


contradiction between the recognition of varying needs within the DMCs in terms of environmental
support and the explicit requirement to apply ADBs environmental safeguard procedures uniformly
across all DMCs. This situation is no longer appropriate, given the significant development of
environmental management capacity in some DMCs and the diverse capacity across DMCs.

163. Efficacy. The 2002 Environment Policy has resulted in some positive changes in the
environmental assessment process. These include clearer and more effective procedures,
increased time inputs for the preparation of SIEEs/SEIAs, greater attention to assessing project
alternatives, and increased focus on monitoring during implementation. There is little evidence,
however, that these gains in input have been translated fully into practical gains in improved
project performance. Rather, ADB's environmental safeguards are dominated by demonstrating
procedural compliance.

164. Notwithstanding the feedback from the questionnaire survey, interviews, and country
case studies that ADB's participation in projects has provided significant value added, the extent
of added value has varied widely across projects and countries and at the different stages of the
environmental assessment process, e.g., impact assessment, monitoring, and implementation.
It is clear, however, that ADB's environmental safeguard system has been largely effective in
protecting ADB's reputation by avoiding financing projects that have major adverse
environmental impacts. However, it is also clear that ADB has not maximized its potential for
achieving positive environmental impacts, due to constraints on professional capacity and
expertise relative to the need, and to the emphasis on "safeguards" rather than the wider
objectives of the Environment Policy.

165. ADB's resources constraint is illustrated by comparison with the environmental
resources allocated by the World Bank. The reorganization of environmental resources
occurring as part of the 2002 reorganization fragmented and arguably weakened ADB's
professional base. The focus on safeguards at the expense of enhancing positive environmental
benefits and capacity building is a pervasive concern. There is some evidence of a de facto
interpretation of the safeguard policy as a justification to avoid category A or other
environmentally sensitive projects. It is not clear that the environmental classification of projects
is being applied with the same rigor across ADB. Questionable environmental project
classification and avoiding ADB involvement in projects that would have been classified as A
occurred in all of the case study countries except the PRC, where the national EIA procedures
reinforce or even dominate the ADB procedures. The effectiveness of the implementation of the
policy is also undermined by the dominance of upfront procedural compliance during project
processing and the often inadequate ADB involvement in addressing problems during project
implementation and in the post-construction phase. This weakness is of particular concern to
NGOs as there is a feeling that for some projects, ADB does not do enough to mitigate adverse
environmental impacts once they become known. Overall, ADB's environmental policies
including the 2002 Environment Policy and safeguard procedures are considered "less
effective."

166. Efficiency. The transaction costs of ADB environmental safeguard procedures have
been found to be high relative to both the benefits and DMCs' capabilities to bear the cost. A
key cause is that in many cases EAs have to comply with both national and ADB procedures,
causing a duplication of effort. The inefficiency is compounded, because in many cases ADB's
safeguard activities are heavily reliant on the national process, but separate from it.
Inconsistency in the timing of environmental assessment also undermines the value and
efficiency of ADB's activities. Depending on the country and project, ADB assessments can be
undertaken before adequate information is available, or after all key design decisions are made.
                                                                                               55


167. The relatively high transaction costs, as perceived by EAs and government officials,
include the direct costs of meeting ADB's procedural requirements (e.g., preparation of
SEIAs/SIEEs and EIAs) and the cost of delays caused by the slow approval process within ADB.
The transaction costs are particularly severe for sector loans and some emergency loans with
many small subprojects, each of which requires preparation of a SIEE at substantial time and
money costs but often with limited benefits. The efficiency is further decreased by the focus of
ADB's procedures on front-end processing with little emphasis on outcomes through
implementation and value addition. Overall, ADB's environmental policies, including the 2002
Environment Policy and safeguard procedures, are considered "less efficient."

168. Sustainability. There are three factors affecting the sustainability of ADB's
environmental safeguard procedures: (i) the demonstration of benefits, (ii) the development of
the technical capacities of the EAs, and (iii) the efficiency of the financial resources needed to
implement environmental assessment and mitigation measures. The current procedures have
focused on compliance at the approval stage and at the project level. Relatively less attention is
paid to identifying opportunities to contribute to potential environmental benefits or value
addition of the environmental assessment and environmental capacity building at the sector
level. The current procedures, with a clear focus on project approval and less on capacity
building, do not provide a long-term solution that is likely to meet the needs and resource
constraints of ADB or the DMCs. The procedures are resulting in a duplication of resources and
added costs.

169. The sustainability of the present ADB system is on the one hand dependent on strong
financial and technical support from ADB. However, ADB is operating in a zero real growth
budget environment that limits the creation of new positions. Choices need to be made to
devote more staff resources for environment must be compared to the need to devote staff
resources to a large number of other areas. Sustainability is also dependent on the national
systems for a large element of the information and analysis used in environmental assessments.
Despite efforts in the 1990s made by ADB to improve the legal and institutional framework for
environmental assessment for several key DMCs the present system has not been targeted at
building capacity within the DMCs. This is essential to overcoming both the resource and cost
issues. In Viet Nam, in response to calls by the Paris Declaration to use strengthened country
systems, ADB and other development partners have been working with the government to
harmonize environmental safeguard procedures. The harmonization efforts will potentially
improve the sustainability of ADB's safeguard system in DMCs with differing situations and
needs. Overall, ADB's environmental policies and safeguard procedures are considered "less
likely" to be sustainable without continued capacity building assistance for most countries.

170. Overall Evaluation. Overall, ADB's environmental policies and safeguard procedures
are relevant. The 2002 Environment Policy needs to be revised to address some fundamental
weaknesses to make the policy and the procedures more cost effective for DMCs with differing
needs and capacities.

B.     Key Issues and Lessons Identified from ADB's Current Environmental Safeguard
       and Enhancement Practices

171. A number of issues and lessons were identified from assessing ADB's experience of
implementing its environmental safeguard policies and procedures. The issues and lessons
form the basis for the recommendations for future improvement.
56


       1.      The "one size fits all" approach is not effective, failing to add value in many
               cases.

172. The 2002 Environment Policy recognizes the need for flexibility in responding to the
needs of the DMCs due to their divergent situations in respect of both needs and capacity (para.
25 of the Environment Policy). However, the policy (in the same paragraph) requires a uniform
response through ADB's internal procedures for environmental compliance and management
across all DMCs. This uniformity and lack of flexibility in internal procedures is not appropriate,
given the development of environmental capacity in some DMCs and the diversity this has
created across DMCs. The uniform approach also frustrates the optimal use of ADB's limited
professional resources, as those scarce resources cannot be focused on projects and capacity
building in DMCs where they would have maximum value added. In terms of environmental
capacities, over the past decade there has been progress in some DMCs but relatively little in
others. There is now considerable diversity in environmental management capacity across the
region, with the PRC at one end of the spectrum and the smaller DMCs at the other in the
strength of their environmental policies, and in their capacity to undertake a larger role in the
preparation and implementation of the environmental aspects of ADB-supported projects. There
is also considerable diversity in the environmental issues faced by DMCs.

173. ADB's approach to the implementation of environmental safeguard issues should be
based on a thorough assessment of actual capacity in the DMC concerned. This change would
support to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, which commits ADB and other multilateral
development institutions to increased alignment with partner countries' priorities, systems, and
procedures, and to helping to strengthen their capacities and eliminate duplication of effort to
make procedures as cost effective as possible. It is also a core response to many of the issues
and lessons identified in this evaluation. The duplication of effort is a major criticism by many
EAs, particularly in the PRC and India. The SES found that there is in any case a de facto
reliance on national assessments and that in most projects ADB's separate assessment is not
adding significant value. The crucial issue is how ADB can maintain its own internal assurance
systems while, in those situations where it is appropriate, passing a greater responsibility for
environmental compliance to DMCs and introducing some greater measure of flexibility into the
procedure. The need for flexibility, differentiation among DMCs, and progressively greater
reliance on national systems is the most important policy issue arising from the SES.

174. The results of the evaluation suggest that the long-term strategic objective should be
greater harmonization with, and use of, country systems. This is a provocative conclusion, and
one likely to be strongly opposed by some stakeholders within and outside of ADB. The
conclusion is, however, less revolutionary than evolutionary in two key respects. First, there is
already a significant de facto reliance on DMC resources and systems to undertake core
environmental evaluation work and to monitor the effectiveness of the implementation of agreed
upon mitigation measures--ADB is particularly weak in the latter. This is particularly so in the
DMCs with a more developed environmental framework such as the PRC and India. Many of
the SEIAs/SIEEs completed by ADB are based almost entirely on the information and findings
of the EIAs/IEEs prepared by EAs. Recognizing and managing this situation would improve
efficiency and permit better management of the strengths and weaknesses of the assessment
process than currently exists. Second, the development of environmental capacity within DMCs
is an explicit objective of Environment Policy and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.
Revision of the safeguard procedures should recognize this and be directed toward achieving
this objective.
                                                                                                57


       2.      There is overemphasis on procedural compliance, with associated high
               transaction costs.

175. There was a consensus from the questionnaire survey and interviews that ADB's
environmental safeguard procedures are more geared toward procedural compliance rather
than achieving results. Both the phenomenon of perverse outcomes and the "one size fits all"
approach are the results of this input-oriented culture. It needs to be recognized that procedures
are important for large organizations like ADB and there are important advantages associated
with a procedure-oriented environmental assessment approach, e.g., being transparent and
systematic. ADB's current accountability mechanism very much focuses on procedural
compliance. Nevertheless, overemphasis on procedural compliance brings about high
transaction costs relative to benefits. This was particularly evident with several sector loans in
Viet Nam and India. Each subproject was relatively small and an SIEE had to be prepared at the
subproject level. The practice was both costly, relative to the costs of the subprojects and in
terms of the delays it caused, and inconsequential in terms of benefits and returns. A more
results-oriented approach would call for country and project specific solutions to address the
specific needs of the projects and the countries. However, the results-oriented approach would
require fundamental changes in how the performance of ADB staff is evaluated and moving
away from the approval culture to a more results-oriented corporate culture.

       3.      Perverse incentives associated with "environmental safeguards" work to
               direct ADB funding away from environmentally sensitive projects.

176. The 2002 Environment Policy places considerable emphasis on the role that
environmental issues should play in shaping ADB's lending and country programs. It aims to
ensure that environmental matters are fully addressed within all aspects of ADB's programs.
However, there is little evidence that this emphasis has been translated into substantive actions.
Originating from the procedure compliance and loan approval culture, there is recurring
evidence of lending decisions being actively directed to avoid projects that might trigger
environmental procedures. Three of four sector projects included for case studies in India had
an explicit criterion of excluding environmentally sensitive subprojects. Two road projects were
subdivided to exclude sections within national parks (which were left for government own
financing). The purpose was to avoid the project being designated category A and triggering EIA
requirements. This is a fundamental weakness, not of the Environment Policy, but of the
procedures that support it. There is a need to better align ADB's internal procedures (the
environmental safeguards) and the wider intentions of the Environment Policy and ADB's
strategic objectives.

177. The decision to avoid environmentally sensitive projects is a rational response of ADB
staff, given the existing incentive structure. Often this approach is preferred by the governments,
as it fits their desire to expedite project processing and minimize project delays and the
associated payment of interest and commitment charges. ADB staff have incentives to gain
recognition for project approval, as this impacts on career progression. Environmental
safeguard procedures can frustrate this, especially where there is a clash between ADB and
national procedures. From the perspective of individual ADB staff and EAs, it makes good
sense to avoid or circumvent the environmental safeguard procedures. From the broader
perspective of ADB's development objectives, this outcome is perverse and is not consistent
with ADB's role as a development partner for DMCs. An argument could be made that ADB's
development impact would be greater if it were involved in environmentally sensitive but
economically sound projects. Most of them will be financed by domestic resources without ADB
involvement.
58




       4.      Environmental safeguard and enhancement are two sides of the same coin,
               and one should not be overemphasized at the expense of the other.

178. There is a need to redirect the 2002 Environment Policy. The subtle but important
"interpretation" has developed around the introduction of "safeguard" into the common label of
the Environment Policy. Indeed, within ADB the "Environment Policy" has become widely
referred to as the "Environmental Safeguard Policy," and "environmental safeguards" have been
made synonymous with "avoiding environmental harm." This distinction between the
Environment Policy and environmental safeguards warrants clarification, as it is much more
than semantics--it is an observable emphasis that is reflected in situations across the full span
of ADB's activities and permeates many of the issues and findings addressed in the SES.

179. Revising the 2002 Environment Policy could achieve much in replacing this widely held
belief with a common understanding of actively seeking "to achieve environmental gain" as the
common currency of ADB operations. In practice, this would mean that ADB-supported projects
should play a greater "demonstration" role in introducing international good practices in
assessing, minimizing, and mitigating adverse environmental impacts of projects during the
entire project cycle, including a better assessment of project alternatives and technologies used;
better scoping and assessment of impacts, particularly secondary and induced impacts,
improved monitoring and mitigation, including during the postconstruction phase as required;
and better management of environmental issues during implementation. It would eventually lead
to better projects and greater capacity development, which would achieve greater development
benefits.

       5.      "Mainstreaming" but         also   "marginalizing":     staff   development     and
               organizational issues

180. The 2002 reorganization, which decentralized and mainstreamed environmental
specialists into RDs and created an independent RSES to strengthen oversight during the
project processing phase, has brought about benefits in terms of internalizing environmental
expertise in the RDs and integrating environmental considerations into project formulation and
design. However, there is prima facie evidence that the reorganization may have also
accentuated the procedural compliance-driven culture. Feedback during the evaluation
highlighted the perceived isolation of the environmental auditing function within RSES. The
decentralization of resources was widely perceived in ADB, particularly outside RSDD, as
having reduced the visibility of environment within ADB's activities, even though this perception
may not be fully justified. Capacity building at the sector level requires leadership, and there are
views that ADB has suffered a lack of leadership and initiative in the environment sector that
can be traced, at least in part, to the decentralization of environmental specialists and their
greater focus on project-specific activities.

181. Staff motivation is also a factor. Decentralization had the effect of limiting the career
prospects for environmental specialists within ADB. Effective and ambitious professionals in the
field will necessarily have to move to mainstream activities (project processing) to gain career
advancement. Several "mainstreamed" environment specialists in the RDs have managed to
become mission leaders for loan processing and have been promoted. There are also important
professional risks inherent in the decentralization of capability. Environment is a multi-
disciplinary sector. Few individuals have sound knowledge across all of the environmental
disciplines involved. Unless there is an effective supporting network, it is unlikely that any
individual will have the training or exposure to adequately address the full range of issues
                                                                                                 59


encountered. Environmental specialists are usually part of a team. This lack of strong technical
capability can lead to a lack of professional confidence and ultimately deference within the
project team rather than critical, knowledgeable, and assertive review. To a degree, ADB has
compensated for the negative effects of decentralization through establishing a network of
environmental practitioners and those in related fields (e.g., energy, natural resources, and rural
development), the Community of Practice on Environment.

182. The most critical deficiency in resources was found in RMs. Most RMs function with little
practical support in terms of environmental issues. INRM has one environmental consultant. All
other RMs visited had neither environmental specialists nor consultants. All RM officers
interviewed expressed dissatisfaction with the level of support provided from Headquarters.
Some did not know whom to contact in Headquarters for environmental support. Some admitted
that ADB staff are under pressure to make decisions and judgments concerning environmental
matters for which they considered they were not qualified. This poor situation is in contrast to
the World Bank, which is building useful in-country environmental capabilities as a matter of
policy. In-country support is more effective in being able to monitor projects, to build
relationships with national environmental agencies, and to provide immediate support to country
operations. Strengthening RMs should consider a combination of local recruitment, using long-
term local consultants, as well as redeployment of staff from Headquarters.

183. Other contrasts with the World Bank are also relevant. The World Bank has a system of
technical leadership that is not currently evident in ADB. For example, the World Bank's sector
lead specialists are well recognized in terms of promotion, whereas sector specialists
(particularly for cross-cutting sectors) at ADB often have limited career development prospects.
In-country, the World Bank has a useful and effective system of local specialists who play an
important role not only in ongoing project management and monitoring but also in building a
growing professional skill base in the DMC. All of these measures appear to be useful models
that ADB might consider adopting.

       6.      Poor technical quality of ADB's environmental assessment process

184. The purpose of the environmental assessment process is to protect the environment by
contributing to key decisions on a development project, program, or strategy, as well as to
create the platform for the ongoing environmental management of a project. While the purpose
and objectives are little changed after three decades of experience, the application of the
environmental assessment process has evolved considerably over this period. It has become a
much more sophisticated and useful tool for decision making and management. The most
important trends include (i) the use of quantification in prediction of impacts rather than reliance
on qualitative judgments; (ii) the extension of environmental assessment to include strategic and
program initiatives; and (iii) the extension of environmental assessment to include
environmental management through the life of a project from feasibility to design,
implementation, and operation.

185. While ADB's Environment Policy implicitly recognizes and endorses the objectives and
the widening role of the environmental assessment process, the implementation of environment
assessment procedures by ADB was found to be uneven. In some projects, the procedures are
delivering excellent results and the methodologies reflect best practice. In others, the
procedures and methodologies are consistently failing to meet the objectives. A majority of
respondents to the questionnaire survey of ADB AMLs considered the standard of
environmental assessments to be good, a perception that may not be fully justified. The
60


commentary below highlights the OEM's concerns about technical approach that may impact on
the overall implementation of ADB's Environment Policy.

186. Resources. As discussed above, there has been an essential reliance on national
systems and resources in preparing ADB's internal environmental assessments. Staff and
consultants interviewed in-country referred to the lack of resources and time as key constraints
to conducting an independent and comprehensive environmental assessment. While there has
been some increase in time allocations as a result of the 2003 procedures, the average
allocations of 3.4 person-months for SEIAs and 2.6 person-months for SIEEs within project
processing PPTAs are inadequate to do little more than review and edit national documentation
and reformat it to meet ADB norms. This also appears to be almost a scripted allocation, as it is
consistent regardless of the issues involved. This situation dictates a reliance on national
resources for data collection and often also for evaluation of the implications of the project.
Critically, issues that are not included within a national assessment may be excluded.

187. Timing. Depending on the national procedures, assessment can be based on
preliminary prefeasibility information on the project--providing an ineffective basis for
assessment--or be completed so late that the design is complete and the key purpose of
influencing design is negated. Reconciling the timing of assessments to permit a meaningful
assessment process and also to maintain the integrity of ADB's review or audit process is one
of the more challenging requirements in rationalizing ADB and national systems. This varies
significantly from country to country and will require solutions targeted to specific country needs.

188. Categorization. ADB's classification system for environmental assessment of projects is
broadly consistent with national schemes. However, the application of the classification system
appears biased against selection of projects that fall within category A and would trigger full EIA
requirements. This is particularly true in India, where the delays involved through full EIA
processes would be incompatible with ADB's approval schedule. Consequently, ADB's lending
program is, to some extent, directed away from environmentally sensitive projects. In other
cases, there appear to be questions surrounding the rigor and application of ADB's
environmental classification system.

189. Monitoring. ADB's environmental assessments are focused on the initial assessment
conducted as part of the project evaluation process. There is much less emphasis, or
demonstrable effort, directed to the actual implementation stage of the projects. There is almost
no monitoring of environmental matters after project completion. PPRs and BTORs typically
discuss environmental compliance only as required under the 2003 procedures and usually in a
cursory way--more as another procedural requirement than as a genuine review aimed at
ensuring environmental performance. The safeguard review reports by RSES are generally
more informative and focused, but the coverage of projects is limited. The inclusion of third-
party, independent environmental assessment and monitoring within the project implementation
process is delivering benefits. This is a major benefit of the 2003 procedures. This was
particularly evident in the Philippines, where amendments to project design as part of the
ongoing environmental management process were being made in response to local concerns
and newly identified issues. The benefits to local communities were evident.

190. Scope. The scope of ADB's environmental assessment is generally narrow, being
restricted to the physical construction works for the project and centered on the direct physical
impacts of the project. Wider issues such as off-site construction impacts, impacts on
communities (outside of relocation), and induced or secondary impacts (e.g., downstream
impacts associated with dams, impacts of dams on fisheries) are often not addressed. It is these
                                                                                                                        61


wider implications of a project that are increasingly the focus of objections to development
projects by NGOs and local communities.

191. Standards. While ADB officially adopted World Bank standards in 2002, it is not clear
that these are always applied, particularly in countries such as India and PRC that have a
growing set of national standards. The resource implications of adopting the World Bank
standards in terms of strengthened monitoring also need to be assessed, because typically
national monitoring agencies use national standards. RSDD should benchmark ADB's staffing
for environmental safeguard issues with those of the World Bank on a country-by-country basis,
correcting for differences in the number and type of projects.

192. Lack of Quantification and Innovation. There is a general lack of use of quantified
predictive measures within the assessment process, and consequently a reliance on checklists
and professional judgment. The original IEEs or EIAs conducted by the EAs are generally more
comprehensive, but the quality varies significantly. A related concern is the lack of focus being
accorded to ADB's projects as "demonstration projects" to develop and illustrate best practices
and innovation in environmental assessment and design, such as the use of modeling, remote
sensing, and other techniques. Inadequate emphasis is given to utilizing ADB projects and the
associated environmental assessment process as a tool to assist in capacity building within
DMCs. One specific example was the inclusion of visual assessments, linked to follow-up
landscape and ecological enhancement, in association with environmental assessment of road
projects by the World Bank in India. The EAs presented this as a good example of value added
by a funding agency. By contrast, ADB's approach delivers limited added value.

193. Documentation and Reporting. The SIEEs and SEIAs are the most widely circulated
documents, internally and externally, concerning ADB's environmental assessment of projects.
The SIEEs/SEIAs are typically a summary or derivation of the national assessment 42 or a
preliminary assessment undertaken by ADB's staff or consultants. The documents provide
guidance for ongoing management of the projects by ADB and are placed in the public domain
via the ADB website. However, there are weaknesses in the quality of documents, particularly
SIEEs. The content and format of the SIEEs/SEIAs read like a recipe. Unfortunately, the format
does not help ADB or EA make decisions. Many SIEEs/SEIAs provide detailed descriptions of
soil types and climate, even though this may be totally irrelevant to the project decisions, but
give little explicit information on the key environmental issues facing the projects. Most earlier
SIEEs for category B projects (not B sensitive), averaging 3­4 pages, did not include an EMP.
Some of these projects involved total costs of $200­$300 million. This reliance on description
rather than providing a focus on issues has been a major criticism of the EIA process
internationally during the past decade and has led to major revisions of and improvements to
the content and style of documentation elsewhere. The documentation within the ADB
safeguard system needs similar review and reform. The acceptance of poor reports will only
frustrate improvements in the efficacy and value of the system. Poor quality EIAs also increases
the risk that potential environmental problems are not identified and mitigation measures
developed.

42
     The evaluation team tried several searching methods but could not locate many original EIAs/IEEs during the
     evaluation. However, RSDD was able to successfully locate all the original IEEs and EIAs using a combination of
     searching methods after the completion of the evaluation. The evaluation team acknowledges the potential adverse
     impact of not reviewing most of the original EIAs/IEEs on the robustness of the SES conclusions. Nonetheless, the
     difficulties experienced by the evaluation team highlights the need to establish a fully centralized filing system with
     better search facility for crucial environmental documents. As planned under the Public Communications Policy, the
     Disclosure Management System started on 29 September 2006 to capture full EIA and IEE reports for summaries
     posted on the web.
62




C.     Recommendations

194. The recommendations to be outlined below are more "for consideration" than "cast in
stone". Many areas require more in-depth and comprehensive assessment in the subsequent
policy update led by RSDD.

       1.     Review of the 2002 Environment Policy and Potential Refinement

195. The evaluation findings indicate that, while the principles and objectives of the
Environment Policy remain valid and relevant, there is a need to update the policy to better
reflect current needs and resources within DMCs and ADB. The recommendations are broad
and directional in nature rather than prescriptive. The formulation of detailed recommendations
for improvement is outside the scope of the SES and will be developed during the broader
review and consultation process being undertaken by RSDD. The evaluation findings highlight
some key issues to be considered in RSDD's process leading to the refinement of the policy.

              a.      Refocusing Efforts--from front-end loan processing and approval to
                      results delivery, and from safeguards to enhancement

196. Based on observations and feedback during the SES, the OEM estimated conceptually
that perhaps as much as 70% of the effort and resources of ADB staff is directed to the internal
project approval stage, and as little as 30% to ensuring that environmental measures are
actually implemented. This is illustrated in Figure 1, which indicates that most procedural
requirements are before implementation. The need to refocus efforts should be a central theme
for any substantial review of ADB's environmental safeguard procedures. Remedying the
current imbalance of effort is likely to require significant change, with potentially wide
implications for procedures, the level of resources, and the organization of environmental
resources within ADB. A corollary of a change in focus to outcomes rather than approval and
compliance is likely to be greater emphasis on in-country resources.

197. There is a need for detailed review of the procedures for environmental assessment and
compliance and the allocation of environmental resources within ADB. One objective of this
review should be to refocus efforts toward the planning, design, and implementation of projects
and the wider objectives of the Environment Policy rather than the current dominance of the
internal loan approval and compliance process. While there is a general need for ADB to
provide stronger in-country resources, there is also a need for prioritization among both
countries and projects to identify areas where ADB's scarce resources will add the most value
and have the greatest impact. Initially, the focus would sensibly be placed on those countries
identified as targets for transition, including but not confined to the PRC and India. Related
objectives of the review should include achieving more effective linkage between capacity
building and projects; facilitating ongoing involvement; review of projects through design,
implementation, and operations; and using projects as a key demonstration tool in capacity
building.

198. Much has been said about the insufficient efforts made by ADB toward monitoring during
implementation. Several case studies indicated that ADB has made significant contributions to
improved monitoring through introducing the third-party monitoring mechanism compared with
similar projects financed by domestic sources. However, this practice appears to be ad hoc. The
concept of third-party monitoring has been accepted in some DMCs including the PRC and
Philippines, and it may be internalized as a matter of rule rather than an exception. The role of
                                                                                                63


NGOs and civil society at large in improving monitoring and implementation in ADB-supported
projects should also be explicitly addressed. This may be particularly helpful after project
completion, when ADB monitoring typically ceases.

199. The most important causes for the current focus on front-end loan processing lie in the
"approval culture" and the fear of projects being subjected to the accountability mechanism.
ADB's Medium-Term Strategy II 2006--200843 clearly states, "Enhancing ADB's contribution to
country outcomes requires a shift in corporate priorities from an institutional culture that
prioritizes loan approval and lending volumes, to a culture where portfolio performance and
contribution to country outcomes become predominant. This shift must be supported by
changes in incentive systems, including staff rewards." The advocated cultural change is ADB-
wide and for all aspects of ADB operations including environmental safeguards. It is likely a
gradual process, and the environmental policy review should be directed towards supporting
this process.

                   b.      Integration with National Procedures

200. Many EAs of ADB-financed projects need to complete both national and ADB
environmental procedures with considerable duplication of effort and resources. This occurs
because of inconsistencies in terms of timing, standards, scope, and technical assessment
requirements between the procedures. The 2002 Environmental Policy recognizes both the
need for integration with national procedures and the importance of environmental assessment
as a process. Neither intention is being fully achieved at present.

201. Despite the fact that most DMCs have developed regulations for environmental
assessment over the past decades, they vary considerably in detailed requirements and
standards of implementation. There are also concerns in some countries relating to the
independence of the environmental assessment process. The process of alignment of national
and funding agency systems can progress only on a country-by-country basis and will take
some years to implement. Some countries are now ready to start a transition in terms of
capacity and experience. PRC, India, and Philippines, for example, were found to have a solid
basis for developing a suitable joint approach for ADB projects that avoids duplication of effort.
Other countries may not be ready, and some of them will not be ready for many years. Within
the same country, there are likely to be significant disparities across sectors and regions. In the
PRC, for example, strong technical capacities have been developed on environmental
assessment for highway projects, partly because there has been tremendous growth in the
sector, and most of the projects are high national priority, environmental category A ones. In
other sectors where fewer or lower environmental category projects are available, the capacities
may be underdeveloped. Any progression on adopting country systems must be based on wide
consultations with key stakeholders and detailed gap analyses of the country systems involved,
if necessary, on a sector-by-sector basis or province (state)-by-province (state) basis. The SES
has not been able to contribute in this area due to time and resource constraints. It should be a
key item on the agenda of the policy review and update working group.

202. There is already, by default, a reliance on national procedures in meeting ADB's
environmental compliance requirements. It would be beneficial to recognize this reality and
adopt a more proactive approach. One of the key arguments against greater reliance on
national systems is the risk in terms of poor environmental compliance, "watering down" of ADB
safeguard standards, and possible corruption. About 13% of the AMLs surveyed who responded

43
     ADB. Medium-Term Strategy II 2006­2008. March 2006. Sec. M26-06. Manila.
64


to the question were concerned about potential corruption problems if ADB were to adopt the
national safeguard system. The Philippine country case studies indicated that ADB's
involvement helped reduce potential corruption in enforcing the national standards, i.e., money
changing hands in return for an ECC (Appendix 4). A program is needed to develop procedures
able to provide satisfactory assurance measures for ADB, aligned with greater explicit reliance
on national procedures. This program should recognize and take advantage of the activities of
other multilateral agencies and integrate also with any initiatives to increase reliance on national
systems. It should involve key stakeholders, including NGOs and civil societies, in ensuring that
their concerns about watering down of standards and potential corruption are addressed.

203. Two possible models of integration warrant detailed investigation. The first, possibly
working in collaboration with the World Bank, involves the use of a certification process through
which ADB would accredit a country system in terms of scope and timing of assessment,
standards, evaluation techniques, community engagement, and environmental management.
The professionals or companies used to undertake environmental assessment on ADB projects
could be similarly assessed and accredited. The PRC, for example, already has a ranking
system for design institutes that could form the basis of an accreditation program. The
Philippines had a similar accreditation system up to 2001 (para. 39). The certification process
would be supported by audits completed by ADB staff or experts. This mechanism could be
used to manage the transition, encourage higher standards in DMCs, provide flexibility, and
protect ADB's reputation. A second model involves the use of a joint assessment, combining the
more stringent requirements of the national and ADB systems. This approach has been used
effectively by BP and Shell. ADB could conduct a pilot program to experiment with both, initially
in PRC and India, expanding to other DMCs if successful.

204. An important point is that the application of the country systems does not mean that ADB
will pass all the responsibilities with respect to environmental assessment and monitoring to
DMCs. Rather, the goal is to achieve ADB's policy objectives through greater use of national
systems and resources. ADB should help improve deficiencies in the country systems where
they exist. A roadmap should be prepared that includes timebound monitorable indicators and
capacity building assistance to address such weaknesses.

               c.      Broadening the Focus from "The Project" to "Environmental
                       Capacity"

205. There is a strong emphasis on "the Project" within ADB's environmental compliance
activities. The compliance and the project focus tends to concentrate ADB's environmental
activities on one element of the Environment Policy, leaving relatively fewer resources or less
effort to address wider matters that are inherent in the Environment Policy. The OEM found a
consistent message from EAs that ADB's focus on projects was not effective. One of the
traditional attractions of ADB's involvement was its ability to add value through innovation,
broader capacity-building activities, and other indirect benefits. To some extent, these wider
benefits were viewed as part of the trade-off for the high transaction costs often involved in ADB
funding. In the environment sector, there was a clear sense that this added value had been lost.
ADB's efforts in the late 1980s and the 1990s to build up and improve the legal and institutional
framework for environmental assessment in several key client countries may have been
discontinued prematurely since 2002. It may be argued that, had ADB stayed focused on such
capacity building, a large number of other DMCs with equal (if not greater) such needs would
have benefited. Over time this can, and possibly has already, led to a relatively insular focus on
project approval that is unlikely to be an effective long-term approach to achieve ADB's wider
                                                                                                 65


developmental goals and the commitments set out in the Paris Declaration or the broader needs
of DMCs.

206. Shift in emphasis in ADB's environmental program from the current focus on individual
projects to one targeted more at capacity building will be conducive for the achievement of
greater flexibility and reliance on national systems and also has important implications for the
organization of environmental resources within ADB. The current decentralization of
environmental resources, linkage to project activities, and emphasis on Headquarters rather
than in-country staff are unlikely to provide the focus, direction, or liaison needed to lead
capacity building rather than project compliance. Even within the context of "project evaluation,"
the SES found a narrow view of project scope, in some cases, minimal consideration of
immediate off-site impacts or opportunities to use a project to develop better practices or
environmental performance. It was the exception to find an example that gave emphasis to the
wider social and community setting of a project; addressed induced, secondary, or off-site
impacts seriously; or considered how the project might contribute to ADB's wider policy
objectives such as capacity building. This approach facilitates approval of the project but is
contrary to the focus on sustainable development promoted within the Environment Policy.

               d.      Integrating Environmental and Social Safeguards

207. ADB's three safeguard policies on environment, involuntary resettlement, and
indigenous people are implemented in a separate manner involving different reporting and
compliance procedures, despite the fact that RSES includes all three types of safeguard
specialists. The emphasis on sustainable development in the 2002 Environment Policy suggests
an integration of environmental and social safeguards and enhancement. There are advantages
to integrating the three policies, even though there could be some disadvantages as well. The
policy review should further explore the pros and cons of the integration. A major justification for
an integrated approach is that environmental and social impacts are often closely interrelated as
best exemplified in hydropower development projects. Integrated social and environmental
assessment has been widely adopted in the private sector (para. 117). Further integration of
environmental and social safeguards would have organizational implications that are discussed
below.

       2.      Strengthening Organizational Effectiveness

208. Any reorganization of resources within ADB involves issues and considerations well
outside the scope of the SES. However, organizational issues are an important factor in the
overall efficiency and effectiveness of the environmental safeguard system and the delivery of
the wider objectives of the Environment Policy. Several key points emerged from the evaluation.
First, there is a merit in the consolidation of environmental resources within ADB's structure.
The most important arguments in favor of this are to strengthen technical leadership, provide
stronger multidisciplinary technical skills, improve the morale of environment specialists, and
provide a clearer career path within the discipline. Consolidation would also provide opportunity
for better and more flexible utilization of a limited professional resource.

209. These considerations do not necessarily imply a return to the original centralized
Environment Division. It would take an in-depth study and a broader view (beyond
environmental issues) to reach a more definite conclusion on this. It is possible that the loss of
synergy could be addressed without returning to the fully centralized structure in order to retain
the benefits of the mainstreaming of the environmental specialists in the RDs. In fact, the 2005
reorganization within RSDD to expand RSES's mandate to serve the function of both an
66


environment division (corporate home for environment) and safeguard division is a step in this
direction. Another "intermediate" step that could be taken is to consolidate the safeguard
specialists and consultants in the sector divisions in each RD into a safeguard unit under the
direct leadership of the director general. This would recognize and meet the need to allocate the
limited safeguard resources at the departmental rational than the divisional level. The inclusion
of environment into the Agriculture, Environment, and Natural Resources Division as part of the
2002 reorganization was questionable, since it does not recognize that environment has a
"brown" side. Many infrastructure projects have environmental impacts. However, it is possible
that the structure may have worked for some RDs with predominant "greenside" environmental
and resource management issues, e.g., the former Mekong Region Department and now the
Southeast Asia Department, and not others. To that end, ADB may consider variable
institutional setups for different RDs with respect to environmental safeguard specialists.

210. Second, sustainable development implies a balanced approach to development that
integrates social, environmental, and economic considerations. To some extent this has already
been achieved within ADB through housing the centralized social and environmental safeguards
specialists in one division RSES. Further integration of social and environmental resources may
be difficult but is necessary in order to build a critical mass of capability. An important vehicle for
achieving better integration is through conducting joint environmental and social impact
assessment for selected ADB-supported projects.

211. Third, within any review of resources or structure, priority should be given to
strengthening the environmental capability in RMs. This should be priority and in those countries
where a program to increase reliance on the national system is to be actively considered. The
presence of experienced environmental professionals will be important in developing this
initiative, building liaison with national institutions, and improving the robustness of
environmental activities in DMC operations. Given the ADB-wide freeze on total number of
positions, the options are limited. One option is to engage long-term consultants, which has
been widely practiced by divisions and RMs. The other option is to better consolidate and make
good use of existing resources as highlighted (para. 209).

       3.      Improving the Quality of ADB's Environmental Assessment Process and
               Lowering Transaction Costs to Make It More Cost Effective

212. There are technical weaknesses in ADB's environmental assessment procedures and
practices. A range of technical measures could be introduced to improve the quality and
consistency of environmental assessments within ADB's procedures. The majority of these
could be introduced through a systematic review and update of matters such as categorization,
scope, quantification, standards, etc. The changes would bring ADB's procedures more in line
with current international good practices and provide a more reliable and transparent
assessment process. The most important element of the changes is to redirect the current
"recipe" approach to one focused more strongly on the key and unique issues and decisions to
be addressed in each project and the subsequent actions that need to be pursued in respect of
mitigation, design, and follow-up actions. This impinges on the ADB-wide effort to redirect
emphasis, including but not confined to its environmental activities, from a requirement for
procedural approval to a focus on actual outcomes.

213. The RSDD review should examine these matters. The review should prioritize activities
able to deliver quick gains and considerable overall benefit. Several more issues may warrant
attention. The first one relates to environmental categorization and the tendency to avoid
environmentally sensitive projects. The categorization and scoping process relies on checklists
                                                                                                 67


and prescribed responses rather than permitting greater influence of professional judgment to
tailor assessment needs to specific situations. In this respect, the lack of experienced
environmental professionals, both within ADB and in the DMCs, is a serious constraint. Another
key cause for the phenomenon is the approval culture of ADB, where the institutional incentives,
formal and informal, focus on getting the project approved on time. Over the long run, ADB
should aim to improve the capacities of environmental expertise both at ADB and in the DMCs.
In the short run, the environmental safeguard specialists in the RDs and at RSES should rely
less on checklists and try to look more deeply into the underlying issues. Caution should be
particularly directed at sector loans, for which the core subprojects are but a small portion of the
bigger picture. The routine practice in some regions of excluding environmentally sensitive
subprojects from sector loans has also provided a perverse incentive for project teams to divide
roads into sections for separate financing. This practice, although encouraged by some
governments, should be reviewed and, in the case of continuing such practices, a bigger picture
should be acquired before approving specific subprojects.

214. ADB's B sensitive category is not clearly defined. It is also unique to ADB and fuels an
impression that ADB is trying to "whitewash" potential category A projects. ADB may consider
abolishing this categorization. In the Philippines' safeguard system, a separate category is
created for environmental improvement projects. ADB should consider adopting a similar
category, as ADB is actively pursuing environmental improvement projects in several DMCs.
Adoption of such a category would better reflect the true impact of the projects and facilitate
smoother implementation of the environmental assessment process.

215. Another important issue relates to the high transaction costs of preparing SIEEs at the
subproject level for sector and emergency loans. There is widespread discontent among the
EAs concerning small subprojects of such loans. Possible options include conducting a master
IEE at the project level, or greatly relaxing the SIEE criteria and simplifying its procedures.
Several AMLs surveyed complained about the rule that the most environmentally sensitive
subproject determines the environmental category of a sector project as being unnecessarily
punishing and adding to transaction costs.

216. The third issue is related to the need for a new focus of environmental assessment on
what are the real issues, what project decisions arise from these issues, what responses might
be considered, and what recommendations are useful for the ongoing project. The SIEE/SEIA
process needs to be refocused to provide better and more useful information to facilitate project
decisions. New expectations need to be set for staff and consultants preparing these key
reports. A change in the format and expectations of the SIEE/SEIA is relatively simple and is
likely to achieve significant benefits within the safeguard system. An EMP should be required for
SIEEs/SEIAs for a wider portion of projects (e.g., exceeding a certain size) to facilitate
monitoring during implementation. Assessment of project alternatives and of secondary and
induced impacts should be made more prominent and substantive in the overall structure of
environmental assessment reports.

217. Insufficient monitoring during project implementation and operation has received much
attention since 2003. While monitoring procedures are increasingly in place, adequate
resources will need to be allocated for such a purpose. One option to be considered may be a
separate assessment and rating for environmental performance of the project to be required as
part of the project completion mission for category A and B projects. This would mandate
inclusion of an environmental specialist/consultant in the project completion mission and
address the current practice of routine and cursory mention of compliance with environmental
covenants for most projects without substantive evaluation of the project's overall environmental
68


performance. An important first step to further integrate environmental monitoring into ADB's
project monitoring efforts is to include environmental indicators in the Design and Monitoring
Framework. This will provide a clear basis for subsequent monitoring.

        4.      Improving the Effectiveness of Public Disclosure and Partnerships with
                NGOs and Civil Society on the Environment

218. ADB is justifiably concerned with its image, its reputation, and its relationships with a
wide range of external organizations and stakeholders. Among these, some NGOs are the most
vocal in providing a critical review of ADB's activities and in shaping the external view of the
organization. The environmental policies of ADB, particularly their implementation, are a regular
focus for NGO comment. ADB's requirements for public consultations are, in principle,
consistent with international conventions and best practices. In both Viet Nam and PRC, the
government and EA officials met cited ADB's public consultations as a major value addition to
the national procedures. However, there are several existing and potential issues arising from
the public disclosure and consultation requirements.

219. The first is the implications of the 120-day disclosure rule, which mandates the posting of
SEIAs for category A projects and SIEEs for B sensitive projects on the ADB website 120 days
before Board's consideration of project approval. The OEM has reviewed the information on the
number of visits to and downloads of ADB's SIEEs and SEIAs. Generally, the number of visits,
averaging 40 per month, is low compared with other ADB documents and tends to concentrate
on a few sensitive projects in a limited number of countries (often those with better English
proficiency). The vast majority of SEIAs/SIEEs receive many fewer visits. More importantly, very
few comments are received from the viewers. Also, there is apparently no mechanism in place
to react to these comments. On the other hand, numerous interviews and results from the
questionnaire survey indicate that the 120-day disclosure rule is one of the main deterrents for
assigning a project category A or B sensitive. In the case of a category A or B sensitive project,
there is a strong incentive to carry out the environmental assessment early on, sometimes even
before the project's detailed design is available, to meet the loan processing schedule. This
practice diminishes the usefulness of the environmental assessment as a decision-making tool.

220. The 120-day disclosure rule is a major practical obstacle to achieving better integration with
national procedures. While any relaxation of the rule is likely to generate strong criticism from NGOs,
it may be necessary to consider this as one option in seeking to rationalize national and ADB
safeguard systems to achieve an optimal approach. There are at least two options. One is to take
the World Bank approach, which has a 120-day disclosure rule for environmental assessment
reports, but it is applied to unedited original EIA or IEE reports. There is less time pressure, since no
editing is required. This approach also has the additional benefit of having a centralized filing system
to collect and retain the original EIA or IEE reports (scanned or hardcopy), which ADB currently
does not have. Having a centralized filing system for keeping vital environmental documents such
as the original EIA and IEE documents for ADB-supported projects is important for internal and
external references and evaluation.

221. The other option is to reduce the number of days from 120 to, say, 60. As an example,
the African Development Bank has recently changed its policy to reduce the required public
disclosure period of EIAs for private sector projects from 120 days to 60 days. The strategy has
been accompanied by several internal measures to simplify the operations process. Given that
the 120-day rule was adopted when the Internet was not as common as it is now, it is not clear
that this length of time is necessary, with today's instant communications. Further, many of the
affected people are on the wrong side of the digital divide and are not fluent in English. This
                                                                                                69


raises a serious question whether the people most affected by the project benefit in any material
way from disclosure of the SEIA on ADB's website.

222. The second issue is concerned with the transparency and independence of the
environmental assessment process. There is an expectation in all environmental assessment
processes that the environmental assessment is independent and based on sound scientific
principles. This expectation can be seen to be compromised whenever the environmental
assessment team and process are perceived to be too close to the project processing team.
The embedding of environmental safeguard specialists within the RDs and closer integration
with the project approval process can be criticized as undermining the independence of the
environmental assessment. While it is difficult for ADB to provide complete independence, and
the current audit processes by RSDD and the role of the chief compliance officer provide
important assurances, it can be argued that the involvement of the environmental specialists
within the project team directly responsible for gaining project approval has compromised the
perceived independence of the process. This is clearly a weakness in responding to any
concerted action or accusation made by NGOs.

223. The third potential issue is the proposed increased reliance on national procedures.
Previous comments from NGOs suggest that they will be highly critical of any moves to place
greater reliance on national procedures. This is understandable, given the variation in quality and
outcome, which may potentially water down ADB's safeguard standards. In communicating with
NGOs on this issue, it is important to stress that there is already a heavy de facto reliance on
national safeguard procedures, and any initiative to move toward greater integration would be
progressive and would require credible assurances that the process will deliver overall improvement
in assessment quality and implementation of the required mitigation measures. Equally important,
emphasis is needed on the overall changes in procedures and the potential for wider gains in
capacity building that would follow from the changes. Ways of constructively engaging with NGOs in
monitoring and implementation should be explored in RSDD's review of the Environment Policy.

       5.      Moving Towards Adoption of Improved Country Systems                            and
               Harmonization with Other Development Partners in Selected DMCs

224. The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness provides strong guidance on the need to seek
harmonization between funding agencies and partner countries on environmental assessments:

       "Donors have achieved considerable progress in harmonization around EIA
       including relevant health and social issues at the project level. This progress
       needs to be deepened, including on addressing implications of global
       environmental issues such as climate change, desertification and loss of
       biodiversity.

       Donor and partner countries jointly commit to:
       (i)   Strengthen the application of EIAs and deepen common procedures for
             projects, including consultations with stakeholders; and develop and
             apply common approaches for "strategic environmental assessment" at
             the sector and national levels.
       (ii)  Continue to develop the specialized technical and policy capacity
             necessary for environmental analysis and for enforcement of legislation."
             (paras. 40­41, Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness).
70


225. Progressive extension of the integration of ADB's environmental safeguard system with
national systems has emerged as a likely response to many of the issues identified in this
review. A program to harmonize procedures would make explicit the already implicit reliance on
integration with existing national procedures; it would also create opportunities to improve
national environmental management capacities. Initiatives are in place to strengthen the
harmonization of procedures with other development partners. This is best exemplified by the
Hanoi Core Statement on Aid Effectiveness, which, among others, commits the government and
the five key development partners to align their development strategies and to use strengthened
country systems. ADB has played a lead role in the harmonization efforts in Viet Nam. However,
that leadership role may be at risk of being lost with the staff turnover and retirement at the Viet
Nam Resident Mission. Environmental management in Viet Nam is at a very different level of
institutional development compared with the PRC, India, and Philippines. The Viet Nam
experience may provide key lessons on the framework needed to guide the harmonization
process more widely. ADB should gain a leadership role in the harmonization efforts in the
Asian context and should follow a more systematic strategy.

226. To move towards adopting the improved country systems in a phased and concerted
manner, the DMCs may be divided into at least three groups: (i) countries with well developed
systems that embody most of the objectives and principles of ADB's policies and with a
reasonable track record in implementation, (ii) countries with semi-developed
legal/institutional/policy frameworks and some capacities for environmental safeguards but all
requiring substantial strengthening, and (iii) countries with weak systems and capacities. The
SES has identified PRC, India, and, to a lesser extent, Philippines as the countries in the first
two categories and with the greatest opportunity for harmonization. This opinion is consistent
with the AMLs surveyed: between 70% to 100% of those who responded to the question
suggested that it is possible to adopt the national systems in these three countries, compared
with the average of 56% for all countries. Useful examples of the harmonization of
environmental assessment processes have been provided by recent work undertaken by Shell
and BP in the PRC. These cases provided for harmonization of scope, standards, technical
methodology, and management requirements. There is also a national framework for
accreditation of environmental institutions in place, and SEPA provides a strong central agency
through which to further the initiative. There is a good foundation on which to build
harmonization of procedures for the assessment of ADB projects.

227. The adoption of country systems should not be achieved through watering down ADB's
current environmental safeguard standards. It will also be a long-term and progressive task and
may not be possible for many of ADB's DMCs in group (iii) for a long time to come (para. 226).
These include but are not confined to most Pacific DMCs. There is a fundamental lack of human
resources in these DMCs, and the environmental institutions are weak, underfunded, and lack
either the authority or the political will to enforce national laws and regulations. Even for those
countries with relatively better capacities such as the PRC and India, there is variability in such
capacities and in the level of enforcement across sectors, provinces/states, and projects. For
example, in the PRC, the transport sector may be more advanced in terms of environmental
assessment capacity than other sectors due to the rich experience accumulated from executing
a large number of highway projects. Limited experience from other development partners,
particularly the World Bank, in piloting adoption of improved country systems indicates that
initial inputs, e.g., conducting equivalence or gap analysis, finding appropriate sectors, projects,
and agencies, etc., can be time consuming and costly. However, the long-term benefits of
improving and adopting country systems in terms of capacity building and sustainability may
outweigh the short-term costs.
                                                                                                   71


228. The "Equator Principles," developed based on the environmental and social standards
and the advice of the International Finance Corporation, have been adopted by 41 financing
institutions, mostly private banks. The 10 principles are a voluntary set of guidelines for
managing environmental and social issues in project finance lending, and comprise review and
categorization, social and environmental assessment, applicable social and environmental
standards, action plan and management system, consultation and disclosure, grievance
mechanism, independent review, covenants, independent monitoring and reporting, and
reporting. ADB should monitor developments in this area and work with other financing
agencies to adopt the salient features of the principles, recognizing that some of the features of
the principles have already been integrated with ADB procedures. The "Equator Principles" and
the evolving good practices are particularly relevant for ADB's private sector operations and DFI
projects, as suggested in the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development study
(footnote 6). In both types of operations, ADB currently suffers from capacity shortages,
underdeveloped guidelines and best practices.

       6.      Developing an Action Plan to Implement the Revised Environment Policy

229. ADB in the past has adopted policies without having a clear understanding of the
resources needed for implementing the policies. The Environment Policy may be another
example. It is very similar to the corresponding World Bank policy. However, the findings of the
SES suggest that in some countries, the World Bank is better resourced, particularly in the
resident missions, to implement environmental safeguard policies. ADB, perhaps led by RSDD,
should develop an action plan to implement the revised Environment Policy, and any plan to be
developed must involve an assessment of ADB's resources at headquarters and in the field for
implementing environmental safeguards and possibly a benchmark of ADB's resources with
those of the World Bank on a country-by-country basis, adjusting for the volume and type of
projects. If the analysis shows that ADB is under resourced, the tradeoffs would need to be
considered involving a combination of actions in three areas: (i) increasing the resources within
the context of ADB's overall human resource planning; (ii) revising the policy requirements
downward to bring them into line with available resources recognizing that this might result in
ADB accepting less stringent environmental safeguards than the World Bank; and (iii) improving
the cost effectiveness of ADB's environmental safeguards through a range of measures
including, but not confined, delegating more authority and accountability to DMCs through
greater use of country systems and third party monitoring. Alternative consequences may
include an increasing number of projects being subjected to the compliance mechanism and a
growing view among civil society that in some cases ADB does not adequately identify and
mitigate environmental risks and impacts. All these will increase reputational, if not legal, risks to
ADB if the policy and procedural requirements for environmental safeguards and resource
allocation, both financial and staff, are not aligned.
                                                                                                                                                                            72
                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 1
                                                                       EVALUATION MATRIX

Issues                                    Questions                                  Information Required                     Information Source and Gathering
A. Relevance of the       Were there goals, explicit and underlined,       Comparison of environment-related goals          Review of country strategies and programs,
environmental             with the various environmental safeguard         and statements in the various sector             sector policy papers, and comments on the
safeguard policies and    policies and procedures, and what were           policies, the operational strategies, and        2002 Environment Policy made by
procedures to achieving   they? What was the external political            guidelines over time                             departments and Management
strategic development     environment in which the policies and
goals of ADB and          procedures were formulated?                      Documented and anecdotal information on          Interviews with ADB staff who were involved
DMCs                                                                       perceived advantages and disadvantages of        in drafting of the 2002 Environment Policy
                          Given the fact that environmental goals and      having an environmental safeguard policy
                          compliance procedures were already                                                                Questionnaire survey of ADB appraisal
                          imbedded in ADB's various sector policies,       Information on environmental safeguard           mission leaders and interviews with ADB
                          country operational strategies and programs,     policy, or lack thereof, of other development    environmental safeguard specialists, heads of
                          and operational guidelines before 2002, what     agencies and countries (particularly OECD        project implementation units
                          was the expected value-added of the 2002         countries)
                          Environment Policy in terms of achieving                                                          Consultations with stakeholders including
                          better environmental safeguards and the          Relevance of ADB's environmental                 nongovernment organizations, governments,
                          developmental goals of ADB and DMCs?             safeguard policies and procedures as             executing agencies, and other development
                                                                           perceived by key DMCs and executing              agencies on the relevance of environmental
                          Do ADB's environmental safeguard policies        agencies, nongovernment organizations,           safeguard policies
                          and procedures conform to international "best    ADB mission leaders, and environmental
                          practices" while taking into account the         safeguard specialists.
                          differences in legal framework, institutional
                          capabilities, and level of economic
                          development among countries being
                          compared

B. Efficacy and           Have ADB's operations in terms of inputs,        Evidence for shift, or lack thereof, in sector   Desktop research of documents of
Efficiency in terms of    outputs, and outcomes changed in                 focus of ADB loans and TAs over time in          environmental compliance reviews conducted
inputs, outputs, and      accordance with its environmental safeguard      accordance with its environmental policies,      by ADB's environmental safeguard specialists
outcomes                  policies since 1993? Has the 2002                particularly before and after promulgation of
                          Environment Policy significantly enhanced        the 2002 Environment Policy                      Desktop review of the quality of the country
                          the effectiveness of environmental safeguard                                                      environmental analyses for PRC, India,
                          of ADB-supported projects?                       Time and staff inputs to environmental           Philippines, and Viet Nam
                                                                           compliance at PPTA or loan appraisal stage
                          Has the Policy influenced how environmental      and at project implementation and                Desktop review of the quality of summary
                          safeguard and enhancement are integrated at      operations stages                                environmental impact assessments and
                          the CSP level through conducting                                                                  summary initial environmental examinations
                          comprehensive and thorough country               Changes in percentage of categories A and        for categories A and B projects
                          environmental analyses that will help identify   B loans with potentially significant
                          the environmental needs of the DMCs and          environmental impacts over time                  Review of projects with environmental
                          ADB's strategic environmental goals in the                                                        improvement as an objective, and of
                          DMCs?                                                                                             environmental TAs
Issues                                    Questions                                 Information Required                     Information Source and Gathering
                         Has ADB's involvement in projects                Quality of environmental impact assessment       Review of PCRs and PPARs for assessment
                         significantly enhanced the environmental         reports and reviews by environmental             of environmental impact of the completed
                         safeguard measures for these projects? In        compliance specialists, etc.                     projects. Review PPRs and the
                         other words, without ADB's support for the                                                        Environmental and Social Information
                         projects, how would DMCs implement the           Percentage of loans that have                    System for environmental performance
                         environmental safeguards using their own         environmental improvement as an objective        during project implementation
                         systems?
                                                                          Number of environment-related TAs                Questionnaire survey and interviews with
                         Have the 2002 Environment Policy and the         provided                                         appraisal mission leaders, environmental
                         institutional structure, namely, division of                                                      safeguard specialists, heads of project
                         environment specialists into two groups, i.e.,   Environmental impacts of ADB-supported           administration units, and directors of sector
                         operational departments and RSES, served         projects, as measured and as perceived by        divisions to obtain their assessment on the
                         to strengthen environmental safeguards           client DMCs                                      effectiveness and the transaction costs of
                         through mainstreaming as intended?                                                                ADB's environmental safeguard procedures
                                                                          Costs of meeting the requirements of the
                         Given the heavy emphasis on the front-end        environmental safeguard procedures, which        Consultations with stakeholders including
                         procedural requirements of the environmental     include costs of conducting environmental        nongovernment organizations, governments,
                         safeguard policies and apparently much less      impact assessment, monitoring and                executing agencies, and other development
                         emphasis on project implementation, what         evaluation, and investing in mitigation          agencies on the effectiveness and
                         are the actual impacts of ADB's                  measures                                         transaction costs of ADB environmental
                         environmental safeguards in terms of                                                              safeguard procedures vis-à-vis governments'
                         environmental impacts of ADB-supported           Information on the client DMC's own              own procedures and those of other
                         projects, transaction costs, capacity building   environmental safeguard procedures and           development agencies
                         for ADB's DMCs, and the market appeal of         implementation                                   Case studies of selected projects in PRC,
                         ADB financing relative to those of other                                                          India, and Philippines to investigate how
                         multilateral and bilateral financing agencies?   Information on the types of environmental        ADB's environmental safeguard procedures
                                                                          impact identified through ADB's                  helped identify and assess the main
                         Are the transaction costs of implementing the    environmental impact assessment and the          environmental impact of the projects, if the
                         environment safeguard procedures too high        cost-effectiveness of the mitigating             recommended mitigating measures were
                         for DMCs relative to benefits and to the         measures recommended and implemented             implemented, and how effective the
                         financing capabilities of the executing                                                           measures were
                         agencies?

C. Lessons learned       What positive and negative lessons can be        Information on reasons why much more             Questionnaire survey and Interviews with
from the experience of   learned from ADB's experience of                 emphasis has been placed on front-end            ADB directors of sector divisions, mission
implementing the         implementing environmental safeguard             procedural requirements rather than              leaders, environmental safeguard specialists,
environmental            procedures since 1993 in terms of clarity,       implementation from the viewpoint of staff       and heads of project implementation units to
safeguard procedures     effectiveness of the procedures, impact on       incentive structure, staff expertise, and time   obtain their assessment of the incentive




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 1
so far                   project quality, and institutional capacity      allocation                                       structure in fulfilling the requirements of the
                         requirements and building?                                                                        environment safeguards




                                                                                                                                                                             73
                                                                                                                                                                           74
                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 1
                          Given the apparent shortage of resources for      Time and resources allocated to impact         Consultations with stakeholders including
                          monitoring and evaluation at all levels during    monitoring and evaluation during project       nongovernment organizations, governments,
                          project implementation and upon                   implementation and operation                   and executing agencies on resource
                          commissioning, is it a cost-effective strategy                                                   allocation for meeting the requirements and
                          to have comprehensive environmental               Main issues and problems encountered           monitoring the implementation of
                          safeguard policies and procedures, knowing        during the implementation of ADB's             environmental safeguard policies
                          that there is little prospect of monitoring its   environmental safeguards as reported by
                          implementation?                                   ADB staff, executing agencies, and             Case studies of selected projects in PRC,
                                                                            government agencies.                           India, and Philippines to assess the main
                                                                                                                           issues faced by executing agencies when
                                                                            Experience from OECD countries and other       they tried to apply ADB's environmental
                                                                            development agencies                           safeguard procedures

D. Recommendations        What measures can be taken to improve the         Information on the main problems               Questionnaire survey and interviews with
for improvement           cost-effectiveness of ADB's environmental         encountered during the implementation of       ADB directors of sector divisions, mission
                          compliance procedures?                            environmental safeguard policies in the four   leaders, environmental safeguard specialists,
                                                                            participating countries                        and heads of project implementation units on
                          Given the context of ADB's Innovation and                                                        the main problems encountered during the
                          Efficiency Initiative and the Middle Income       Information on the safeguard systems of        implementation of environmental safeguard
                          Countries and Ordinary Capital Resources          individual countries and their pros and cons   policies and their assessment of priority
                          Country Partnership, could the environmental                                                     areas for future improvement
                          safeguard procedures be improved to               Experience, policies, and best practices of
                          enhance their effectiveness and outcome           other development agencies                     Consultation with stakeholders including
                          orientation, while at the same time                                                              nongovernment organizations, governments,
                          streamlining procedures and reducing                                                             executing agencies, and other development
                          transaction costs?                                                                               agencies to obtain their perspective on
                                                                                                                           harmonizing ADB safeguard measures with
                                                                                                                           the countries' own systems and the
                                                                                                                           safeguard systems of other development
                                                                                                                           agencies

ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, OECD= Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; PCR = project completion
report, PPAR = project performance audit report, PPR = project performance report, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, PRC= People's Republic of China;
RSES= Environment and Social Safeguard Division; TA = technical assistance.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                                   Appendix 2        75


 ADB ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
                       Old and New OM 20 Compared
               Environmental Considerations in ADB Operations

Elements                           OM 20: OP, 1997                                 OM 20: OP, 2003
Terminology
(1) Environmental           Defines environmental assessment         Defines environmental assessment as a generic
assessment                  as a generic name for IEE or EIA         term that describes a process--rather than a
                            (para. 3).                               one-time report--of environmental analysis,
                                                                     management, and planning taking place
                                                                     throughout the project cycle to address
                                                                     environmental impacts of development policies,
                                                                     strategies, programs, and projects (para. 4).
New Instruments
Country Environmental       Not included.                            CEA is prepared as input to CSP (para. 2).
Analysis (CEA)
Strategic Environmental     Not included.                            SEA is an optional environmental assessment
Assessment (SEA)                                                     tool for program loans (para. 12) and sector
                                                                     loans (para. 16).
Scope of Environmental Assessment Requirement

Lending instruments         Applies to all types of lending          Applies to all project loans, FI loans, program
                            instruments including project,           loans, sector loans, sector development program
                            program, and sector loans; loans         loans, and private sector investment operations
                            involving financial intermediaries       (para. 4).
                            (FIs); and private sector loans
                            (paras. 1­13).
Emergency rehabilitation    While there is no specific mention       Specifies that since emergency rehabilitation
loan                        of the requirement, in practice          loans may assume any of the available lending
                            these loans are subject to the           instruments, these are subject to the
                            environmental assessment                 environmental assessment requirement (footnote
                            requirement.                             3, para. 4).
Components financed by      Not specified.                           Specifies that the environmental assessment
cofinanciers                                                         requirement covers all project components
                                                                     whether financed by ADB, cofinanciers, or the
                                                                     government (para. 4). Also that a single
                                                                     environmental assessment will be conducted to
                                                                     satisfy the requirements of ADB and the
                                                                     cofinanciers (para. 22).
Project Classification

Classification process      One-time classification (para. 2).       Classification as an ongoing process (para. 7).
Number of environment       Provides three environment               Classification applies to all lending modalities.
categories                  categories: A, B, and C (para. 2).       Adds a fourth category, FI, referring to projects
                                                                     utilizing financial intermediaries for onlending of
                                                                     subprojects (para. 6) or equity investment.
Selected projects in        Defines such projects that involve       Defines such category B projects as those that
category B considered as    deforestation or loss of biodiversity;   are deemed by ADB's chief compliance officer to
environmentally sensitive   involuntary resettlement issues; the     be environmentally sensitive for the purposes of
                            processing, handling, and disposal       (i) the 120-day disclosure rule, and (ii) the
                            of toxic and hazardous substances;       environmental management plan requirement
                            or other activities that are likely to   could involve projects near environmentally
                            be of interest to a wide external        sensitive areas; projects that involve
                            group of persons (footnote 2, para.      deforestation or loss of biodiversity; projects that
                            3).                                      involve involuntary resettlement issues; projects
                                                                     that involve the processing, handling, or disposal
76        Appendix 2



Elements                                 OM 20: OP, 1997                              OM 20: OP, 2003
                                                                       of toxic and hazardous substances; or projects
                                                                       that involve environmentally sensitive activities
                                                                       that also may be of concern to a wide group of
                                                                       external stakeholders (footnote 9, para. 10).
Basis of project classification   Not specified.                       Clearly emphasizes that the category of a project
in the case of a multi-                                                is based on the most environmentally sensitive
component project                                                      component including direct and indirect impacts
                                                                       (para. 7).
Reclassification in case of       Not specified.                       Provides that all major changes in scope during
major changes in project                                               project implementation will be screened for
scope during implementation                                            significance of environmental impacts and such
                                                                       are classified accordingly (para. 27).
Classification of                 Not specified.                       Classified as category C (para. 20).
microfinance projects
Other Considerations Concerning Environmental Assessment
Examination of alternatives       Specified as a major element in an   Specified as an important consideration in
                                  EIA report (footnote 2, p.1).        undertaking an environmental assessment (para.
                                                                       4).
Identification of indirect and    Recommends the identification of     Specified as important considerations in
cumulative impacts                indirect effects (OM/GP: 20          undertaking an environmental assessment (para.
                                  Appendix, page 8).                   4).
Environmental standards           Not specified.                       States that ADB will follow the World Bank's
                                                                       Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook
                                                                       for standards and approaches to pollution
                                                                       prevention and abatement but such may be
                                                                       superseded by alternative standards and
                                                                       approaches derived from the environmental
                                                                       assessment of any individual project (para. 23).
Uncertainties in locations        Not specified.                       For category A and environmentally sensitive
and alignments of                                                      category B projects, where uncertainty exists
infrastructure                                                         about specific locations or alignments of major
                                                                       infrastructure or project facilities at the time of
                                                                       Board approval, the EIA or IEE will include an
                                                                       EMP that presents full details on the agreed
                                                                       upon process to be followed for environmental
                                                                       assessment (see full details in para. 28).
Unanticipated environmental       Not specified.                       If unanticipated impacts are identified after the
impacts                                                                loan is closed, ADB will encourage and assist, as
                                                                       required, the borrower to plan and implement
                                                                       remedial measures (para. 29).
Environmental Management          Not mentioned in the OM/OP.          Specifically required in an EIA or IEE of category
Plan                                                                   A or category B sensitive projects (para. 25).
                                                                       Should describe specific mitigation measures;
                                                                       environmental monitoring requirements; and
                                                                       related institutional arrangements, including
                                                                       budget requirements (para. 25).
                                                                       Must be fully reflected in loan agreements and
                                                                       project administration memoranda (para. 25).
                                                                       Format for EIA includes "environmental
                                                                       management plan that includes institutional
                                                                       requirements and environmental monitoring
                                                                       program" (footnote 7).
                                                                                                    Appendix 2      77


Elements                              OM 20: OP, 1997                               OM 20: OP, 2003
                                                                      Format for IEE includes "institutional
                                                                      requirements and environmental monitoring
                                                                      program" (footnote 8).
Contents of Environmental Assessment Reports
Project Loan
Category A                     EIA report following format            EIA report following format prescribed in footnote
                               prescribed in footnote 2, p. 1 of 6    7, para. 8.
Category B (sensitive)         IEE report following format            IEE report (see footnote 8, paras. 20 and 25).
                               prescribed in footnote 3, p. 1 of 6

Category B                     IEE report following format            IEE report following format prescribed in footnote
                               prescribed in footnote 3, p. 1 of 6    8, para. 8.
Program Loan
Category A or B program        Environmental repercussions, if        Environmental assessment report includes a
loan without an investment     any, of the policy and institutional   matrix of potential environmental impacts of each
component                      reforms to be introduced are           policy action with appropriate mitigation
                               examined (para. 5).                    measures for the policy actions underpinning the
                                                                      program loan (para. 12).
Program loan with              In addition to above, the              In addition to above, the environmental
investment component and       environmental assessment               assessment requirement for project loans
specific projects identified   requirement for project loans apply,   applies, and an IEE or EIA is undertaken (para.
                               and an IEE or EIA is undertaken        12).
                               (para. 5).
Use of SEA                     Not specified                          SEA is optional (para. 12).
Sector Loan
Before approval of sector      The environmental assessment           The environmental assessment report covers the
loan category B or B(s)        report covers the following:           following:
                               * Examination of the policy and        * Examination of the policy and institutional
                               institutional changes proposed in a    changes proposed in a sector loan to determine
                               sector loan to determine their         their environmental implications, and to introduce
                               environmental implications, if any;    appropriate environmental interventions (para.
                                                                      13);
                               * IEE or EIA report for core
                               subprojects' environmental criteria    * IEE or EIA report for core subprojects (para.
                               and concerns that need to be           14);
                               examined during subproject
                               selection, design, appraisal, and      * Institutional arrangements (including budget
                               implementation.                        and capacity arrangements) and process that will
                                                                      be followed for environmental assessment of
                                                                      subprojects after approval of sector loan (para.
                                                                      15).
After sector loan approval ­   IEE or EIA is prepared for category    Preparation of IEE or EIA for category B
for subsequent subprojects     A or B (sensitive) subprojects (and    (sensitive) or category A subprojects, confirmed
                               along with the proposal, is            by ADB as environmentally sensitive (para. 15).
                               forwarded to ADB for review) (para.
                               8).
Use of SEA                     Not specified.                         SEA is optional (para. 16).
Sector Development Program Loan
                               Not specified                          Preparation of an environmental assessment
                                                                      report depending on mix of lending instruments
                                                                      (para. 17).
78        Appendix 2



Elements                               OM 20: OP, 1997                               OM 20: OP, 2003
FI Loans through:
(1) Equity investment in an     Makes no specific requirement for      The environmental assessment report includes a
operation with potential        preparation of an environmental        description of the environmental management
environmental impacts           assessment report; however, the        system (comprising policy, procedures, and
                                RRP reflects covenant provisions       capacity) to be applied by the FI (para. 18).
                                committing the FI to ensure that
                                subborrowers comply with the
                                environmental regulations and
                                requirements of the DMC
                                government and, if necessary, of
                                ADB (para. 10).
(2) Credit line with category   Makes no specific requirement for      The environmental assessment report includes a
A or B sensitive subprojects    preparation of an environmental        description of the environmental management
                                assessment report, but the             system that will cover the environmental
                                adoption of a policy statement and     assessment process of all subprojects to be
                                agreed upon institutional              financed with ADB funds (para. 19).
                                arrangements between ADB and
                                the FI regarding review of
                                subprojects are to be reflected in
                                the RRP (para. 11).
* Subprojects above the free    An IEE or EIA is prepared (and         An IEE or EIA is prepared and forwarded to ADB
limit                           forwarded to ADB for review and        for clearance before subproject approval (para.
                                clearance before subproject            19).
                                approval) (para. 11).
* Subprojects below the free    The FI must prepare an appropriate     An EIA or IEE for subsequent subprojects is
limit                           policy statement before the credit     prepared; ADB reserves the right to review it
                                line is approved, and any need for     along with the subproject proposals (para. 19).
                                strengthening the capacity of the FI
                                should be addressed. The IEE or
                                EIA of these subprojects (along
                                with the proposal) will be forwarded
                                to ADB for review based on the
                                agreed upon arrangements stated
                                in the report and recommendation
                                of the President (RRP) or loan
                                documents (para.11).
(3) Microfinance projects       Not specified.                         An environmental assessment report is not
                                                                       required (by substitution with reference to para.
                                                                       20).
Private Sector Loans
Loans and equity                The general environmental              Specifies similar provisions (para. 21).
investments with specific       assessment requirements (for
identified projects/            project loans) apply (para. 13[i]).
subprojects
Credit Line or Equity Investment in a FI
An investment vehicle where     The environmental assessment           Specifies similar provisions (para. 21).
subprojects are known           requirements for category FI loans
during project                  and equity investments apply (para.
implementation                  13[ii]).
Clearance of Environmental Assessment Reports by the Government Authority
                                The DMC's government should            Where final government clearance of
                                clear the IEE or EIA before the        environmental assessment/SEA has not been
                                SIEE or SEIA is submitted to the       received before the conclusion of loan
                                Board, or at the latest, before the    negotiation, a loan covenant requiring
                                                                                                   Appendix 2         79


Elements                             OM 20: OP, 1997                                OM 20: OP, 2003
                              project is implemented. Where           government clearance of the EIA or IEE will be
                              government clearance has not            included in the loan agreement (para. 30 [iv]).
                              been received before the RRP is
                              circulated to the Board, a loan
                              covenant requiring government
                              clearance of the IEE or EIA before
                              project implementation should be
                              included in the agreement for the
                              project.
Public Consultation
Policy statement              In preparing environmental              For category A and B projects, the borrower
                              assessment reports, ADB                 must consult with groups affected by the
                              encourages the borrower to take         proposed project and local NGOs (para. 9).
                              into account the views of affected
                              groups including NGOs (para. 14         Consultation is done as early as possible in the
                              [iv]).                                  project cycle, from project design and
                                                                      identification of environment mitigation
                                                                      measures, and during project implementation
                                                                      (para. 9).
Consultation points           Not specified.                          Required for category A projects and specifies
                                                                      that consultation should occur at least twice
                                                                      (para. 9):
                                                                      ·   once during the early stages of EIA field
                                                                          work; and
                                                                      ·   once when the draft EIA report is available
Documentation in              Not specified.                          The major elements of the public consultation
environmental assessment                                              process are described in the environmental
or summary environmental                                              assessment and summary environmental
assessment reports                                                    assessment reports (para. 9).
Disclosure of Information
Form and language of          Not specified.                          To facilitate consultations for category A and B
information to be disclosed                                           projects, the borrower will provide information on
                                                                      the project's environmental issues in a form and
                                                                      language(s) accessible to those being consulted
                                                                      (para. 10).
120-Day Disclosure Rule
                              Required for category A and B           A similar provision applies (para. 10).
                              (sensitive) projects in the public or
                              private sector (para. 4):
* Project loan                For a category A and B sensitive        A similar provision applies (para. 10).
                              project, the SEIA or SIEE report is
                              circulated to the Board and the
                              public at least 120 days before
                              Board approval of the project.
* Sector loan with category
A or B sensitive sample
subprojects
    before sector loan        The SIEE or SEIA report of the          A similar provision applies (para. 15).
    approval                  sector loan is circulated to the
                              Board and the public at least 120
                              days before Board approval of the
                              sector loan (para. 8).
80        Appendix 2



Elements                              OM 20: OP, 1997                                     OM 20: OP, 2003
     after sector loan         Not specified.                            The SIEE or SEIA report is circulated to the
     approval                                                            public at least 120 days before approval of the
                                                                         subproject (para. 15).


* Program loan with an         The SIEE or SEIA report of the            A similar provision applies (as stated in para. 12,
investment component           program loan is circulated to the         which says general requirements for
comprising a subsequent        Board and the public at least 120         environmental assessment to be followed).
project                        days before Board approval (not
                               specified in para. 5).
* FI loan (after FI loan       120-day disclosure is not required        The SIEE or SEIA of category B sensitive or
approval)                      (not specified in paras. 10 and 11).      category A subproject above the "free limit" is
                                                                         circulated to the public at least 120 days before
                                                                         the subproject is approved (para. 19).
Disclosure to the public and   After the release of the SIEE or          SIEE and SEIA reports are required to be
NGOs                           SEIA of subsequent subprojects to         circulated worldwide, through the depository
                               the Board, these reports, including       library system and on the ADB web site (para.
                               the IEE or EIA report, if requested,      10);
                               are made available by ADB to
                               locally affected groups and NGOs          (Note: For category A and category B sensitive
                               through the Executive Director of         projects, the release of the summary
                               the DMC concerned on the Board,           environmental assessment report coincides with
                               or through the Bank's depository          the release of the same to the Board, while for
                               library program, except where             other category B and FI loans with potential
                               confidentiality rules would be            category A and B subprojects, the release of the
                               violated (para. 4).                       summary environmental assessment report
                                                                         coincides with launching of the RRP on the web.)
                                                                         The full EIA or IEE reports are also made
                                                                         available to interested parties on request (para.
                                                                         10).
                                                                         (Note: Availability of report coincides with the
                                                                         public release of SEA reports.)
Inclusion of environmental     For category A and B sensitive            Findings of environmental assessment reports
assessment findings or         projects in particular, the               including EMPs, where relevant, are reflected in
summary environmental          environmental assessment or               the RRP (para. 8). Summary environmental
assessment reports in the      specifically the EMP findings are         assessment reports of category B or FI projects
RRP                            reflected in the RRP, and any             with potential category A or B subprojects are
                               significant changes in the summary        attached as a core appendix to the RRP of a
                               environmental assessment                  project or sector loan.
                               previously circulated to the Board
                               should be highlighted in the RRP
                               (para. 19). (In practice, for all other
                               category B project, sector, and
                               program loans, the summary IEE is
                               attached to the RRP either as a
                               core or supplementary appendix.)
Permission to release the      Not specified.                            Not specified.
environmental assessment
or summary environmental
assessment report to the
Board
Cases of major changes in      Not specified.                            The SEIA or SIEE of an environmentally
project scope                                                            sensitive change in scope is circulated to the
                                                                         public as well as the Board of Directors, at least
                                                                         120 days before Management approves the
                                                                         change in scope (para. 27).
                                                                                             Appendix 2        81


Elements                            OM 20: OP, 1997                           OM 20: OP, 2003
Review Missions
                             Not specified.                     Requires that review missions from regional
                                                                departments conduct an annual review of
                                                                environmental aspects of category A and B
                                                                sensitive projects with findings reflected in the
                                                                aide memoire of the review mission (para. 25).
Reporting Arrangement
From the borrowers and       Not specified.                     For subsequent projects, the borrowers and
executing agencies                                              executing agencies submit semiannual reports
                                                                on implementation of EMPs (para. 25).
PCR and PPAR
Coverage of environmental    Not specified.                     Specified in para. 26.
aspects of projects in PCR
and PPAR
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance, BP = British Petroleum, BTOR = back-to-
office-report, CRP = Compliance Review Panel, CSP = country strategy and program, DMC = developing member
country, EA = executing agency, EIA = environmental impact assessment, EMP = environmental management plan,
GMS = Greater Mekong Subregion, IEE = initial environmental examination, INRM = India Resident Mission, NGO =
nongovernment organization, OED = Operations Evaluation Department, OEM = Operations Evaluation Mission, OM
= operations manual, PCR = project completion report, PMU = project management unit, PPAR = project
performance audit report, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, PRC = People's Republic of China,
PSOD = Private Sector Operations Department, RD = Regional Department, RETA = regional technical assistance,
RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President, RSDD = Regional and Sustainable Development Department,
RSES = Environmental and Social Safeguard Division of RSDD, SDP = sector development program, SEIA =
summary environmental impact assessment, SES = special evaluation study, SIEE = summary initial environment
examination, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
82     Appendix 3



              QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY OF APPRAISAL MISSION LEADERS

A.     Findings from the Questionnaire Survey

1.     The main findings from the questionnaire are presented in this section. It is stressed that
the survey results are largely perceptions of the appraisal mission leaders (AMLs) that may be
biased and in some cases inaccurate, due to recall failure and other factors. However, wherever
possible, the survey results have been considered in association with other information in this
evaluation such as country case studies and review of documents to provide a more complete
and accurate picture. Section B provides tabulations of the survey responses, which were the
bases for the following exposition.

       1.      General Information on Sample Projects and Appraisal Mission Leaders

2.    Table A3.1 provides a profile of the respondents. Fifty-two percent of the respondents
were Level five or above at the time of appraisal. Sixty-two percent had an educational
background in finance or economics, 42% in engineering, 14% in environment-related fields,
and 18% in other fields (architecture, geography, planning, management, and medical science).

3.      Table A3.2 provides a profile of the 147 projects addressed in the responses. The
distribution of countries in terms of number of projects is as follows: People's Republic of China
(PRC) (21); Bangladesh (16); India (14); Indonesia and Viet Nam (9 each); Nepal, Pakistan, and
Sri Lanka (8 each); and Cambodia and Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) (7 each).
Thirty-one projects were under environmental category A (including 14 for PRC, 4 for
Bangladesh, 3 each for Lao PDR and Pakistan, and 2 for Sri Lanka); 113 were category B; and
3 were category B "Sensitive". Sixty-nine projects or 47% were approved after the promulgation
of the 2002 Environment Policy and the reorganization of ADB's environmental resources (see
Table A3.3).

       2.      Assessment of Environmental           Safeguard     Procedures     During    Loan
               Appraisal and Approval

4.    There is interest in the impact of the 2003 environmental procedures. Forty-eight AMLs
who responded had experience in processing loans both before and after November 2002,
when the Environment Policy was approved. Of these, 27 (56%) considered the new
procedures and guidelines to be clearer, stricter, and/or more effective than the previous version
(see Table A3.4). Thus the majority indicated that the revisions to procedures in 2003 have
been well received and beneficial.

5.      The relative importance of the changes in the Environment Policy and the reorganization
of environmental resources in the effectiveness of environmental safeguards was explored.
Eighteen respondents considered that the Environment Policy has had a greater impact on the
changes in the environmental safeguard procedures than ADB's reorganization in January
2002, more than double the number (eight) that considered the opposite (Table A3.5).
However, there was a recurring view that the reorganization may have had a significant adverse
impact on the effectiveness of Asian Development Bank's (ADB) safeguard procedures. As one
respondent expressed pointedly: "The decision to cut environmental operational staff capacity
via cutting the Environment Division, "mainstreaming" of environmental staff, and eventual loss
of focus are [the cause of] the operational problems. ADB has never recovered." The impact of
the reorganization is shown to be questionable, with views for and against. Those against are
often strongly expressed.
                                                                                 Appendix 3    83



6.      On the usefulness of various forms of assistance and guidance on environmental
safeguards, a large majority (80%) of the respondents considered that the manuals; guidelines;
and advice and guidance from colleagues, management, and Environment and Social
Safeguard Division (RSES)/former Environment Division are useful or very useful (see Table
A3.6). In comparison, about half (47%) thought the related training and seminars to be useful.
Thus the technical and procedural support being offered to ADB operational staff is both useful
and appreciated.

7.     Categorization of projects is a key to ADBs environmental safeguards. A large majority
of respondents (77%) considered that the environmental category assigned to the projects they
led was appropriate; 14% said that the category overestimated the adverse environmental
impact, i.e., the category should have been lower; while only 3% felt that it underestimated the
adverse impact, i.e., the category should have been higher (see Table A3.7). The perception of
mission leaders instills confidence that the present categorization is effective and working well

8.     The availability of environmental expertise is an essential element of the safeguard
system. When asked if the project team had adequate environmental expertise and was
competent in applying environmental safeguards, 84% of AMLs replied "yes" (see Table A3.8).
Given that only 14% of respondents had environment-related training, this high level of
confidence was likely caused by the fact that 49% of the fact-finding missions had an ADB
environment (safeguard) specialist as part of the mission, and almost 50% of the missions had
environmental consultants (some missions may have had both) (see Table A3.9).

9.      The survey explored the perceptions of quality of environmental impact assessments
(EIAs) and initial environmental evaluations (IEEs) by mission leaders. EIAs or IEEs prepared
by the executing agency (EA) before ADB's involvement were available for 34 of the 147
projects (see Table A3.10). These included 16 for PRC; 6 for India; 3 for Nepal; 2 each for
Bangladesh, Philippines, and Sri Lanka; and 1 each for Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, and
Pakistan (see Table A3.11). Eighty-three percent of the IEE/EIA reports prepared by the EAs
were found to be "good" to "excellent" by the mission leaders. The 28 "good" or "excellent"
IEE/EIA reports included 15 for PRC and 5 for India, as PRC and India have relatively strong
EIA expertise. The 28 IEE/EIA reports consist of 13 EIAs for category A projects (out of 15 EIAs
available, or 87%), and 15 IEEs for category B projects (out of 20 IEEs available, or 75%).

10.     By contrast, the special evaluation study (SES) team found the quality of EIAs and IEEs
to be extremely variable and often poor ­ largely descriptive, lacking solid or quantitative
assessment, and with little value added. The perception of mission leaders may reflect that the
EIAs were at the top end of the range of quality and that, as they concerned potential ADB
projects, they had received more comprehensive and in-depth analyses than other projects.
However, it may also indicate a very low expectation of quality, in part because there is little
exposure to international best practices and in part because only 14% of mission leaders had
had environmental training. There is a wide range of views on the quality of EIAs being
prepared, and this is a very important issue, especially in the context of policy changes that put
greater reliance on local procedures. Despite the view of mission leaders, the SES team
remains concerned that the quality of local EIAs and IEEs is poor. Improving the quality of local
EIAs is an essential requisite for placing greater reliance on national systems.

11.   The survey investigated the level of resources used in EIA/IEE activities. Thirty
respondents estimated the time that the EA allocated to produce the EIA/IEE (Table A3.12). The
84        Appendix 3



average time required was 4 person-months for EIAs and 2.8 person-months for IEEs.1 It is
relevant to note that, in the experience of the SES team, this is less than 25% of the input
required to complete a typical EIA or IEE to international standards. This assumes that the
project does not involve any significant ecological or modeling elements that would greatly
increase both resource requirements and time needed. This is an extremely important
observation and comparison. The expectation for ADB's resource allocations by mission leaders
is considered to be unrealistically low based on international practice. This is more
understandable if considered in the context of the current standards of deliverables and the view
of the majority of mission leaders that current standards are good. But recall that only 14% have
environmental training.

12.     With respect to ADB's inputs, ADB provided project preparatory technical assistance
(PPTA) for 125 (84%) of the projects (see Table A3.13). For 115 (78%) PPTAs, preparation of
a summary EIA (SEIA) or summary IEE (SIEE) was included as part of the consultant's terms of
reference (see Table A3.14). One hundred nine respondents made an estimation of the time
that PPTA consultants used to produce the SEIA/SIEE (see Table A3.15). The average was 3.4
person-months for SEIAs and 2.6 person-months for SIEEs (including for three category B
sensitive projects). The time allocated for SEIAs does not appear to be significantly higher than
that for SIEEs, i.e., on average 0.8 person-month more. This is surprising, as SEIAs are
intended to be considerably more comprehensive and therefore time consuming than SIEEs.
The answer lies partly in the breakdown of the category A projects by country. The PRC
accounted for nearly half of the category A projects for which there were estimates of the time
allocation, and all of them had had prior EIAs. There was therefore the ability to draw heavily
from the national assessment. The average time input by ADB's PPTA consultants to the
preparation of the PRC SEIAs was 2.4 person-months, which is even lower than the average for
preparing SIEEs (2.6 person-months) for all category B projects.

13.     The survey investigated perceptions of the benefits of the IEE/EIA process. Table A3.16
presents the responses to this survey question. Most mission leaders had a positive perception,
with 44% of respondents indicating that the IEE/EIA process was "useful." The perceived
benefits included the identification of and response to potential environmental issues, and
improved quality of project implementation without major changes to planning and design. A
further 12% indicated that it was "very useful," leading to changes in design and a better project.
One third (33%) were neutral, while about 11% believed it was "not useful" in that it did not
identify important issues and was just a procedural requirement, or "negative" in that it served to
complicate issues and increased delays and costs of the project.

14.     When asked to elaborate on the effects of the IEE/EIA process, the "positive" views
included that (i) it helps to identify the environmental risks and adverse impacts and to devise
mitigation measures, (ii) it encourages the participation of government counterpart staff and
raises their awareness of potential adverse impacts, and (iii) it helps in designing better projects
that involve complex interrelationships between people and the environment. However, many
others expressed less positive experiences with the IEE/EIA process related to (i) perceived
inappropriate environmental classification, where it should have been a lower category; and (ii)
too much emphasis being placed on procedural compliance while overlooking the importance of
overall capacity for the EAs. Some respondents suggested that ADB should have a separate
category for "environmental improvement" projects.

1
    The averages were derived using the weighted average (by frequency of respondents) of the midpoint values of
    the time intervals. For example, three person-months was used to represent the interval between two and four
    person-months in the calculation.
                                                                                 Appendix 3    85



15.     The survey shows that the level of concern for the potential adverse impacts of a project,
as perceived by AMLs, varied significantly across stakeholders, countries, and environmental
categories. Table A3.17 summarizes the results and shows that governments and society at
large were perceived to be much less concerned about environmental matters than ADB teams,
possibly indicating the former's low environmental awareness. The levels of concern also varied
significantly across the environmental categories of the projects, with greatest concern focused
on category A projects.

16.     Across countries, as presented in Table A3.18, it appears that PRC projects have
received higher levels of concern from key stakeholders with the exception of nongovernment
organizations (NGOs) and the general public. This, in part, may reflect the higher number of
category A projects in the PRC. It should be noted that ADB's projects in the Lao PDR are of
particular concern to NGOs, with five of seven projects (71%) receiving "substantial" concerns
by NGOs. This is likely due to the ecologically sensitive nature of ADB-supported projects in the
Lao PDR, including the high-profile Nam Theun 2 Hydropower Project.

17.    A related question is the rating of the driving factors behind the AML's efforts concerning
environmental safeguards during appraisal. The responses to this question are shown in Table
A3.19. Pressure from ADB's Management and Board was found moderately important or very
important for 81% of the projects. In contrast, the percentages for "government's own
environmental safeguard regulations," "commitment of the EA to environmental protection," and
"pressure from affected communities, NGOs, and general public" were much lower at 60%,
66%, and 64%, respectively. Other key driving factors included the AML's environmental
knowledge and commitment to compliance (91%), expertise and experience of ADB
environmental (safeguard) specialists or consultants (89%), assistance and guidance from
RSES/former Environment Division (77%), and pressure to have the project approved on
schedule and that the SEIA/SIEE must be presented to the Board 120 days before project
approval (62%).

18.    The survey considered the "scoping" process within the safeguard procedures.
"Scoping" establishes the areas to be addressed within the main assessment. Seventy-eight
percent of respondents considered that scoping paid moderate or substantial attention to
impacts during construction, 65% to impacts during operation, 46% to assessing alternatives to
the project, 43% to assessing secondary or induced impacts, 53% to assessing cumulative
impacts, 70% to assessing effects on local people, and 80% to making sure mitigating
measures were implemented through monitoring (see Table A3.20).

19.     While the relatively low attention paid to assessing project alternatives and secondary
impacts is confirmed by the review of the IEE/EIA documents and case studies, it is somewhat
surprising that 80% of the respondents felt that ADB had paid moderate or substantial attention
to making sure mitigating measures were implemented through monitoring, which is effectively
the same percentage (78%) for impacts during construction. A related question was "To what
extent have ADB's environmental safeguard procedures provided value-added to the
government's requirements?" Survey respondents' answers to this question are presented in
Table A3.21. For 73% of the projects, the respondents felt that ADB provided moderate to large
value added to "identifying the main environmental impact and recommending appropriate
mitigating measures". The percentage is smaller, 61%, for "implementing the mitigating
measures and monitoring the environmental impact during implementation and operation." The
results are "inconsistent" with the earlier finding that 80% of the respondents felt ADB had paid
attention to monitoring and implementation. Other sources of information including document
86     Appendix 3



review and case studies support the finding that ADB has had less value added in monitoring
and implementation. An underlying concern is that ADB mission leaders may have very low
expectations of the EIA/IEE process, perhaps because only a small proportion of them have any
formal training in the discipline.

20.      The survey explored the efficiency of the safeguard procedures when applied to different
loan modalities. The results indicate that, when applied to individual subprojects of project
modalities with multiple subprojects, i.e., sector loans, sector development programs (SDPs),
financial intermediation loans, ADB's environmental safeguard procedures can be highly time
consuming. Some of these loans have a large number of subprojects, on occasion more than
100. Of the 147 projects, 51 (35%) were in this category. For 26 (50%) of the projects, some or
all of the subproject EAs were required to do a separate SIEE/SEIA. Respondents estimated
that the average total time required by EAs to prepare a SIEE for each of their subprojects was
2.2 person-months (see Table A3.22). When asked to assess the need for and cost of preparing
an SIEE at the subproject level, six (19%) respondents believed that the project level SIEE
should be adequate and that there is no need for subproject-level SIEEs (see Table A3.23).
Fourteen (45%) considered that subproject-level SIEEs are necessary but should be simplified,
and four (13%) believed that the costs in terms of money and time are justified by the benefits.
One respondent's comment sums up the views expressed widely in both the survey and in
interviews with in-country staff: "The number of subprojects is close to 100. From the EA's
viewpoint, high costs and resultant delay of project implementation for unnecessarily extensive
environmental assessment do not seem to be balanced with the project benefits."

21.     When asked if ADB could have adopted the environmental safeguard system of the
country and achieved satisfactory results for the project, 82 (56%) felt it was possible to do so,
with or without additional efforts by ADB to improve monitoring and enforcement and perhaps
with an accreditation system in place (see Table A3.24). Forty-nine (33%) respondents believed
that it was not possible to do so without compromising ADB's environmental safeguard
standards. When asked about the risks that ADB would face in adopting the country system for
the project, 33 (22%) indicated that "the country environmental safeguard system was either
non-existent or inadequate," 89 (61%) indicated that "the country system looked good on paper
but implementation was weak," and 19 (13%) felt that "corruption would have prevented
effective implementation of the country system" (see Table A3.25).

22.     In terms of the preparedness of countries to adopt national systems, of the four countries
selected for case studies, the Philippines received the highest confidence (four of four
projects;100%), followed by the PRC (17 of 21 projects , 81%), India (10 of 14 projects, 71%),
and Viet Nam (three of nine projects; 33%) . This is broadly consistent with the findings of the
case studies.

23.     The survey explored a range of issues by asking respondents if they agreed or
disagreed with a series of statements regarding ADB's environmental safeguard procedures
(see results in Table A3.26). This approach enabled views to be canvassed on a range of
specific issues. Ninety respondents replied to the question, providing a fairly wide coverage of
views and experience:

       (i)     Overall, the respondents were positive about the cost-effectiveness of the
               procedures. About two thirds (66%) agreed or strongly agreed that ADB's
               environmental safeguard procedures are working effectively and deliver results.
                                                                                 Appendix 3    87


       (ii)    About one third (20% - 30%) expressed negative views ­ agreeing with
               statements that the procedures cause unacceptable delays, the IEE/EIA process
               does not address specific project needs effectively, environmental requirements
               cost too much for the EAs, the IEE/EIA process is mostly "box-checking," project
               alternatives are not seriously considered and evaluated, mitigation measures are
               often generic and impractical, and IEEs/EIAs are often based on very cursory
               information and are of little value.
       (iii)   About one third (30%) felt that ADB's criteria for environmental classification are
               too rigid, causing higher than necessary costs, while only 14% believed they are
               too relaxed, resulting in inadequate safeguards.
       (iv)    About two thirds of the respondents (62%) agreed that there is a need for greater
               flexibility in procedures;
       (v)     About half agreed that there is not adequate follow through to the implementation
               stage to ensure mitigation is implemented.
       (vi)    About half (45%) agreed that public consultation is too rigid and difficult to
               implement.

24.     The survey considered the effect of the safeguard procedures on the attractiveness of
ADB financing relative to alternative financing sources. About 40% said there was a negative
effect. Some respondents provided narrative assessments showing a wide range of views:

       (i)     Many respondents believed that if ADB procedures involve elements of
               international best practices, many borrowers are willing to comply with them and
               even adopt those elements to improve their own domestic requirements.
       (ii)    It was noted that commercial lenders rely on ADB to use its environmental policy
               to safeguard against adverse impacts. Other views include that there is too much
               emphasis on procedural rather than substantive compliance.
       (iii)   Some observed that the presentation of environmental safeguard procedures to
               the borrower is important. If the procedures are presented as "requirements," it
               will often irritate the borrower. If they are presented in the context of improving
               project quality, it will be much easier for the borrower to comply and it may have
               a long-term useful impact beyond the project scope.
       (iv)    Some emphasized that ADB's procedures should accommodate the reality and
               capacities of the client agencies.
       (v)     Others stressed that project-specific environmental intervention could become
               unattractive and environmental policy and institutional goals should be achieved
               under a separate intervention.

25.    The survey sought suggestions on how ADB could improve the effectiveness of its
environmental safeguards. The comments and suggestions were centered on several
categories:

       (i)     addressing the current mismatch between ADB environmental safeguard policies
               and the quantity and quality of staff resources;
       (ii)    moving away from the current focus on procedural compliance, particularly
               during loan processing, to a more results-based approach with more attention
               paid to monitoring and implementation; and
       (iii)   adopting country-specific environmental safeguard procedures, taking into
               account the realities and the capacities of the EAs.
88     Appendix 3



26.    Some of the most cryptic comments are included to provide a flavor of the responses.
The themes that they reflect include the need for more specialist resources; greater focus on
implementation; issues of timing; focusing effort on major projects, not smaller ones; and
increasing flexibility.

       (i)     "ADB can improve the effectiveness by being serious about environmental
               staffing: reinstate the Environment Division, staff it with 10-20 specialists by
               hiring qualified staff with substantial field experience."
       (ii)    "We have adequate procedures in place during processing. What is needed is
               more resources and support for monitoring environmental safeguards during
               project implementation."
       (iii)    "On the procedural requirements, it would be beneficial if the 120 day circulation
               rule could be reduced to, say, 45 days. This would allow more time to prepare
               and complete the EIA and the SEIA."
       (iv)    The policy does not allow resources to be focused on projects that have major
               impacts/risks. Meeting policy requirements for projects with marginal or routine
               impacts requires significant resources for limited returns, whereas complex
               projects are starved of resources.".
       (v)     "The procedure should be flexible and basically should follow each country's
               procedures as long as the objectives of environmental safeguard can be
               achieved. Each country has different approval procedures. There may be a gap
               between the ideal procedures and the country procedures. Then, ADB should
               provide advice and support to fill the gap, but should not be lazy with just
               imposing ADB's procedure. This is where ADB can provide value addition to
               DMCs."

       3.      Implementation and Monitoring

27.      The relative lack of focus on implementation and monitoring has been a consistent
criticism of the current safeguard procedures. The survey sought views on this issue. Eighty-one
(55%) respondents indicated that they were involved in the administration of the loan after
approval. The average length of involvement was 20 months. Thirty-six (44%) respondents
indicated they had discussed issues related to environmental compliance in back-to-office
reports (BTORs) for loan review missions. The points covered by the BTORs included the need
for preparation of IEEs for succeeding subprojects, changes in design, establishing monitoring
and evaluation mechanisms, and lack of or insufficient compliance.

28.     Respondents were asked if ADB had made sufficient efforts to monitor the impact and
the implementation of the mitigation measures, through loan review, project completion, and
project performance evaluation missions. Seventy-eight (54%) indicated "adequate relative to
the impact," 29 (20%) indicated "some but inadequate," and only 8 (6%) indicated "very little"
(see Table A3.27). Furthermore, 99 (66%) of the projects were indicated to have had an
environmental monitoring program in place, mostly run by the EAs, and some supported by
ADB.

       4.      Future Improvement of ADB's Environmental Safeguard Procedures

29.     The respondents were requested to make suggestions on how ADB should improve the
effectiveness of its environmental safeguards. The comments and suggestions were centered
on several categories: (i) addressing the current mismatch between ADB environmental
safeguard policies and the quantity and quality of the staff resources: (ii) moving away from the
                                                                                 Appendix 3    89


current focus on procedural compliance, particularly during loan processing, to a more results-
based approach with more attention paid to monitoring and implementation; and (iii) adopting
country-specific environmental safeguard procedures, taking into account the realities and the
capacities of the EAs. The following are some selected quotes:

       (i)     "ADB can improve the effectiveness by being serious about environmental
               staffing: reinstate the Environment Division, staff it with 10-20 specialists by
               hiring qualified staff with substantial field experience."
       (ii)    "We have adequate procedures in place during processing. What is needed is
               more resources and support for monitoring environmental safeguards during
               project implementation."
       (iii)    "On the procedural requirements, it would be beneficial if the 120-day circulation
               rule could be reduced to, say, 45 days. This would allow more time to prepare
               and complete the EIA and the SEIA."
       (iv)    The policy does not allow resources to be focused on projects that have major
               impacts/risks. Meeting policy requirements for projects with marginal or routine
               impacts requires significant resources for limited returns, whereas complex
               projects are starved of resources."
       (v)     "The procedure should be flexible and basically should follow each country's
               procedures as long as the objectives of environmental safeguard can be
               achieved. Each country has different approval procedures. There may be a gap
               between the ideal procedures and the country procedures. Then, ADB should
               provide advice and support to fill the gap, but should not be lazy with just
               imposing ADB's procedure. This is where ADB can provide value addition to
               DMCs."

       5.      Summary

30.    It needs to be acknowledged that the questionnaire survey was essentially an
opportunity for "self-evaluation" by the AMLs on the costs and effectiveness of environmental
safeguard in the projects they had appraised. Although it is constrained by the perspective,
experience, and knowledge base of the respondents, it offered an important gauge on a wide
range of issues related to environmental safeguard.

31.     The survey revealed several key conclusions. While the majority of respondents felt that
ADB has provided important "added value," particularly in terms of assessing the adverse
impacts of ADB-supported projects and devising mitigating measures, ADB's environmental
safeguard policies and procedures suffer from several deficiencies and weaknesses. First, there
is a major mismatch between ADB's environmental safeguard policies and the resources
available to achieve the policy outcome. Second, within the limited resources available, far more
resources have been allocated for environmental safeguard procedures during loan processing
with much fewer resources for monitoring and implementation. Third, the IEE/EIA process is
more procedural compliance-driven than results-based. This has led to relatively uniform
attention paid to all projects, resulting in high transaction costs for some EAs, particularly for
small and routine projects or subprojects, rather than focusing on projects with major
environmental risks and impacts. Finally, ADB's inputs and value added to the EIA/IEE process
are limited for several large client countries including PRC and India due to the application of
uniform procedures to all countries. Efforts should be made to develop more tailored and
country-specific strategies and approaches of assistance in environmental safeguard.
90     Appendix 3



B.     Tabulation of Survey Results
                              Table A3.1: Profile of Survey Respondents
                                                (n = 90)
                                 Item                     Frequency               %
                 Job Level at Time of Appraisal
                  Level 4 and below                             36                40
                  Level 5 and above                             47                52
                  Unspecified                                   7                 8

                 Educational Background*
                  Economics/finance                             56                62
                  Engineering                                   38                42
                  Environment                                   13                14
                  Other fields                                  16                18
                 Note: Percentage total does not add up to 100 as one respondent can have
                       multiple educational backgrounds.
                 Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.


               Table A3.2: Breakdown of Projects Surveyed by Country, by category
                                      (in descending order)
                                                          Category
                     Country                                            B         Total     Percent
                                                  A        B
                                                                     sensitive
     People's Republic of China                   14        7           0          21         14
     Bangladesh                                    4       12           0          16         11
     India                                        0       14            0          14         10
     Indonesia                                    1        8            0          9          6
     Viet Nam                                     1         6           2          9          6
     Nepal                                        1        7            0          8          5
     Pakistan                                     3         5           0          8          5
     Sri Lanka                                    2        6            0          8          5
     Cambodia                                     0        7            0          7          5
     Lao People's Democratic Republic             3         3           1          7          5
     Uzbekistan                                   0        6            0          6          4
     Tajikistan                                   0         5           0          5          3
     Afghanistan                                   0        4           0          4          3
     Bhutan                                        1        3           0          4          3
     Maldives                                     0         4           0          4          3
     Philippines                                  0         4           0          4          3
     Kyrgyz Republic                              0        3            0          3          2
     Mongolia                                     0        3            0          3          2
     Azerbaijan                                   0         2           0          2          1
     Marshall Islands                             0         2           0          2          1
     Fiji Islands                                  0        1           0           1          1
     Federated States of Micronesia               0        1            0          1          1
     Samoa                                        1         0           0          1          1
       Total                                      31      113           3         147        100
       %                                          21      77            2         100
     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                                      Appendix 3     91



                                 Table A3.3: Number of Projects Approved Before and
                                      After Promulgation of Environment Policy

                                  Year of Approval               Frequency                 %
                             Before Policy
                                        1997                              7               5
                                        1998                              8               5
                                        1999                              7               5
                                        2000                             16               11
                                        2001                             18               12
                                        2002                             22               15
                                      Subtotal                           78               53
                             After Policy
                                        2003                             27                18
                                        2004                             19                13
                                        2005                             22                15
                                        2006                              1                1
                                      Subtotal                            69               47
                                        Total                            147              100
                             Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.



Table A3.4: Comparison of Environmental Safeguard Procedures Before and After the Environment Policy
                                                                      I don't                   No basis for
                                      Agree        Disagree            know       Unspecified   comparison         Total
           Item                  No.      %       No.    %       No.        %     No.     %     No.     %      No.      %
There were no substantial        19       13      25     17       1         1      3      2     99      67     147     100
changes

The new procedures and            27      18      17     12       1           1    3      2     99      67     147     100
guidelines are stricter and/or
more effective
The new procedures and            27      18      17     12       1           1    3      2     99      67     147     100
guidelines are clearer and/or
easier to implement
The old procedures and            3           2   41     28       1           1    3      2     99      67     147     100
guidelines were stricter
and/or more effective
The old procedures and            7           5   37     25       1           1    3      2     99      67     147     100
guidelines were clearer
and/or easier to implement
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
92      Appendix 3




                     Table A3.5: Perception of the Factor Causing Greater Impact on
                            Changes in Environmental Safeguard Procedures

                                   Response                         Frequency       %
                     Reorganization                                     8           5
                     Environment Policy                                 18          12
                     About the same                                     4            3
                     No impact/changes                                  8           5
                     No basis of comparison                            104          71
                     Unspecified                                        5            3
                                        Total                          147       100
                     Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

     Table A3.6: Usefulness of Various Forms of Guidance on ADB's Environmental Safeguards
                                           Procedures
                                                        Advice or       Advice from
                                  Operations         guidance from     RSES/former
                                  manuals and        colleagues and     Environment        Training/
                                   guidelines         management          Division         seminars
       Response                  Freq.      %        Freq.      %      Freq.      %      Freq.     %
Not aware/ not useful              2        1          3        2        3        2       20       14

Aware but not useful               24        16        18      12       17      12        33      22

Aware and useful                   97        66        85      58       74      50        53      36

Aware and very useful              21        14        34      23       45      31        16      11

No basis for response              0            0       0      0         0      0          2       1
No response                        3            2       7      5         8      5         23      16
           Total                  147       100        147    100       147     100      147      100
ADB =Asian Development Bank; RSES=Regional and Sustainable Environment and Social Safeguard.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission
                                                                                      Appendix 3     93




              Table A3.7: Perception of Appropriateness of Assigned Environmental Category, by Country
                                                                                   I don't      No
                                   Appropriate Underestimated Overestimated                             Total
 Country                                                                            know    response
                                    No.    %       No.       %     No.      %     No. % No.        % No.    %
 Afghanistan                         2     50       0        0      1       25     0     0    1    25  4   100
 Azerbaijan                          2    100       0        0      0       0      0     0    0     0  2   100
 Bangladesh                         14     88       1        6      1       6      0     0    0     0  16 100
 Bhutan                              3     75       0        0      0       0      0     0    1    25  4   100
 Cambodia                            6     86       0        0      1       14     0     0    0     0  7   100
 Fiji Islands                        1    100       0        0      0       0      0     0    0     0  1   100
 Federated States of Micronesia      0      0       0        0      1      100     0     0    0     0  1   100
 India                              11     79       1        7      1       7      0     0    1     7  14  100
 Indonesia                           7     78       0        0      1       11     1    11    0     0  9   100
 Kyrgyz Republic                     1     33       0        0      0       0      2    67    0     0  3   100
 Lao People's Democratic Republic    6     86       0        0      1       14     0     0    0     0  7   100
 Maldives                            3     75       0        0      1       25     0     0    0     0  4   100
 Mongolia                            2     67       0        0      0       0      1    33    0     0  3   100
 Nepal                               6     75       0        0      2       25     0     0    0     0  8   100
 Pakistan                            6     75       0        0      2       25     0     0    0     0  8   100
 Philippines                         4    100       0        0      0       0      0     0    0     0  4   100
 People's Republic of China         16     76       2       10      3       14     0     0    0     0  21 100
 Marshall Islands                    1     50       0        0      1       50     0     0    0     0  2   100
 Samoa                               0      0       0        0      1      100     0     0    0     0  1   100
 Sri Lanka                           6     75       0        0      1       13     1    13    0     0  8   100
 Tajikistan                          3     60       0        0      1       20     1    20    0     0  5   100
 Uzbekistan                          6    100       0        0      0       0      0     0    0     0  6   100
 Viet Nam                            7     78       0        0      2       22     0     0    0     0  9   100
                Total               113    77       4        3      21      14     6     4    3     2 147 100
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
  94      Appendix 3




                          Table A3.8: Perception of Expertise and Competence of
                          Project Team in Applying Environmental Safeguards to
                                                the Project

                                         Response                  Frequency        %

                          Enough expertise                               123        84
                          Not enough expertise                           10         7

                          I don't know                                   4          3
                          No response                                    10         7

                                          Total                          147       100
                          Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.



     Table A3.9: Presence of an Environmental Expert during Appraisal and Fact Finding Missions
                                                     (n = 147)
                                     Present        Not present    Appraisal       No response     Total
                                                                    mission
            Mission                                                 waived
                                    No.      %       No.     %     No.         %   No.    %      No.       %
Fact Finding
 Environmental specialist           72      49       66     45      6          4    3      2     147   100
 Environmental consultant           73      50       65     44      6          4    3      2     147   100

Appraisal
 Environmental specialist           54      36       82     55      8          5    4      3     148   100
 Environmental consultant           41      28       94     64      8          5    4      3     147   100
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                Appendix 3    95



 Table A3.10: EIA or IEE was Prepared by the Borrower Prior to ADB Involvement
                               (in descending order)
                                                            Projects with EIA or IEE
                                       Total No. of
              Country                   Projects
                                                                     % of Total Projects
                                        Surveyed        Number
                                                                          Surveyed
People's Republic of China                  21             16                 76
India                                       14              6                 43
Nepal                                        8              3                 38
Bangladesh                                  16              2                 13
Philippines                                  4              2                 50
Cambodia                                     7              1                 14
Indonesia                                    9              1                 11
Lao People's Democratic Republic             7              1                 14
Pakistan                                     8              1                 13
Sri Lanka                                    8              1                 13
Afghanistan                                  4              0                  0
Azerbaijan                                   2              0                  0
Bhutan                                       4              0                  0
Fiji Islands                                 1              0                  0
Federated States of Micronesia               1              0                  0
Kyrgyz Republic                              3              0                  0
Maldives                                     4              0                  0
Mongolia                                     3              0                  0
Marshall Islands                             2              0                  0
Samoa                                        1              0                  0
Tajikistan                                   5              0                  0
Uzbekistan                                   6              0                  0
Viet Nam                                     9              0                  0
              TOTAL                         147            34                 23
ADB= Asian Development Bank; EIA=environmental impact assessment; IEE=initial environmental
examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
        96     Appendix 3




        Table A3.11: Assessment of Quality of EIA/IEE Prepared by the Borrower Prior to ADB Involvement

                                     Number of                            Assessment of Quality of EIA/IEE
                                      Projects
                                      Surveyed
              Country               with EIA/IEE    Excellent             Good             Poor         I don't know      No reply
                                       Prior to
                                        ADB        Freq       %    Freq         %    Freq         %     Freq       %     Freq   %
                                    Involvement
Bangladesh                               2           0         0    1         50       0       0         1      50        0      0
Cambodia                                 1           0         0    1        100       0       0         0       0        0      0
India                                    6           2        33    3         50       1      17         0       0        0      0
Indonesia                                1           0         0    1        100       0       0         0       0        0      0
Lao People's Democratic Republic         1           0         0    1        100       0       0         0       0        0      0
Nepal                                    3           0         0    1         33       2      67         0       0        0      0
Pakistan                                 1           0         0    1        100       0       0         0       0        0      0
Philippines                              2           0         0    1         50       0       0         0       0        1     50
People's Republic of China               16          4        25   11         69       1       6         0       0        0      0
Sri Lanka                                1           0         0    1        100       0       0         0       0        0      0
               Total                     34          6        18   22         65       4      12         1       3        1      3
ADB= Asian Development Bank; EIA=environmental impact assessment; IEE=initial environmental examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




                Table A3.12: Person-months Spent by Borrower in Preparing EIA/IEE, by Category

                                                              Category A                              Category B
           Person-Months (PM)
                                                   Frequency                %          Frequency                   %
           Less than 2 PM                                 3                 20                3                    15
           2  PM < 4                                      5                 33                12                   60
           4  PM < 6                                      2                 13                1                    5
           6 PM or more                                   4                 27                0                    0
           I don't know                                   1                 7                 2                    10
           Unspecified                                    0                 0                 2                    10
                         Total                           15                100                20                   100
         EIA=environmental impact assessment; IEE=initial environmental examination.
         Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                Appendix 3       97




   Table A3.13: Provision of Project Preparatory Technical Assistance to Projects Surveyed, by
                                             Country
                                                    Project Preparatory Technical Assistance
Country                                         Not Provided        Provided       Unspecified
                                                No.       %       No.       %      No.       %
Afghanistan                                       0        0        4       3       0        0
Azerbaijan                                        0        0        2       2       0        0
Bangladesh                                        3       14       13      10       0        0
Bhutan                                            1        5        3       2       0        0
Cambodia                                         1         5        6       5       0        0
Fiji Islands                                      0        0        1       1       0        0
Federated States of Micronesia                    0        0        0       0       1       100
India                                             6       29        8       6       0        0
Indonesia                                         0        0        9       7       0        0
Kyrgyz Republic                                   0        0        3       2       0        0
Lao People's Democratic Republic                  0        0        7       6       0        0
Maldives                                          1        5        3       2       0        0
Mongolia                                          0        0        3       2       0        0
Nepal                                            0         0        8       6       0        0
Pakistan                                          0        0        8       6       0        0
Philippines                                       1        5        3       2       0        0
People's Republic of China                        0        0       21      17       0        0
Marshall Islands                                  2       10        0       0       0        0
Samoa                                             1        5        0       0       0        0
Sri Lanka                                        2        10        6       5       0        0
Tajikistan                                        2       10        3       2       0        0
Uzbekistan                                        1        5        5       4       0        0
Viet Nam                                          0        0        9       7       0        0
                     Total                       21      100      125      100      1       100
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
98      Appendix 3




 Table A3.14: Preparation of Summary EIA/IEE Part of Consultant's Terms of Reference (TOR), by
                                           Country
                                                      Preparation of Summary EIA/IEE
                                         Part of PPTA        Not Part of PPTA
             Country                                                                Unspecified
                                        Consultant's TOR     Consultant's TOR
                                          No.          %           No.           %          No.           %
Afghanistan                                4           3            0            0           0             0
Azerbaijan                                 2           2            0            0           0            0
Bangladesh                                 9           8            3            75          1            14
Bhutan                                     3           3            0            0           0            0
Cambodia                                   6           5            0            0           0            0
Fiji Islands                               1           1            0             0          1            14
Federated States of Micronesia             0           0            0            0           0            0
India                                      8           7            0            0           0             0
Indonesia                                  9           8            0            0           0            0
Kyrgyz Republic                            3           3            0            0           0            0
Lao People's Democratic Republic           7           6            0            0           0             0
Maldives                                   3           3            0            0           0            0
Mongolia                                   3           3            0            0           0            0
Nepal                                      8           7            0            0           0            0
Pakistan                                   8           7            0            0           0            0
Philippines                                2           2            0            0           1            14
People's Republic of China                20          17            0            0           1            14
Marshall Islands                           0           0            0            0           0            0
Samoa                                      0           0            0            0           0             0
Sri Lanka                                  4           3            0            0           2            29
Tajikistan                                 3           3            0            0           0            0
Uzbekistan                                 4           3            0            0           1            14
Viet Nam                                   8           7            1            25          0            0
              Total                       115         100           4           100          7           100
EIA=environmental impact assessment; IEE=initial environmental examination; PPTA=project preparatory technical
assistance; TOR= terms of reference.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                           Appendix 3   99



 Table A3.15: ADB Inputs to Preparation of SEIAs/SIEEs, by
                         Category
     Person-Months (PM)             Frequency                    %

Category A
 Less than 2 PM                               5                 17
 2  PM < 4                                    14                 48
 4  PM < 6                                    5                  17
 6 PM or more                                 3                 10
 Unspecified                                  2                  7
             Total                            29                100
Category B
 Less than 2 PM                               33                37
 2  PM < 4                                    35                 39
 4  PM < 6                                    9                  10
 6 PM or more                                 2                  2
 I don't know                                 9                 10
 Unspecified                                  2                  2
             Total                            90                100
Category B sensitive
 Less than 2 PM                               1                 33
 2  PM < 4                                    1                  33
 4  PM < 6                                    1                  33
 6 PM or more                                 0                  0
             Total                            3                 100
ADB= Asian Development Bank; SEIA= summary environmental impact
assessment; SIEE= summary initial environmental examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.


  Table A3.16: Perception of the Net Effect of the EIA/IEE
               Process in Project Appraisal
           Net Effect            Frequency                      %

Negative                                 3                      2
Not useful                               13                     9
Neutral                                  48                     33
Useful                                   64                     44
Very useful                              17                     12
No EIA/IEE done                          2                      1
              Total                  147                       100
EIA=environmental impact assessment;         IEE=initial   environmental
examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                                                                      100
            Table A3.17: Lack of Concern for Environment by Stakeholders: Percentage (%) of Projects with "None" or
                                                     "Limited" Concerns




                                                                                                                                      Appendix 3
                                                   ADB                       Non-
                                                             Executing                   Affected    General        Consultant
       Category                    Government   Management                government
                                                              Agency                     People      Public           Team
                                                 and Board                Organization
       All projects                       58        28          56            48           56           73             28
       Category A projects                39        16          35            26           39           65             13
      ADB= Asian Development Bank.
      Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.



     Table A3.18: Levels of Concern by Stakeholders: Percentage (%) of Projects with "Moderate" or "Substantial" Concerns

                                                   ADB                         Non-
                                                              Executing                      Affected        General     Consultant
Country                          Government     Management                  government
                                                               Agency                        People          Public        Team
                                                 and Board                  Organization
People's Republic of China               67         81           67                48           67             24            86
India                                    43         64           57                57           43             36            55
Philippines                              50         75           50                50           50             25            75
Viet Nam                                 44         66           44                33           44             11            66
ADB= Asian Development Bank.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                Table A3.19: Importance of Various Driving Factors on AMLs' Efforts on Environmental Safeguard Compliance
                                Very Little/
                                               Moderately Important   Very Important   Not Applicable    I Don't Know   No Response
                               Unimportant
       Driving Factor                                                                                                                 Total   %
                                Freq     %       Freq         %       Freq       %     Freq      %      Freq      %     Freq    %
Pressure from ADB                19      13       46          31      73        50      1        1       5        3      3      2     147     100
Management and Board for
environmental compliance

Government's own                 52      35       49          33      40        27      1        1       2        1      3      2     147     100
environmental safeguard
regulations and standards

Level of commitment of the       44      30       57          39      40        27      1        1       2        1      3      2     147     100
executing agency to
environmental protection

ADB AML's environmental          8       5        47          32      86        59      1        1       2        1      3      2     147     100
knowledge and commitment to
compliance

Expertise and experience of      7       5        45          31      85        58      3        2       4        3      3      2     147     100
ADB environment (safeguard)
specialist or consultant

Assistance and guidance from     22      15       47          32      66        45      3        2       3        2      6      4     147     100
RSES/former Environment
Division

Pressure from affected           62      42       50          34      29        20      1        1       1        1      4      3     147     100
communities, concerned
NGOS, and the general public

Desire of the appraisal          8       5        37          25      96        65      1        1       2        1      3      2     147     100
mission to improve the
environment or not cause
environmental damage

Pressure to have the project     36      24       31          21      60        41      8        5       5        3      7      5     147     100
approved on schedule and the
SEIA/SIEE must be presented
to the Board 120 days before
project approval




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 3
ADB= Asian Development Bank; AML= appraisal mission leaders, NGO= nongovernment organization; RSES= regional and sustainable environment social
safeguard; SEIA= summary environmental impact assessment; SIEE= summary initial environmental examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




                                                                                                                                                    101
                                                                                                                                                                                                      102
        Table A3.20: Amount of Attention Given to Various Aspects of the Project While Undertaking the Environmental Assessment

                                        None              Limited            Moderate          Substantial         Not relevant             I don't know         No response




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 3
 Item                                                                                                                                                                                Total     %
                                      Freq      %        Freq      %         Freq        %     Freq          %     Freq            %        Freq        %        Freq        %
 Impact during construction            2        1         20       14         44         30     70           48     7              5         1          1         3          2       147       100

 Impact during operation               4         3       36        24        50          34        46        31        7           5         1          1         3          2       147       100
 Alternatives to the project          20        14       27        18        28          19        40        27        22          15        1          1         9          6       147       100
 Secondary or induced impact          18        12       46        31        34          23        29        20        9           6         1          1        10          7       147       100

 Cumulative environmental impact      17        12       39        27        48          33        30        20        5           3         1          1         7          5       147       100

 Effects on people in local            8         5       27        18        41          28        62        42        4           3         1          1         4          3       147       100
 communities
 Making sure mitigation measures       4         3       16        11        50          34        68        46        4           3         1          1         4          3       147       100
 were implemented through
 monitoring
 Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.

        Table A3.21: Extent of Additional Value from ADB's Environmental Safeguard Procedures to the Government's Requirements
                                                                                                                                                                           No
                                           Not at all         Limited             Moderate                Large             Not relevant         I don't know
Item                                                                                                                                                                    response       Total     %
                                        Freq         %     Freq         %         Freq        %         Freq      %         Freq        %        Freq       %           Freq   %
Identified the main environmental         4          3      29          20         61         41         47       32          3         2         3         2            0     0       147      100
impact of the project and
recommended appropriate
mitigating measures
Implemented the mitigating                  8        5        28        19          43        29        47        32         6          4          14       10           1       1     147      100
measures and monitored the
environmental impact during Project
implementation and/or operations
 Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                             Appendix 3                  103



          Table A3.22: Person-months Spent by Executing Agency in Preparing Additional
                             SEIA/SIEE for Subprojects, by Category

                                             Category A                     Category B
         Person-Months (PM)            Frequency         %           Frequency          %
        Less than 2 PM                     0             0               10            48
        2  PM < 4                          2            50                6            29
        4  PM < 6                          0             0                0             0
        6 PM or more                       0             0               1              5
        I don't know                       1            25               2             10
        Unspecified                        1            25                2            10
                  Total                    4            100              21            100
       SEIA= summary environmental impact assessment; SIEE= summary initial environmental examination.
       Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.


Table A3.23: Assessment of the Need for and Cost of Preparing SEIA/SIEE at the Subproject Level
Item                                                                     Frequency                 %
SEIA/SIEE at the project level (with the initial batch of                    6                     19
subprojects) would have been adequate
SEIA/SIEE at the subproject level was necessary but should                    14                   45
have been more simplified
SEIA/SIEE at the subproject level cost time and money but                     4                    13
costs were justified by benefits
I don't know                                                                  2                     6
No response                                                                   5                    16
                               Total                                          31                  100
SEIA= summary environmental impact assessment; SIEE= summary initial environmental examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
  104          Appendix 3



         Table A3.24: Assessment of Adoptability of Country's Environmental Safeguard System
Legend:
Option I          ADB could have adopted country's environmental safeguard system without compromising its own
                  environmental safeguard system
Option II         ADB could have adopted country's environmental safeguard System but with additional efforts on
                  monitoring and enforcement
Option III        ADB could have adopted country's environmental safeguard System but with (i) additional efforts on
                  monitoring and enforcement, and (ii) an accreditation system supervised by ADB
Option IV         ADB could not have adopted the country's environmental safeguard system without compromising its own
                  environmental safeguard system

 Country            Option I       Option II    Option III    Option IV      No view     No response      Total    %
                  Freq    %       Freq   %     Freq    %     Freq    %     Freq    %     Freq    %
Afghanistan        0         0     0      0     0       0     2     50      1      25      1       25       4     100
Azerbaijan         0         0     0      0     1      50     1     50      0       0      0       0        2     100
Bangladesh         0         0     5     31     1       6     9     56      1       6      0       0       16     100
Bhutan             2        50     0      0     0       0     1     25      1      25      0       0        4     100
Cambodia           1        14     1     14     3      43     1     14      1      14      0       0        7     100
Fiji Islands       1        100    0      0     0       0     0      0      0       0      0       0        1     100
Federated
States of
Micronesia         0         0     0      0     0       0     0      0      1     100      0       0        1     100
India              7        50     3     21     0       0     1      7      3      21      0       0       14     100
Indonesia          3        33     3     33     2      22     1     11      0       0      0       0        9     100
Kyrgyz
Republic           0         0     0      0     0       0     3     100     0       0      0       0        3     100
Lao
People's
Democratic
Republic           0         0     1     14     2      29     4     57      0       0      0       0        7     100
Maldives           0         0     1     25     1      25     1     25      1      25      0       0        4     100
Mongolia           0         0     1     33     1      33     1     33      0       0      0       0        3     100
Nepal              2        25     4     50     1      13     1     13      0       0      0       0        8     100
Pakistan           0         0     2     25     0       0     6     75      0       0      0       0        8     100
Philippines        2        50     1     25     1      25     0      0      0       0      0       0        4     100
People's
Republic of
China              5        24     10    48     2      10     3     14      1       5      0       0       21     100
Marshall
Islands            0         0     1     50     0       0     1     50      0       0      0       0        2     100
Samoa              0         0     1     100    0       0     0      0      0       0      0       0        1     100
Sri Lanka          1        13     4     50     0       0     0      0      2      25      1       13       8     100
Tajikistan         0         0     1     20     0       0     3     60      1      20      0       0        5     100
Uzbekistan         0         0     1     17     0       0     4     67      1      17      0       0        6     100
Viet Nam        1     11       2     22          0      0      6    67       0      0      0       0        9     100
   Total       25     17      42     29         15     10     49    33      14     10      2       1       147    100
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                       Appendix 3               105



   Table A3.25: Possible Risks in Adopting the Country's Environmental Safeguard
                                        System
 Legend:
 Risk I              The country environmental safeguard system was either non
                     existent or inadequate
 Risk II             System looked good on paper but implementation was weak due to
                     lack of resources and capacities
 Risk III            Corruption in the system would have prevented the effective
                     implementation of the system


                             No. of           Risk I         Risk II                Risk III
 Country                    Projects
                            Surveyed     Freq          %   Freq        %     Freq          %
 Afghanistan                      4       4        100      0       0          0            0
 Azerbaijan                       2       1         50      1      50          0            0
 Bangladesh                      16       3         19     10      63          4           25
 Bhutan                           4       1         25      1      25          0            0
 Cambodia                        7        4        57      3       43          2           29
 Fiji Islands                     1       0          0      1      100         0            0
 Federated States of             1        1        100      0       0          0            0
 Micronesia
 India                           14       0         0       6          43      0            0
 Indonesia                        9       0         0       7          78      3           33
 Kyrgyz Republic                  3       3        100      0           0      0            0
 Lao People's                     7       2        29       5          71      0            0
 Democratic Republic
 Maldives                         4       2        50       2      50          0            0
 Mongolia                         3       0         0       3      100         0            0
 Nepal                            8       1        13       7      88          2           25
 Pakistan                         8       2        25       6      75          0            0
 Philippines                      4       0         0       2      50          0            0
 People's Republic of            21       1         5      14      67          3           14
 China
 Marshall Islands                2        1        50       1      50           0           0
 Samoa                           1        0         0       1      100          0           0
 Sri Lanka                       8       1         13       5      63           1          13
 Tajikistan                      5        2        40       3      60           0           0
 Uzbekistan                      6        2        33       5      83           2          33
 Viet Nam                        9        2        22       6      67           2          22
          Total                 147      33        22      89      61          19          13
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                                                                         106
                                                                                                                                          Appendix 3
                                    Table A3.26: Perception of ADB's Environmental Safeguard Procedures
                                                                                                  Strongly
                                       Strongly Agree     Agree         No View     Disagree                 No Response
Statement                                                                                         Disagree                 Total   %
                                       Freq      %      Freq      %    Freq   %    Freq    %   Freq      %   Freq    %
1. The environmental safeguard          11       7      88        60   26     18   14     10    1       1     7      5     147     100
process is working effectively
and delivers satisfactory results.

2. The criteria for determining a       5        3      35        24   35     24   65     44    2       1     5      3     147     100
project's environmental
classification, i.e., A, B, C, and
FI, are too rigid - causing higher
than necessary costs.
3. The criteria for determining a       4        3      15        10   30     20   85     58    7       5     6      4     147     100
project's environmental
classification are unclear and
relaxed - causing inadequate
safeguards

4. There is a need for greater          23      16      69        47   21     14   29     20    0       0     5      3     147     100
flexibility in procedures.

5. The IEE/EIA process causes           6        4      33        22   30     20   66     45    5       3     7      5     147     100
unacceptable project delays
and, thus, increases costs

6. The IEE/EIA process does             3        2      27        18   34     23   74     50    6       4     3      2     147     100
not address specific project
needs effectively.
7. Environmental requirements           2        1      37        25   29     20   72     49    4       3     3      2     147     100
cost too much for the executing
agencies
8. The EIA/IEE process is               4        3      25        17   19     13   88     60    8       5     3      2     147     100
mostly "box-checking" and often
fails to focus on key
environmental impacts and
mitigation actions.
9. Project alternatives are not         2        1      41        28   30     20   65     44    5       3     4      3     147     100
seriously considered and
evaluated in the EIA/IEE.

ADB= Asian Development Bank; EIA=environmental impact assessment; IEE=initial environmental examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                    Table A3.26: Perception of ADB's Environmental Safeguard Procedures ­ Continued

                                                                                                        Strongly
                                           Strongly Agree     Agree         No View    Disagree                    No Response
 Statement                                                                                              Disagree                 Total   %
                                           Freq      %      Freq      %    Freq   %    Freq    %     Freq      %   Freq     %
 10. The mitigation measures
 recommended are often generic              4        3      32        22   18     12   83      56      5      3     5       3    147     100
 and/or impractical.

 11. There is not adequate follow
 through to implementation stage to         8        5      67        46   20     14   44      30      4      3     4       3    147     100
 ensure mitigation is implemented.

 12. IEE/EIAs are often based on
 very cursory information and are of        3        2      27        18   18     12   86      59      9      6     4       3    147     100
 little value to project planning/design

 13. There is inadequate focus on
 environment in loan review and             8        5      47        32   22     15   59      40      5      3     6       4    147     100
 completion missions


 14. The public consultation process
                                            5        3      62        42   29     20   45      31      2      1     4       3    147     100
 is too rigid and difficult to implement

ADB= Asian Development Bank; EIA=environmental impact assessment; IEE=initial environmental examination.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.




                                                                                                                                               Appendix 3
                                                                                                                                               107
                                                                                        108
                                                                                         Appendix 3
          Table A3.27: Assessment of ADB Efforts to Monitor Mitigating Measures

                               Response                         Frequency          %
 Very little effort                                                  8             5
 Some effort but inadequate                                         29            20
 Adequate effort relative to impact                                 78            53
 Cannot comment/ Not involved in implementation                      9             6
 I don't know                                                       21            14
 No response                                                         2             1
                                 Total                             147            100
ADB= Asian Development Bank.
Source: Operations Evaluation Mission.
                                                                                 Appendix 4   109


                         KEY FINDINGS FROM COUNTRY STUDIES

A.     The Philippines

1.       The Philippines was the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) eighth largest borrower over
the decade between 1996 and 2005, averaging $270 million per year or 4.7% of ADB's lending
total. It was the first of the four countries visited by the Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM)
and, in a sense, served as a testing ground for the study methodology. Four projects were
selected, including one on energy, one on transport, and two sector loans for urban
development.

       1.      Main Findings from the Project Case Studies

2.     Of the 18 category A and B projects approved for the Philippines since 1997, there was
no category A project; all were category B, including the four selected projects.

               a.     Inv 7162/1769: Manila North Tollways Corporation

3.      The project, approved in October 2000, was partly financed by a combined loan of $70
million through ADB's private sector investment facility. It involved the rehabilitation and
expansion of 82.6 kilometers (km) of the North Luzon Expressway from Manila to the Clark
Special Economic Zone.

4.      The project had a "B" category in both the government's and ADB's classification. This
was deemed appropriate based on the government's standard that the road rehabilitated does
not go through an environmentally critical area (ECA). ADB's initial classification of the project
was "A," but it agreed to downgrade to "B" based on the borrower's argument that the project
did not require any additional right-of-way. As implemented, the project entailed a 46% increase
in lane-kilometers, compared with the old road, due to the construction of additional lanes. The
potential adverse impact of the project could be significant, and its specific environmental
impact would depend largely on actual environmental measures, e.g., where the fill materials
would be obtained and how the spoil sites would be managed.

5.      The Summary Initial Environmental Examination (SIEE), prepared by consultants
engaged by the borrower based on the original IEE, was detailed and informative compared
with SIEEs in general. ADB provided comments on data gaps including noise and pollution due
to increased traffic volume and monitoring of environmental compliance. The borrower created a
Quality, Environment, Safety and Health Division to ensure corporate-wide environmental
compliance. As required by loan covenants, an independent environmental consultant was
engaged by the MNTC to conduct quarterly monitoring during construction of the
implementation of environmental mitigating measures and to address new environmental
issues/problems as they emerged. The contractors could draw money only for work completed
with a certificate from the environmental consultant on environmental compliance. The EMP
(EMP) as part of the SIEE was revised and updated to include site-specific (unanticipated)
mitigating measures during project implementation and operations. Among observed site-
specific unanticipated impacts were (i) poor drainage due to clogged culverts, which might lead
to flooding of adjacent areas; (ii) impeded water flow along natural waterways due to siltation
and eutrophication; (iii) unsightly mounds of construction spoils and other solid wastes along
roadsides; and (iv) poor aesthetics due to inadequate reforestation program.
110      Appendix 4



6.      Overall, ADB, as one of the financiers, appears to have provided important value added
to impact assessment and environmental monitoring and management through requiring the
engagement of an independent environmental consultant for project appraisal and supervision.
ADB's appraisal provided significant inputs to the design and implementation of the project, e.g.,
inclusion of a health and safety plan, and inclusion of the monitoring of oil, grease, and noise
into the EMP. ADB also required the borrower to comply with international standards
(emissions), i.e., the standards specified in the World Bank's Pollution Prevention and
Abatement Handbook. However, in the actual implementation, as shown in the borrower's self-
monitoring reports, parameters were assessed against local or Department of Environment and
Natural Resources (DENR) standards, which are not consistent (slightly lower/higher in some
parameters) with the World Bank standards.

                 b.      Loan 1984: Electricity Market and Transmission Development
                         Project

7.      The project, approved in December 2002, was partly financed through a loan of $40
million from ADB's ordinary capital resources (OCR). It aimed to develop the necessary
infrastructure for power sector restructuring. Part of the project involved upgrading the Luzon
transmission grid of 230 kV lines and expanding the Mindanao substations. It had an
environmental category "B," and an IEE was undertaken.

8.     Under the Philippine system, a transmission project of 230 kV or above and more than
20 km long that does not go through an ECA is classified as "B." However, a 1982 Presidential
Decree (PD) provides exemption for projects operating prior to 1982. In this case, the existing
Luzon transmission line for upgrading, being operational since 1956, was therefore exempted
from securing an environmental compliance certificate (ECC), or the transmission line
components were classified as category D, for which a Certificate of Non-coverage was issued
based on a PD submitted by the executing agency (EA), the then National Power Corporation
(NPC). All Mindanao substations, falling under category C of the environmental impact
statement (EIS) system for expansion, have secured ECCs based on PDs. Under ADB's
system, the project was classified as category B, and an SIEE was prepared (there was an IEE
document; however, this is no longer available) and submitted to ADB.

9.      The SIEE was prepared by the Environment Management Department of NPC and is of
good quality. The Division (currently under TRANSCO) has 14 staff who are experienced in
environmental assessment and monitoring for power transmission projects. However, ADB did
not appear to have any substantial inputs or value added. This is partly because NPC had
strong capacities and was mostly meeting DENR's requirements rather than the requirements of
ADB except for the SIEE. ADB has never had environmental specialists or consultants as part
of the fact-finding, appraisal, or loan review missions.

10.    The site visits confirmed that TRANSCO, which is ISO14000 certified, has a well-
designed environmental management system in place that follows international best practices.
The OEM was introduced to another project, the Leyte-Cebu Transmission Project, financed by
the JBIC1 (JBIC) and the government's own resources with no ADB involvement. The project,
which involved construction of submarine transmission cables, demonstrated TRANSCO's
strong capacities and commitment to environmental safeguard. For example, to protect the coral


1
    According to TRANSCO officials, JBIC required environmental monitoring but no environmental impact
    assessment. The project relied entirely on the government's own environmental safeguard procedures.
                                                                                   Appendix 4    111


along the corridor, it engaged a group of biologists/divers to transplant the corals to other
locations nearby, as required by the conditions imposed by DENR's ECC, at a substantial cost.

11.   Overall, ADB's value added in environmental safeguard and enhancement in this project
was limited. This was largely because of TRANSCO's own strong capacities and the
government's safeguard procedures.

               c.      Loan 1843: Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector Project

12.     The project, approved in September 2001, was partly financed with a sector loan of $30
million from ADB's OCR through the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP). It aimed to improve
basic urban infrastructure and essential municipal services in about 40 urban local government
units (LGUs) throughout Mindanao. It involved building of basic physical infrastructure covering
water supply, sanitation, drainage, flood control, solid waste management, urban roads, bridges,
public markets, and other public facilities.

13.     The project was assigned an Environmental category "B," and an IEE for the project was
undertaken as part of the project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA) based on ADB's
Guidelines for Environmental Assessment for Sector Loans. Individual IEEs were also prepared
for three core subprojects that are likely to be representative of the types of components. The
IEE and the SIEE prepared during the PPTA included comprehensive and significant data and
analysis of the project and its potential environmental impacts. However, the SIEE was not
included as a core appendix in the report and recommendation of the President (RRP) but as a
supplementary appendix only available on request. Subsequent IEEs were implemented by
proponents, mostly LGU officers/staff delegated in the Engineering/Planning offices, some of
whom trained under the technical assistance of the capacity-building component of this project.
Reviews of samples of these succeeding IEE documents showed some deficiencies in analysis.

14.      ADB was to undertake an assessment of the legislative and institutional framework
within which subprojects were to be implemented, to ensure that these were in accord with
ADB's environmental assessment policies and in order to identify any necessary strengthening
measures. As the project included a large number of small component projects (under the
predetermined free limit), it was deemed desirable to be screened, approved, and monitored
using existing DENR laws, procedures, and institutional resources. This was also consistent
with the project objective of increasing the self-reliance of LGUs and strengthening all levels of
government capacity in subproject preparation, appraisal, approval, implementation, and
monitoring. So far, ADB appears to have delegated most of the appraising and approving tasks
to LGUs, and the delegation of such authorities does not seem to be based on a sound
assessment of local capacities as envisaged at appraisal. For example, the responsible LGUs
have approved a number of subprojects without definite schedule and resources to ensure that
supplemental infrastructure is in place prior to their completion and operation. The public
markets in Makilala and Ozamis City are under way, even though these LGUs have inadequate
facilities for solid waste disposal. The Ozamis City public market will be relocating some 1,000
vendors to a temporary site that will not be large enough to accommodate all the vendors.

15.    On monitoring of the implementation of the EMP as part of the IEE submitted to DENR,
the EA or the LGU is responsible for the direct supervision of subproject implementation and
monitoring of subproject operations and performance. ADB is supposed to review the execution
of subprojects on a selective basis, but, in reality, it has carried out little checking. Of all four
subprojects visited, none of the responsible DENR regional offices has yet to conduct any
monitoring, either.
112    Appendix 4




16.     The sector loan has an environmental category "B," and it is not permissible to finance
any environmentally sensitive subprojects. One of the subprojects currently under preparation to
be financed by the loan is a landfill site. Under Philippine regulations, landfill sites beyond 10
hectares are classified as "A," for which a full EIS is required. The subproject landfill site is
under that limit and therefore is classified as "B." However, depending on future needs, there is
a plan to build three phases of the landfill site, which together will exceed the limit for category
"B." This example highlights the need to adopt a "conservative" principle for determining
environmental categories by looking at the future cumulative impact and entirety of the projects
rather than individual projects.

17.     Overall, ADB has not provided as much value added as envisaged at loan appraisal in
terms of strengthening local capacities for appraising and approving subprojects' environmental
impacts. Monitoring by DENR and ADB is inadequate. However, despite the aforementioned
deficiencies, field visits by the OEM indicated that ADB-funded subprojects have generally
adopted better safety and environmental measures during construction compared with similar
types of projects funded by the government's own resources.

               d.      Loan 2063: Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project

18.      The sector project, approved in December 2003, was partly financed through a loan of
$30.5 million from ADB's OCR, administered with the Development Bank of the Philippines
(DBP) as an intermediary financing agency It aims to increase the supply of appropriate and
affordable shelter with secure tenure for the urban poor, improve the urban poor's quality of life,
and strengthen the capability and capacity of shelter sector institutions. The project covers three
components: (i) site development and distribution of secure tenure, (ii) shelter finance provision,
and (ii) capacity building and implementation support. It aims to benefit poor communities in the
73 cities and 103 first-class municipalities outside Metro Manila.

19.      The project is classified as an environmental category B. However, a full environmental
impact assessment (EIA) was conducted during the PPTA, which included six core subprojects.
An SIEE (as the project was eventually classified as B) was prepared based on the EIA report,
and its quality is highly satisfactory. It identified serious environmental risks associated with
three sites proposed for the housing development subprojects. These sites selected included
steep slopes, which are highly vulnerable for erosion and landslides; a former city dump, which
would expose the future residents to some serious health and environmental risks; and a site
(for city center upgrade) that is flood prone. For the first subproject, the SIEEs recommended
having strict control of slopes of maximum 30% and other erosion control measures. For the
second subproject, the SIEE recommended dropping the former dumpsite and opting for a new
site along Purok Riverside. For the third subproject, the SIEE recommended indefinite deferral
until the flood issue is addressed on a larger scale. The OEM's interviews with DBP confirmed
that all three subprojects were later cancelled, largely because of the environmental
risks/concerns raised in the SIEEs.

20.     Interviews with DBP officials and the environmental consultant engaged under ADB's TA
for project supervision indicated that environmental and social considerations have been
integrated into project design and implementation for the subprojects, in terms of site selection,
and environment-friendly designs of the housing projects. ADB has had clear value added in (i)
environmental impact assessment, i.e., both in terms of helping to identify the environmental
risks associated with the core subprojects and assisting IEE preparation by LGUs for
succeeding subprojects; (ii) monitoring and implementation; and (iii) capacity building for
                                                                                 Appendix 4   113


beneficiaries (LGUs and local communities) through knowledge transfer. In particular, the
provision of a project supervision TA, which includes an environmental consultant, has played a
vital role all three areas. A further point is that, although ADB's own safeguard requirements are
limited with respect to this particular project, ADB's participation in the project is helping DBP
and the borrowers (LGUs) better enforce the government's own environmental safeguard
regulations. This is being achieved mainly through (i) more resources allocated for monitoring
and supervision, and (ii) reduction of potential corruption that otherwise may exist in the "money
for ECC" deals.

               e.     Summary of Philippine Case Studies

21.    Several key points emerge from the Philippine case studies. Over the years and with the
assistance of various development partners, the Philippines has developed a comprehensive
environmental safeguard system that is tailored to the country's needs. There are high
procedural commonalities between ADB's and the Philippines' environmental safeguard
systems. Generally, the Philippines' and ADB's project environmental categorization systems
provide similar divisions in each category, according to the nature and scale of a project. Both
systems (i) have similar environmental assessment requirements for the same or similar
category of projects; and (ii) recognize the need for open and proactive public communications
through consultations and information dissemination to promote social acceptability of projects
and foster participatory development, e.g., consultations prior to project implementation are
required under both systems. A unique aspect of the Philippines' project environmental
categorization is that it has a separate category for environmental improvement.

22.     However, DENR is severely constrained in EIS review and monitoring capacities. For
two of the four projects reviewed, ADB has provided for third-party monitoring on compliance of
mitigating measures and environmental impacts during construction. This has had positive
impact on the environmental performance and quality of the projects. For the remaining
projects, ADB's value added was limited. Overall, ADB's future assistance for the Philippines
with respect to environment should particularly focus on improving the local monitoring and
implementing capacities to help enforce the government's own environmental protection policies
and laws rather than having a separate set of procedural requirements. Such assistance can be
both at the project level, through introducing monitoring mechanisms for ADB-funded projects,
and at the sector level, through provision of technical and other assistance.

B.     India

23.    India is currently ADB's second largest borrowing country after the People's Republic of
China (PRC), averaging $885 million per year over the last decade or 15.4% of ADB's total
lending. However, its environmental "portfolio" is surprisingly small. Between 1997 and May
2006, 44 environmental category A and B projects were approved, but only one of them was
category A.

       1.      Main Findings from the Project Case Studies

24.    The four projects selected are all environmental category B. The only category A project,
LPG Pipeline Project, since 1997 has been completed and was not selected for the case
studies.
114       Appendix 4



                   a.       Loan 1944-IND: East-West Corridor Project

25.     The project, approved in November 2002, was partly financed with a loan of $320 million
from ADB's OCR. It aimed to reduce the capacity constraint on the East-West Corridor through
rehabilitating and widening two-lane highways totaling 468.3 km to dual two-lane carriageways
(four lanes) with various road safety features.

26.     The main quoted reason for the B classification, as with many other ADB-supported
projects in India, was that it was a rehabilitation of an existing road, and no additional right-of-
way was needed. However, this justification may have overlooked a crucial fact that the main
environmental impact of road projects may occur offsite, in quarries and spoils sites. Whether it
is an existing right-of-way or not often matters much less than expected when it comes to offsite
environmental impacts.

27.     An IEE was prepared by a domestic consulting firm, and the SIEE was prepared based
on the IEE. For a $320 million loan with potentially serious significant environmental impacts,
the 3-page SIEE is vague and does not contain any quantitative assessment of the type,
magnitude, or location of possible adverse impact. Instead, it consists of mostly general and
"motherhood" statements on type of impact, e.g., noise, dust, construction wastes, and
mitigating methods, but fails to highlight specific key issues that might face each subproject or
segment of the roads. The SIEE does not include an EMP specifying the type of impact and
mitigating measures, and the responsible parties for implementing and monitoring the mitigating
measures.

28.      The OEM did not have an opportunity to visit the project sites but held an in-depth
discussion with the EA for the project, National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) with respect
to environmental safeguard measures and ADB's value added on environmental safeguards
and enhancement for roads projects in its administration in general (not confined to this
particular project). Generally, the NHAI officials interviewed suggested that India has a stringent
environmental safeguard system, perhaps even more so than the ADB system. The official
mentioned that ADB has pursued a strategy of avoiding sensitive subprojects by picking only
those sections of roads that can be classified as "B" under the ADB classification system. In
some cases, this even led to the situation where ADB would finance road sections only going in
and coming out of a sanctuary, leaving the sections within the sanctuary to NHAI's own
financing.2 This is mainly based on the consideration that more environmentally sensitive roads
or sections of roads would take 1-2 years to get environmental clearance from the MOEF
(MOEF), which would cause excessive delays for ADB-financed projects, entailing higher
commitment charges.3

29.     The apparent avoidance of environmentally sensitive projects by ADB may be partly due
to the lack of expertise and capacity of both ADB Headquarters and the Indian Resident Mission
(INRM) for appraising and monitoring such projects, for example, the latter having no
environmental safeguard specialist and only one environmental consultant.4 NHAI officials

2
    The OEM learned that, under ADB Loan 2019: National Highway Corridor Sector I, ADB financed the Chittorgarth-
    Kota section, the edge of a gavial sanctuary, and the section starting at the other end of the sanctuary, leaving
    NHAI to handle the bypass section falling in the Jawahar Sagar Sanctuary areas.
3
    Officials at the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance confirmed that ADB's approach of
    avoiding environmentally sensitive sections of roads is welcomed by the government, since this reduces the cost of
    borrowing, particularly in the form of commitment charges and interest during construction.
4
    In comparison, the other two resident missions visited by the OEM, viz., in PRC and Viet Nam, have even lower
    capacities, without either an environmental specialist or consultant.
                                                                                             Appendix 4     115


suggested that ADB has never sent an environment-related mission. In comparison, the World
Bank, with about eight consultants led by an environmental safeguard specialist at its Delhi
office, has been helping NHAI not only in mitigating adverse environmental impacts during
construction, but also in improving road landscape design and integration of environmental
considerations into project implementation with little or no cost. In addition, it has gone beyond
project-specific assistance by assisting NHAI to develop an environmental and social safeguard
information system. The system will be useful for assessing the performance of various
contractors/suppliers in terms of environmental performance to move toward a performance
rating or accreditation system. Overall, the NHAI officials felt that the World Bank, with strong
environmental expertise in the field office, has offered much more value added than ADB.

                  b.       Loan 1959-IND: Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development
                           Program

30.     The sector development program (SDP), approved in December 2002, was partly
financed with a loan of $150 million from ADB's OCR. The loan component of the SDP was
designed to rehabilitate about 1,750 km of state roads identified in important state road
corridors.

31.       As was the case with Loan 1944, the SDP was categorized as B, the main reason being
that it is a rehabilitation of an existing road, and no additional right-of-way is needed. At the time
of loan approval, an IEE was prepared for five project corridors of the Phase I civil works, and
IEEs were to be prepared for all the remaining projects roads selected during implementation.
The SIEE was prepared based on the IEE for Phase I as a supplementary appendix to the RRP,
available only on request. It was vague on details of potential impact and contained no EMP.

32.      One of the criteria for selecting subprojects for the SDP is that "Environmentally
sensitive candidate roads will be excluded for investment." While this criterion may have aimed
to minimize adverse environmental impacts of ADB's road projects, in practice, this approach
may have some undesirable outcomes. As in the case described by NHAI officials, the EA
officials also suggested that ADB has financed road sections on either side of national
protection areas while leaving the sections within the protected area for the government's own
financing.5 The approach may be best characterized as "the tail wagging the dog," as ADB let its
desire to minimize environment-related risks and delays dictate what it can finance, and it may
have missed out potential opportunities for more value added for improving the environmental
practices of the road projects in India by playing the "demonstration" role. It may have also
exposed ADB to some moral risks, as one EA official put it: "ADB cannot completely run away if
some environmental risks materialize, as the road will be perceived as one road."

33.    The OEM visited one of the roads being built under the project and observed that the
construction was along the existing alignment, with no additional right-of-way required. The
environmental management was generally satisfactory, with no major spoils sites visible and the
construction materials mixing site well kept and clean. However, as with many road projects, the
main environmental impacts may occur offsite, depending on where and how the construction
materials are excavated and wastes disposed of. Neither the SIEE nor site interviews could
provide answers to the questions. It appears that ADB is almost completely relying on the
semiannual self-monitoring reports on compliance prepared by the EA, and ADB rarely
conducts monitoring on this and other road projects in India due to lack of capacity.

5
    The officials mentioned the Orcha-Tikamgarh and Sagar-Jabalpur sections as examples of this kind of selective
    financing.
116    Appendix 4




               c.      Loan 2151-IND: Multisector Project for Infrastructure Rehabilitation
                       in Jammu and Kashmir

34.      The sector project, approved in December 2004, was partly financed with an OCR loan
of $250 million. It targeted the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the utility facilities in
Jammu and Kashmir. It aimed to restore facilities needed to deliver minimum water services in
the two main cities, Jammu and Srinagar, and the rehabilitation of key roads and bridges in 14
districts.

35.       The project was categorized as B, and a SIEE was completed based on IEEs prepared
for individual subprojects. The SIEE, as a supplementary appendix to the RRP, was brief on
potential impact and contents of the EMP. The OEM obtained the original IEEs for the sample
subprojects prepared by the domestic consultants engaged by the EA. The IEEs are of good
quality, contained in detailed EMPs to mitigate potential adverse impacts. The IEEs stated that
initially there was a proposal to construct a high ground-level reservoir located in a wildlife
sanctuary. This would have required clearance under the Jammu and Kashmir Wildlife
(Protection) Act and would have also triggered an A category as per ADB's guidelines. It was
decided that subprojects falling under category A would not be included in this project. This
resulted in a change in the location of the proposed reservoir to outside the sanctuary.

36.    The OEM could not visit the project sites as it was unable to obtain security clearance
from the government. However, the OEM was able to meet a key EA official visiting Delhi and
the responsible project officer at INRM. It appears that project implementation has encountered
serious delays, i.e., approximately only $5 million disbursed with about one third of the time
elapsed. Although the reasons for the delays are complex, slow approval procedures by the
government including environmental compliance procedures contributed to the delays. The
main challenge facing this project is that, as the sector loan has many subprojects, many small
subprojects require IEEs in order to get the government's and ADB's approval. INRM has only
one environmental consultant and is severely constrained in its capacity to provide assistance to
the EAs in reviewing and approving IEEs. INRM appears to have received limited support from
Headquarters for administering the project due to the latter's own limited capacities.

37.     The sector loan, like many other sectors loans, requires intensive staff inputs during
implementation, even though the process may have been less complicated at loan appraisal
compared with a project loan. Presently, INRM does not have the capacity to support such
intensive inputs, which could either cause project delays or introduce safeguard-related risks,
resulting in low customer satisfaction.

               d.      Loan 2151-IND: Power Grid Transmission (Sector) Project

38.     The sector project, approved in December 2004, was partly financed with a loan of $400
million from ADB's OCR. It was formulated to finance the 5-year requirements of
POWERGRID's National Transmission Development Plan covering strengthening and
expansion of 765 kilovolt (kV) and 400 kV transmission lines and associated substations.

39.    The project was categorized as B, and an initial IEE was undertaken and placed as a
supplementary appendix to the RRP, available upon request. The SIEE is of good quality and
contains detailed identification of the types of potential environmental impact related to location
and design, construction, and operation. The assessment of alternative routes is soundly based
on geographical information system and walkover surveys. The potential impacts related to
                                                                                                 Appendix 4      117


construction were identified, but the assessment is descriptive, often without site-specific
assessment. The EMP, albeit comprehensive, appears to be a generic description of possible
mitigating measures based on industry best practices.

40.     The OEM held a discussion with the officials at POWERGRID responsible for
environmental and social safeguards. POWERGRID has developed corporate environmental
and social safeguard procedures integrating the procedures of the government, ADB, and the
World Bank. It is the strongest effort yet made at the corporate level by any of the EAs visited in
the four countries to harmonize the safeguard procedures of the government and major
development partners. POWERGRID appears to have a strong and experienced environmental
and social safeguard department responsible for both environmental impact assessment, i.e.,
mostly IEEs, at project appraisal and monitoring during implementation. ADB (and the World
Bank) appears to have had some influence on the environmental and social safeguards of
POWERGRID at the policy and procedural level, but the inputs to actual implementation and
monitoring are limited. This is largely due to the fact that POWERGRID has relatively strong
expertise and capacities in the concerned technical areas.

                   e.       Summary of India Case Studies

41.    India has a well-developed, comprehensive legal basis for its environmental safeguards.
A unique aspect of the Indian system is that it does not have an explicit distinction between
category A and B projects. Rather, a distinction is made between projects requiring a
comprehensive EIA and those needing only a rapid EIA.

42.     A review of the IEE reports for the four selected case studies (all category B
projects),shows a close resemblance in content, which may be indicative of procedural
compliance during project processing. Description of baseline conditions emerged as the strong
area of the projects reviewed, while analysis of alternatives and prediction and assessment of
impacts were found to be relatively weak. Rarely are issues prioritized to lend focus as well as
cost effectiveness to the environmental assessment. Often a large quantity of the data collected
are not directly relevant to the project.6 One reason for weak exploration of different alternatives
may be the failure to initiate the EIA at the earliest stage of project design. In some cases, EIAs
were undertaken when most of the crucial aspects of the project design had already been
decided, and the EIAs primarily aimed to identify measures to mitigate the potential risks and
adverse impacts due to the project. Prediction and assessment of impacts is found to be
generic. Most of the environmental assessment has not used the appropriate quantitative
analytical tools such as mathematical water/air quality models or geographical information
systems (GIS) with the exception of the power grid project, which made use of GIS. Little
attention was paid to induced, secondary, and offsite impacts.

43.     Although mitigation measures were one of the stronger areas, many measures were
generic and have not been integrated with the projects due to lack of specifics with respect to
where and when. Most SIEEs/IEEs reviewed included monitoring plans covering all major
mitigation measures and an institutional framework for implementation. However, inadequate
monitoring of progress in agreed-upon EMP implementation is one of the weak aspects. From
the discussions with the EA, lack of local ownership of the EIA process and weak supervision by


6
    This may be because many MOEF complex questionnaires give more emphasis on collecting a wide array of
    background data. This requirement is not oriented to identifying and prioritizing the environmental issues arising
    from the project activities.
118    Appendix 4



ADB emerged as a reason for unsatisfactory outcomes. Absence of regular environmental
safeguard personnel in INRM is a point in case.

44.       There has been a clear preference by ADB for less environmentally sensitive projects in
India. Since 1997, of the 43 category A and B projects approved for India, only one was
categorized as A. All four projects reviewed by this study were sector loans with a clear criterion
to exclude environmentally sensitive subprojects. ADB has adopted an implicit strategy to
minimize environment-related risks and delays by leaving out more sensitive projects or
subprojects. While this approach may be "cost-effective" for both ADB and the government, it
can expose ADB to some potential moral risks. ADB could have achieved greater environmental
and developmental impact had it chosen more complex but more influential projects. Another
reason often quoted for ADB having a disproportionately large number of category B projects is
that most ADB-supported projects were "rehabilitation" of existing infrastructure or facilities, and
no additional right-of-way was needed. This justification, while fueling a wrong impression that
"if it's a rehabilitation project, it is category B," overlooks the fact that even rehabilitation of
existing facilities could have significant onsite and offsite environmental impacts.

C.     People's Republic of China

45.     The PRC is currently ADB's largest borrower, averaging $1.1 billion per year over the
last decade and accounting for 19.1% of ADB's total lending. It is arguably the most challenging
of the four sample countries in terms of the need for environmental protection and improvement.
In a startling contrast to the other three countries, since 1997, ADB has approved 58 category A
and B projects, of which 43 (74%) were category A.

       1.      Main Findings from the Project Case Studies

46.     Six projects were chosen for this review, including four in transport, one in energy, and
one in water supply and sanitation. This sample of projects roughly represents ADB's current
portfolio in the PRC. With one recently completed, the other five projects are ongoing. This
combination allows the assessment of the projects' environmental performance during
implementation and as completed. Unlike in the other three countries selected for review, where
category B projects dominated the samples, all six projects are category A under both the
government's and ADB's classification.

               a.      Loan 1851-PRC: Guangxi Roads Development Project and Loan
                       2094-PRC: Guangxi Roads Development II Project

47.      Loan 1851, approved in October 2001 for $150 million from ADB's OCR, aimed to (i)
provide additional transport capacity, alleviate congestion, and reduce traffic accidents and
vehicle operating costs; (ii) improve access for the poor rural population in the transport corridor;
and (iii) facilitate regional cooperation by providing better access from Guanxi and other PRC
provinces to Viet Nam. The scope of the project included (i) construction of 136 km of four-lane
access-controlled tollway from Nanning to Ningming, 43 km of four-lane class I road from
Ningming to Youyiguan at the Viet Nam border, and 49 km of class II connector roads between
the project road and major towns; and (ii) improvement of about 100 km of access roads to
affected villages along the project road alignment.

48.     Loan 2094, approved in October 2004 for $200 million from ADB's OCR, had similar
objectives as Loan 1851. It aimed to (i) construct about 188 km of a four-lane access-controlled
Nanning-Baise toll expressway, 25 km of class II connecting roads, 12 interchanges, 12 toll
                                                                                           Appendix 4    119


stations, 3 traffic control centers, 8 roadside stations, and 4 asset management and
maintenance centers; and (ii) upgrade 250 km of intercounty roads and 500 km of minority
village roads.

49.     Both projects were categorized as A, and EIAs were prepared by domestic consultants
engaged by the EA before ADB's involvement.7 Both SEIAs provide sufficient assessment of the
main expected impact during construction and operation, as well as EMPs. The assessment of
project alternatives was carried out, but the "do nothing" alternative and alternative transport
modes were not rigorously assessed. However, the alternative routes for the planned
expressways were well assessed following the overall principle of minimizing disruption of the
environment such as tunneling and avoiding natural reserves. Public consultations were
implemented through interviews and questionnaire surveys with stakeholders and affected
persons. The results of the public consultations indicated that between 86% and 90% of the
people supported the projects. However, as the SEIA cautioned, the samples may have been
skewed, and the people who did not show support could have been those who were adversely
affected.

50.      The OEM held discussions with the EA for both projects followed by site visits. At the
time of the visit, Loan 1851 was substantially completed and Loan 2094 was ongoing. Overall,
while both projects have adopted generally sound environmental practices, the discussions and
site visits revealed some important issues.

51.     First, as the EIAs were prepared by the EA well before ADB's involvement, ADB's PPTA
consultants were used mostly to translate the reports and reformat in accordance with ADB's
requirements. There was generally no substantial improvement except that ADB provided
support for in-depth investigation of specific issues facing the projects. For example, for Loan
1851, the Guanxi Government requested ADB to support a further study on a type of monkeys
that live in the areas of the expressway corridor. The TA was approved and successfully
implemented.8 The officials expressed the view that ADB should not just come to "inspect" but
also contribute to solving specific problems. ADB should also try to improve its dissemination
channels for its safeguard policies and procedures through conducting workshops and training
courses for the EAs in Chinese. Currently, the main information channel for the EAs to learn
about ADB's environmental safeguard policy is ADB's website in English.

52.     The EA presented its efforts to improve environmental management during construction
through selecting routes that would cause the least environmental damage and bring more
benefits to local people. One of the measures undertaken was, in order to ensure that
contractors complied with the environmental safeguard clauses written into their contracts,
deposits were required from the contractors, e.g., Y5,000 per mu (PRC acre) of land borrowed.
Upon satisfactory restoration of the borrowed lands after completion, the deposits would be
returned in full. Furthermore, learning a lesson from Loan 1851, under Loan 2094, the EA
requires that all quarries must be located 300 meters away from either side of the road and
must not be visible from the road.

53.    A prominent issue that the EA faced during project implementation was that many
contractors, mostly state-owned enterprises that were financially strapped, underbid in order to

7
    The EIA for Loan 1851 was prepared by Xian Communication University and the EIA for Loan 2094 was prepared
    by Highway Research Institute of the Ministry of Communications.
8
     TA 3821-PRC: Nature Reserve Management Plan in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, for $100,000,
     approved in December 2001.
120      Appendix 4



win the contracts first. They did this by putting unrealistically low cost estimates or even zero
costs on some items including environmental protection measures. Many of the bids were much
lower than the engineering estimates. Under the PRC procurement regulation, a bid more than
10% below the engineering estimate would be considered nonresponsive. However, ADB
insisted on the least-cost bid evaluation, which, according to the EA officials, resulted in winning
bidders incurring severe financial losses and cash flow problems for both loans. Lack of budget
clearly made it difficult for them to comply with the environmental requirements and also made it
difficult for the EA and supervision companies to supervise and monitor compliance.9

54.      The OEM toured the entire expressway constructed under Loan 1851 and confirmed that
the quality of the construction is satisfactory to excellent and that environmental management,
particularly slope control and spoils site management, has been generally in accordance with
international good practices. Visits to selected sites under the ongoing Loan 2094 also revealed
similar practices, though there were some deficiencies in terms of management of waste
generated by construction workers. This is despite the cash flow problems identified by the EA
officials. An important value added of ADB-financed projects, compared with similar projects
financed by domestic sources, is the availability of foreign resident supervision engineers. For
both projects, the foreign engineers have played a very helpful advisory and supervisory role in
upholding quality standards, including environmental measures.

                  b.       Loan 1918-PRC: Southern Sichuan Roads Development

55.     The project, approved in September 2002, was partly financed with a loan of $300
million. It aimed to promote economic growth and reduce poverty in the southern part of
Sichuan Province by lowering the cost of transport, relieving traffic congestion, and improving
access in the project area. The project comprised (i) construction of a 160-km, four-lane access-
controlled toll expressway from Xichang to Panzhihua, including access roads, interchanges
with toll stations, tunnels, bridges, administrative stations, and service areas; and (ii) upgrading
of 558 km of county and township roads to improve access to poor and minority areas.

56.     The project was categorized as A, and an EIA was prepared by domestic consultants
engaged by the EA before ADB's involvement.10 A SEIA was prepared by ADB's PPTA
consultants based on the EIA. As the proposed expressway is a part of the National Trunk
Highway System, the do-nothing alternative and alternative transport modes were only
nominally considered, without rigorous assessment in the SEIA from the environment point of
view. Three alternative routes were considered. Due to the difficult terrain and complex
geological conditions, preference was given to routes that would require less tunneling and
fewer bridges. This preference, while minimizing project costs, meant more flat land used and
more resettlement required. The SEIA provides engineering estimates on total excavated
materials needed and to be disposed of and lays down the principles for contractors to excavate
and dispose of the materials. For each of the main impacts identified, the EMP provided the
details on mitigating measures to be undertaken, location and timeframe, and the responsible
parties for implementation and supervision.



9
  Separate interviews with ADB's Project Management Unit revealed that ADB is aware of the EA's concern and has
   adopted several measure to address this issue, including (i) allowing increase of "performance security" in the form
   of bank guarantee, (ii) providing a list of accredited banks for providing the guarantees, and (iii) more stringent
   prequalification.
10
   The EIA was commissioned by the Sichuan Provincial Communications Department, the EA, and compiled by the
   Highway Research Institute of the Ministry of Communications.
                                                                                                     Appendix 4      121


57.     Overall, the quality of the original EIA and the SEIA/EMP is satisfactory. However, partly
due to the limitations of space and format, the SEIA lacks details on the specific impacts
predicted, and the suggested mitigation measures are vague in some cases and phrased more
as principles rather than specific measures. This requires strong efforts in monitoring during
project implementation to ensure that the principles have been implemented.

58.    The OEM met with the EA, Sichuan Panxi Expressway Company Limited, and visited
several project sites near Xichang. The EA officials suggested that, although both ADB and the
government have stringent requirements, ADB has paid more attention to monitoring during
construction, and a result, the EA has probably conducted more frequent monitoring than
otherwise (without ADB financing).

59.      The site visits revealed that the EA is environmentally minded and has adopted
measures that were not envisaged during design to protect the environment while
simultaneously benefiting local people and the project. Several examples are available to
illustrate this. First, to minimize the impact of the structure on hillsides and woodland cover, the
EA revised the original design of road sections along steep hillsides such that the two
carriageways are placed at different heights on the slope in order to avoid deep cuts into the
slope. Second, the EA tried to maximize the use of waste soil for reclaiming wasteland for
agricultural use, e.g., growing fruit trees, which not only saves the land for waste disposal, but
also yields more agricultural land for the local people. Third, the EA helped the local community
to dredge the riverbed and use the rubble and sand for road construction. This not only reduced
the borrow pits and materials' transport cost, but also reduced the risks of mudflow during rainy
season affecting the road and local people. Fourth, the EA encouraged the exchange of waste
soils for fill between different contractors to minimize waste soils to be disposed of, even though
this could mean increased hauling costs. Finally, the EA revised the original design and
constructed several permanent concrete bridges, as part of the access roads, instead of
temporary bridges as originally envisaged. These permanent bridges will benefit local people
long after the construction is finished.

                     c.       Loan 2032-PRC: Gansu Clean Energy Development Project

60.    The project, approved in December 2003, was partly financed through a $35 million loan
from ADB's OCR. It aimed to provide clean energy to the Hexi grid and targeted the townships
of Xishui, Huazhai, and Anyang for rural electrification. The project also aimed to provide
support for institutional strengthening of the implementing agency. It comprised the construction
of a 98-megawatt (MW) run-of-the-river hydropower plant and upgrading power supply to three
poor townships for more reliable electricity directly from the plant.

61.    The project is located in the experimental part of the Qilianshan National Natural
Reserve, which is divided into three zones: core, buffer, and experimental. It has an
environmental category A under both the ADB and PRC classifications. Before ADB's PPTA, an
EIA was implemented by domestic consultants, the Gansu Provincial Academy of Environmental
Sciences, engaged by the EA and was already approved by the EPB (EPB)as delegated by the
SEPA (SEPA).11 The OEM did not have access to the original EIA but was presented a copy of a
supplementary EIA to assess the environmental impacts caused by cascade development in the
Heihe River Basin and by 35-kV and 110-kV transmission lines for power supply, which were

11
     According to EA officials, normally a project of this size is subject to the approval of the provincial EPB. However,
     as this project is located in the experimental part of the Qilianshan National Natural Reserve, the approving
     authority rests with SEPA, which delegated it to the Gansu Provincial EPB.
122        Appendix 4



not included in the original EIA. The OEM found that the supplementary EIA was based on
primary survey data, e.g., fish population, and quantitative assessment, and the quality is
satisfactory. The SEIA describes the impacts during construction and operation, and mitigating
measures to be adopted, but fails to address potential macro-level secondary impacts, e.g., the
impact of the access road on the fragile local ecosystem due to improved access to areas
previously inaccessible.

62.      EA officials stressed that EIA procedures in the PRC are stringent, and the laws and
regulations are in place. ADB's PPTA environmental consultants were engaged primarily for
translating and reformatting the EIA report into the SEIA. However, the area in which ADB
procedures may have had the most value added is public consultations and people orientation,
which have been strengthened because of ADB's participation. However, ADB's 120-day rule
for category A projects may have caused delays in loan approval, especially considering that
the domestic EIA process already included consultation with project-affected people and local
civil society.

63.     The OEM visited the project sites. The work started in October of 2003 and was
expected to be completed about 5 months ahead of schedule. The physical environment of the
project sites in the river valley is highly barren, and most natural vegetation has been destroyed
by human activities, with some spotty vegetation on the hillside. Most of the waste soil from
digging of the channels was used as construction material. The remaining waste soil was
disposed of at several disposal sites and managed well. However, the OEM noted some waste
from the living quarters of the construction workers was disposed of in the river valley without
proper incineration. The Environmental Monitoring Station of Zhangye City is reportedly
conducting monitoring of the quality of water, air, and noise levels on a seasonal basis and did
not detect significant differences in the indicators monitored.

                    d.       Loan 2116-PRC: Dali-Lijiang Railway

64.    The project, approved in December 2004, was financed through a loan of $180 million. It
aimed to remove a transport constraint to sustainable economic growth, thereby helping
increase living standards and reduce poverty in the project area. The project involved
constructing 167 km of single-track, standard gauge, Class I railway, reserved for electrification,
between Dali and Lijiang, and expanding the capacity of the existing Guangtong­Dali line to
accommodate additional traffic.

65.     The project has an environmental category A rating, and an EIA was prepared by
domestic consultants12 engaged by the EA. The larger project area, which is located between
several major natural reserves and inhabited by a number of ethnic minorities, is rich in cultural
and archaeological artifacts. The quality of the SEIA is satisfactory, and the EMP is detailed,
including cost estimates. Total environment-related investment, including tree planting, soil
erosion control for embankment, solid waste and wastewater treatment, and environmental
monitoring, was estimated at Y462 million.

66.     The OEM visited Yunnan Province but did not have a chance to visit the project sites.
However, based on information gathered at ADB and the Ministry of Railways in Beijing, and
written materials provided by the EA, the following were learned. First, some international
nongovernment organizations learned about the project from the ADB website and expressed
concern that the project railways may have undesirable impacts on the local environment and

12
     Prepared by the Second Survey and Design Institute of the Ministry of Railways.
                                                                                      Appendix 4    123


culture of ethnic minorities. As a result, ADB spent an unusual amount of staff time and other
resources during loan appraisal on ensuring that the project is environmentally and socially
sound. While this caused some delays in project approval, the additional scrutiny has probably
not made much difference in project design and implementation. Second, since the 1990s, the
Ministry of Railways has accumulated substantial experience in environmental management for
railways projects, and its environmental awareness and practices have improved significantly.
ADB's involvement has helped strengthen environmental monitoring during construction through
engaging an independent monitoring company. Third, the materials provided by the EA highlight
the key point of integrating environmental protection into the full project cycle, including
preliminary and detailed design, environmental protection clauses written into the contracts, and
the requirement of full-time environmental supervision engineers from the contractors who are
responsible for preparing monthly environmental supervision reports to be submitted to the EA.

                  e.      Loan 2175-PRC: Jilin Water Supply and Sewerage Development

67.     The project, approved in July 2005, is partly financed through a loan of $100 million from
ADB's OCR. It aims to enhance the urban environment and public health through better
wastewater management and increased supply of high-quality water, and to improve the quality
of surface- and groundwater resources in and downstream of the project cities. The project will
benefit more than 4 million urban residents. There are three main subcomponents, which
involve upgrading or constructing wastewater treatment plants and pipeline and auxiliary
systems in three cities: Changchun, Liaoyuan, and Mehekou.

68.      The project has an environmental category A, and an EIA was prepared by domestic
consultants engaged by the EA.13 The project is essentially an environmental improvement. The
SEIA contains a quantitative assessment of both positive and negative impacts but is quite
vague about how to deal with one of the main pollutants from wastewater treatment, viz.,
sludge, even though it lists several options for sludge disposal and composting (to produce
fertilizer).

69.     At the time of the OEM's visit, the work had not started. The OEM was able to meet with
the EA and one of the implementing institutions of the EIA, the Jilin Academy of Environmental
Sciences (JAES). The meeting with the EA revealed that contracts include detailed
environmental protection measures to be undertaken by the contractors. The consulting service
for project supervision also includes environmental specialists for monitoring environmental
measures during project implementation

70.    Another main point from these meetings was ADB's limited value added in the EIA
process due to the fact that the main work of EIA was already completed before ADB's PPTA.
The PPTA consultants simply translated and reformatted the EIA to produce the SEIA. JAES
was asked to assist the ADB consultants without compensation. A suggestion was made that, in
the future, ADB should consider engaging the original EIA implementing agency as the
domestic environmental consultants under PPTA for preparing a SEIA.

71.    JAES commented on ADB's public consultations as being more comprehensive and
people oriented than the PRC procedures. For example, the PPTA consultants conducted public
hearings to solicit views from key stakeholders. In contrast, under the PRC requirements, JAES
only conducted a questionnaire survey of the affected people. JAES felt that the public hearing

13
     Prepared by the Northeast Municipal Engineering and Research Institute, Songliao Institute of Water
     Environmental Science, and the Jilin Academy of Environmental Sciences.
124    Appendix 4



approach is more advantageous than a questionnaire survey, since the survey respondents can
only give comments on predesigned questions, while the attendees at public hearings can
present their views in an open and free manner. ADB's approach pays more attention to
protecting disadvantaged groups.

               f.     Summary of PRC Case Studies

72.     Over the last decade or so, the PRC has made significant progress in improving its legal
and institutional framework for environmental safeguard and enhancement. This was partly
achieved with assistance from major development partners, particularly ADB and the World
Bank, in the form of both technical assistance and investment projects. In a pattern that forms a
strong contrast to the other three countries selected for review, all six projects selected in the
PRC have an environmental category A, and the PRC has a much larger percentage of
category A projects compared with the other countries. The quality of the projects visited is
satisfactory to excellent, and environmental protection measures are generally following
international good practices.

73.     A typical scenario for ADB-supported projects in the PRC is that EIA has already been
undertaken and approved by SEPA or the provincial EPB before ADB's involvement. The main
tasks of ADB's PPTA environmental consultants are to translate the original EIA report into
English and format it according to ADB requirements to produce a SEIA/SIEE report. ADB's
main value added, as acknowledged by several EAs, has been in the area of strengthening
public consultations with affected people and stakeholders. Most officials interviewed felt that
ADB's PPTAs have not contributed much to improving environmental safeguards and
enhancement. Some felt that the resources should have been better spent on examining one or
several unresolved issues facing a particular project in a more in-depth manner, as identified by
the original EIA, rather than the current "one size fits all" approach, whose main objective is to
produce a SEIA for ADB's project approval process.

74.     A related issue is the role, or lack thereof, of domestic consultants in the ADB PPTA
consultant team for implementing the original EIA. Typically, ADB's PPTA engages separate
international and domestic consultants, who request inputs from original EIA consultants without
any compensation. If ADB continues to provide PPTAs on preparing SEIAs, ADB should
consider giving preference to engaging the original EIA consultants as the domestic
environmental consultants in the PPTA team.

75.    Several other less universal but, for some, equally important issues have been identified.
ADB's 120-day disclosure rule has increasingly become one of many deterring factors for EAs
to use ADB financing. As virtually all the EIAs have already included some form of public
consultation before ADB's SEIA, the EAs felt that the 120-day rule is a double penalty and
causes unnecessary delay.

76.    ADB's least-cost bid evaluation was partly blamed in several expressway projects for
causing problems during project implementation, including reduction of environmental protection
measures due to low budget, project delays, and quality-related issues.

77.    Finally, the two meetings with SEPA indicated that, since ADB's reorganization in 2002,
with the original Environment Division dissolved, SEPA finds it difficult to contact ADB for
assistance. The good working relationship that the previous Environment Division developed
with SEPA, particularly at the macro policy and institutional level, has been substantially lost.
                                                                                  Appendix 4    125


ADB's involvement with the PRC's environmental protection is mostly confined to project-level
assistance, which, as seen through this evaluation, has provided limited value added.

D.     Viet Nam

78.     Viet Nam was ADB's 7th largest borrower over the decade between 1996 and 2005,
averaging $288.5 million per year or 5% of ADB's lending total. Of the four countries selected
for case studies, Viet Nam is the only one that is eligible for low-interest concessionary Asian
Development Fund (ADF) loans. Since 1997, ADB has approved 27 category A and category B
public sector loans, of which only two were category A and the rest were all category B.

       1.      Main Findings from the Project Case Studies

79.    The two projects selected are both environmental category B. The only environmental
category A project, Phuoc Hoa Water Resources Management Project, approved in 2003, has
not started implementation and was not selected for in-depth case study. However, desktop
research will be carried out for this project to derive insights and lessons.

               a.      Loan 1855-VIE Second Red River Basin Sector Project

80.    The project, approved in November 2001, is a sector loan of $70 million from ADB's
ADF, designed to establish integrated water resource management in the Red River Basin and
to improve priority infrastructure for water service delivery in the poorer provinces of the basin.

81.      The project has an environmental category B. IEEs were prepared for the initial core
irrigation projects by a team of international and domestic consultants. The quality of the IEEs is
generally satisfactory. The IEEs identified environmental impacts related to the location of the
subprojects, e.g., encroachment into sensitive areas, changes in local hydrology, and impacts
related to project construction, e.g., erosion control, and operation, e.g., water quality, ground
water hydrology. As all the core subprojects were for rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, the
location impact and impact from operations were considered minimal. Mitigating measures were
recommended for potential adverse impacts during construction. For noncore subprojects
prepared at a later stage, however, no separate IEEs were prepared. Instead, IEEs were
included as a part of the feasibility studies for the subprojects, which were conducted by
domestic consultants and reviewed by international consultants.

82.     The OEM visited two subprojects on rehabilitating and improving existing irrigation
infrastructure. Both subprojects were recently completed and appeared to have been operating
satisfactorily. According to the EA officials, the facilities have contributed to the local people's
welfare significantly by providing reliable and inexpensive water for irrigation (rice yield
reportedly increased by as much as 40% in recent years), aquaculture, and mini hydropower
generation. On environmental management and monitoring, the main potential risk may be
erosion from slopes. In one subproject visited, the soil for building the dam was taken from a
slope immediately next to the dam, and no engineering or biological measures were taken to
control potential landslides. The EA officials informed the OEM, later confirmed by the
responsible ADB officer, that neither ADB nor anyone else had conducted any environmental
monitoring during and after construction. With respect to impact during operation, the IEE
mentions the possibility of increased water pollution from increased use of pesticides associated
with higher yields. The EA officials suggested that total use of pesticides in the region has
decreased by half in recent years due to integrated pest management programs. However, as
there is no monitoring done on water quality, the exact impact is unknown.
126        Appendix 4




                    b.      Loan 1888-VIE Provincial Roads Improvement Sector

83.     The project, approved in December 2001, is also a sector loan of $70 million, from
ADB's ADF, to be used for improving roads in 18 provinces in northern Viet Nam to allow better
access for the rural poor and to connect districts and communes to provincial cities and to the
national highway network. It is financing more than 80 segments of provincial roads in various
locations, with a total length of about 1,400 km.

84.     The project has an environmental category B, and an IEE is to be carried out for each of
more than 80 road contracts. This is implemented by a team of consultants led by international
consultants who are also responsible for project supervision. The consultants have worked out
detailed guidelines on environmental impact assessment integrating both government and ADB
procedures and have developed standard legal clauses for environmental management to be
included in the contracts for all contractors. However, in view of the large number of road
segments, it appears that ADB's IEEs, together with social safeguard measures, have added
substantial transactional costs to the overall cost of the project. 14

85.     The quality of the roads completed is generally satisfactory in accordance with Class V
road standards in Viet Nam. However, environmental protection appears to be problematic in
some areas in terms of slope protection and dumping of construction wastes. Compared with
Loan 1855, which has virtually no monitoring program, the supervision consultants for this
project are conducting monitoring of the environmental practices of the contractors as part of
overall project supervision. Although an external monitoring entity, the Development Research
and Consultancy Center, has been engaged, external monitoring has been mostly on social
rather than environmental issues. It has been suggested by the international supervision
consultant that ADB-financed roads probably have better quality and environmental measures
than government-financed roads of the same class. However, the main concern of the OEM is
the generally low standards of Class V roads in terms of road safety and environmental
protection. Given the limited budget for the project, it is possible that Class V may well be the
most appropriate option for the type and low volume of traffic on these roads for the foreseeable
future. Another issue that may potentially affect project administration and operation is the
scattered nature of the roads financed under the project, i.e., more than 80 segments across the
northern provinces. This may potentially have an adverse impact on environmental
management, as most of the contracts are small in value, and monitoring of contract
implementation becomes difficult.

                    c.      Summary of Viet Nam Case Studies

86.      Compared with the other three countries, Viet Nam has relatively weak institutional
capacities for carrying out and reviewing EIAs. In contrast, Viet Nam is currently undergoing
tremendous economic growth, which imposes great demand on such capacities. Viet Nam has
committed to working with its development partners to harmonize its environmental and social
safeguard procedures, but the challenges remain daunting, given the significant gaps between
the safeguard systems of the government and those of the development partners, and its weak
institutional capacities in terms of EIA preparation, monitoring, and implementation.


14
      As one indicator for the transaction costs, total project implementation consultancy, which includes project
     supervision, preparation of IEE, resettlement plans, and ethnic minority development plans, exceeds $7 million,
     more than 10% of the loan amount.
                                                                                            Appendix 4    127


87.     The two projects visited are both low-budget ADF sector loans. They have provided an
important dimension to this evaluation by highlighting issues related to environmental
management of ADF projects. Typically, the subprojects were small in budget and were carried
out using low design standards. Environmental protection was often accorded low priority. The
IEEs made some general recommendations concerning mitigating measures but were vague on
the cost implications. With limited budget, the choice of the government, with ADB's consent,
was clearly to build more subprojects to achieve greater economic impact. ADB's Viet Nam
Resident Mission (VRM) has no environmental specialist/consultant specialized in
environmental safeguard monitoring. In comparison, the Viet Nam Mission of the World Bank,
with a portfolio roughly double that of ADB, has a team of three environmental specialists
working on environmental safeguard and management issues. The World Bank may also have
implemented its environmental classification system more stringently than ADB: Of its 36
existing and planned projects in Viet Nam with environmental category A or B, 16 (44%) are
category A (compared with 2 category A out of 27 category A and B projects for ADB).

88.    Overall, while Viet Nam's environmental safeguard system is in its early stage of
development, ADB's value added to the environmental safeguards and management of the two
ADF projects visited appears to be limited.15 As ADB is working with the government and the
other development partners to harmonize their safeguard systems, ADB must look for ways to
strengthen its own environmental capacities, particularly at VRM.




15
     It should be acknowledged that ADB has played a lead role among the development partners and donors in the
     ongoing efforts towards harmonization of safeguard procedures.
             128     Appendix 5


                            ENVIRONMENT-RELATED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND LOANS

             A.      Environment-Related Technical Assistance (TA)

                  Table A5.1: Environment-Related Technical Assistance, by Country and by Year, 1997­2005
                                                       (in '000 US$)
Country               1997         1998         1999         2000       2001        2002          2003          2004        2005         Total
Afghanistan              0 (0)       0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (0)      0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)    4,195 (3)    1,795 (2)     5,990 (5)
Azerbaijan               0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)    500 (1)       700 (1)     1,200 (2)
Bangladesh               0 (0)        0 (0)      645 (1)       0 (0)   1,000 (1)        0 (0)       120 (1)    800 (1)       250 (1)     2,815 (5)
Bhutan                   0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       150 (1)       0 (0)      200 (1)       350 (2)
Cambodia                 0 (0)     980 (1)         0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)   1,057 (2)      1,260 (1)    113 (1)     2,215 (4)     5,625 (9)
Cook Islands             0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        350 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)       350 (1)
Fiji Islands             0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       783 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)       783 (1)
Federated                                                                  0 (0)        0 (0)
States of                0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)                                  0 (0)    400 (1)         0 (0)       400 (1)
Micronesia
India                1,200 (2)    1,000 (1)      150 (1)   3,770 (2)    950 (2)      700 (2)        995 (1)   3,100 (5)      750 (2)   12,615 (18)
Indonesia            1,900 (3)        0 (0)      800 (2)       0 (0)       0 (0)   1,900 (3)      1,500 (2)   5,420 (8)        0 (0)   11,520 (18)
Kazakhstan               0 (0)        0 (0)      700 (1)    700 (2)     700 (1)         0 (0)         0 (0)    600 (1)       150 (1)     2,850 (6)
Kyrgyz                                                                                                0 (0)
                      598 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)    650 (1)        0 (0)        0 (0)                  400 (1)         0 (0)     1,648 (3)
Republic
Kiribati                 0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       300 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)       300 (1)
Lao People's                                                                                          0 (0)
Democratic               0 (0)     950 (1)         0 (0)   1,200 (3)   1,300 (2)     700 (1)                   470 (3)         0 (0)    4,620 (10)
Republic
Malaysia              588 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       588 (1)
Maldives                 0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (0)      400 (1)       400 (1)
Mongolia              244 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)     400 (1)          0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       644 (2)
Nepal                 700 (2)      600 (1)       750 (1)       0 (0)    775 (1)      750 (1)          0 (0)    600 (1)         0 (0)     4,175 (7)
Pakistan              900 (1)         0 (0)      500 (1)       0 (0)      50 (1)     825 (2)      1,350 (2)   1,700 (4)    1,312 (2)    6,637 (13)
Philippines           950 (2)         0 (0)      840 (1)   1,120 (2)    933 (1)    2,025 (2)        450 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)     6,318 (9)
Papua New
                         0 (0)     150 (1)         0 (0)    340 (1)        0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (0)    1,000 (1)     1,490 (3)
Guinea
People's
Republic of          3,948 (8)    6,734 (8)    6,027 (6)   6,784 (8)   3,310 (6)   4,222 (8)      3,450 (6)   4,054 (8)    5,007 (9)   43,536 (67)
China
Regional             1,452 (2)    6,391 (9)   9,660 (11)   8,590 (7)   9,975 (6)   7,800 (5)    11,302 (13)   8,212 (7)   29,745 (9)   93,127 (69)
Marshall
                      598 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)    298 (1)        0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       896 (2)
Islands
Samoa                    0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)    150 (1)      300 (1)        400 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)       850 (3)
Solomon
                         0 (0)        0 (0)      150 (1)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)         0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       150 (1)
Islands
Sri Lanka             800 (1)      800 (1)     1,130 (2)       0 (0)   1,600 (2)   1,085 ((2)       150 (1)    850 (1)         0 (0)    6,415 (10)
Tajikistan               0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)    600 (1)        0 (0)     120 (1)        820 (2)       0 (0)      850 (1)     2,390 (5)
Thailand              300 (1)          605         0 (0)   1,700 (4)    150 (1)         0 (0)        60 (1)       0 (0)      375 (2)    3,190 (10)
Timor- Leste             0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)    250 (1)        0 (0)     600 (1)          0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       850 (2)
Tuvalu                   0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)       150 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)       150 (1)
Uzbekistan            675 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)   1,200 (2)        0 (0)       350 (1)    575 (1)       300 (1)     3,100 (6)
Viet Nam            1,963 (2)        0 (0)      470 (1)        0 (0)   1,560 (1)       0 (0)          0 (0)       0 (0)    2,275 (4)     6,268 (8)
                      16,816       18,210       21,822       26,002      23,653      22,484         23,940      31,989       47,324       232,239
Grand Total              (29)         (24)         (29)         (33)        (28)        (32)           (38)        (47)         (42)         (302)
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate number of TAs.
Source: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                                  Appendix 5       129



                            Table A5.2: Environment-Related Technical Assistance by Type and Year,
                                                          1997­2005
                                                         (in '000 US$)
                                             ADTA                    PPTA                RETA
                             Year
                                      Amount      No.          Amount     No.       Amount     No.
                             1997       6,935       12            8,429     15        1,452        2
                             1998       6,024        6            5,795      9        6,391        9
                             1999       6,035       10            6,127      8        9,660      11
                             2000      12,038       16            5,374     10        8,590        7
                             2001       7,935       15            5,743      7        9,975        6
                             2002       6,605       10            8,079     17        7,800        5
                             2003       6,583       17            6,055      8       11,302      13
                             2004      10,594       19           13,183     21        8,212        7
                             2005       8,715       20            8,864     13       29,745        9
                            Total      71,464     125            67,649    108       93,127      69
                          AOTA=advisory technical assistance; PPTA=project preparatory technical assistance;
                          RETA=regional technical assistance.Source: Asian Development Bank.

                     Table A5.3: Environment-related Technical Assistance, Selected Countries, 1997­2005
                                                        (in `000 US$)
Country       Type         1997        1998        1999          2000         2001        2002         2003         2004         2005          Total
India         AOTA         0 (0)      0 (0)     150 (1)      3,620 (1)      950 (2)       0 (0)        0 (0)    1,200 (2)      750 (2)      6,670 (8)
              PPTA     1,200 (2)   1,000 (1)       0 (0)       150 (1)        0 (0)     700 (2)     995 (1)     1,900 (3)        0 (0)     5,945 (10)
Subtotal               1,200 (2)   1,000 (1)    150 (1)      3,770 (2)      950 (2)     700 (2)     995 (1)     3,100 (5)      750 (2)    12,615 (18)
Philippines   AOTA         0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)     1,120 (2)        0 (0)   2,025 (2)     450 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)      3,595 (5)
              PPTA       950 (2)       0 (0)    840 (1)          0 (0)      933 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)      2,723 (4)
Subtotal                 950 (2)       0 (0)    840 (1)      1,120 (2)      933 (1)   2,025 (2)     450 (1)         0 (0)        0 (0)      6,318 (9)
People's      AOTA     2,532 (4)   4,469 (4)   2,350 (3)     3,600 (4)    2,560 (4)   2,375 (3)    1,400 (3)    2,679 (5)    1,800 (4)    23,765 (34)
Republic
of China      PPTA     1,416 (4)   2,265 (4)   3,677 (3)     3,184 (4)      750 (2)   1,847 (5)    2,050 (3)    1,375 (3)    3,207 (5)    19,771 (33)
Subtotal               3,948 (8)   6,734 (8)   6,027 (6)     6,784 (8)    3,310 (6)   4,222 (8)    3,450 (6)    4,054 (8)    5,007 (9)    43,536 (67)
Viet Nam      AOTA     1,363 (1)       0 (0)    470 (1)          0 (0)        0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)    2,275 (4)      4,108 (6)
              PPTA       600 (1)       0 (0)       0 (0)         0 (0)    1,560 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)      2,160 (2)
Subtotal               1,963 (2)       0 (0)    470 (1)          0 (0)    1,560 (1)       0 (0)        0 (0)        0 (0)    2,275 (4)      6,268 (8)
  Total               8,061 (14)   7,734 (9)   7,487 (9)   11,674 (12)   6,753 (10)   6,947 (12)   4,895 (8)   7,154 (13)   8,032 (15)   68,737 (102)
AOTA=advisory and operational technical assistance; PPTA=project preparatory technical assistance; RETA=regional technical assistance.
Note: Figures in parentheses indicate the number of TAs.
Source: Asian Development Bank
130      Appendix 5




    Table A5.4: Number of Environmental Capacity Building Advisory Technical Assistance (ADTA)
                                       Projects, 1990­2005
                                                                                                      Total No.
Year                                     Countries Receiving ADTAs                                   of ADTAs
                                                                                                               b


1990         People's Republic of China, Indonesia (3)a, Nepal                                            5
1991         Bangladesh, People's Republic of China, Philippines                                          3
1992         People's Republic of China, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Marshall                       4
             Islands, Mongolia
1993         People's Republic of China, Malaysia                                                         2
1994         Cambodia, Indonesia, Kiribati, Nepal, Viet Nam                                               5
1995         India, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Thailand (2)                       5
1996         Bhutan, Cambodia                                                                             2
1997         People's Republic of China, Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, Uzbekistan                 5
1998         Lao People's Democratic Republic                                                             1
1999         People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Kazakhstan                                            3
2000         Indonesia, Kyrgyz Republic, Marshall Islands, Tajikistan, Democratic Republic                5
             of Timor-Leste,
2001                                                --                                                    0
2002                                                --                                                    0
2003         Bhutan, Pakistan                                                                             2
2004         Kazakhstan                                                                                   1
2005         Bhutan, People's Republic of China, Viet Nam                                                 3
a
  Numbers in parentheses indicate number of ADTAs received by the country for the particular year.
b
  These only include ADTAs that have capacity building or institutional strengthening in environmental assessment
  in the project scope, as a component or an activity. ADTAs that involve preparation of environmental impact
  assessment or environmental management plans for a particular loan project are not included.
Source: Asian Development Bank databases.
                                                                             Appendix 5     131


B.    Environment-Related Loans

                Table A5.5: Environment-Related Loans, by Year and by Country
                                         (1997-2005)
                                                        Amount
     Year                 Country                     (US$ Million)       No. of Projects
     1997
            India                                      113.00                    2
            Indonesia                                   41.00                    2
            Lao People's Democratic Republic            27.00                    1
            Pakistan                                    70.00                    1
            Philippines                                 35.22                    2
            People's Republic of China                 156.00                    1
            Sri Lanka                                   16.60                    1
            Viet Nam                                   102.00                    2
            Subtotal                                   560.82                   12
     1998
            Bangladesh                                  37.00                    1
            India                                      250.00                    1
            Indonesia                                   39.00                    2
            Kiribati                                    10.24                    1
            Philippines                                296.00                    3
            People's Republic of China                 102.00                    1
            Sri Lanka                                   35.00                    1
            Thailand                                    80.00                    1
            Subtotal                                   849.24                   11
     1999
            India                                      375.00                    2
            Lao People's Democratic Republic             5.60                    1
            Maldives                                     8.00                    1
            Pakistan                                     7.80                    1
            People's Republic of China                 402.00                    2
            Marshall Islands                             9.25                    1
            Sri Lanka                                   40.00                    1
            Viet Nam                                    70.00                    1
            Subtotal                                   917.65                   10
     2000
            India                                      250.00                    1
            Indonesia                                   50.00                    1
            Nepal                                      120.00                    1
            Philippines                                175.00                    2
            Papua New Guinea                            15.34                    1
            People's Republic of China                 188.00                    2
            Sri Lanka                                   58.70                    3
            Viet Nam                                    40.20                    1
            Subtotal                                   897.24                   12
     2001
            Cook Islands                                 2.20                    1
            Lao People's Democratic Republic            20.00                    1
132     Appendix 5



           Table A5.5: Environment-Related Loans, by Year and by Country (1997­2005) -
                                             Continued
                                                         Amount
         Year                  Country                 (US$ million)     No. of Projects
                  People's Republic of China               297.00               2
                  Uzbekistan                                36.00               1
                  Subtotal                                 355.20               5
         2002
                  Bangladesh                               114.77               3
                  Cambodia                                  10.91               1
                  Indonesia                                 33.00               1
                  Nepal                                     30.00               1
                  People's Republic of China               265.48               3
                  Subtotal                                 454.16               9
         2003
                  Azerbaijan                                22.00               1
                  Fiji Islands                              47.00               1
                  Pakistan                                  90.00               2
                  People's Republic of China               118.00               2
                  Samoa                                      8.00               1
                  Sri Lanka                                 20.00               1
                  Subtotal                                 305.00               8
         2004
                  Azerbaijan                                30.00               2
                  Bangladesh                                80.00               1
                  Federated States of Micronesia            19.00               2
                  Pakistan                                 150.00               2
                  People's Republic of China               267.40               3
                  Tajikistan                                22.72               1
                  Subtotal                                 569.12               11
         2005
                  India                                    221.20               1
                  Maldives                                   6.00               1
                  People's Republic of China               270.80               4
                  Sri Lanka                                 33.00               2
                  Viet Nam                                  74.30               1
                  Subtotal                                 605.30               9
                                Total                    5,513.73               87
      Notes:
      (i) From 2001 to 2005, loans were classified based on the Loan Classification System conforming to the Poverty
      Reduction Strategy (27 Nov 2000).While loans are classified as having poverty, core poverty interventions, etc;
      additionally, they are also classified based on thematic priorities, environmental protection as one of them. Loans with
      "environmental protection' as theme are those with stated environmental objectives and with total environmental
      component cost not less than 20% of total loan cost.
      (ii) From 1995 to 2000, loans were classified based on the Guidelines for Loan Classification in terms of Strategic
      Development Objectives (14 March 1995) with sound management of natural resources and the environment as one
      of them. A project was classified based on its stated primary or secondary objective, and the cost of components with
      environmental objectives account for more than 50% (for primary environmental objective) or 20% (for secondary
      environmental objective) of the total project cost.
      (iii) This table was generated from a database of projects identified by the Environment and Social Safeguard Division
      (RSES) based on (i) and (ii).
      Source: Asian Development Bank databases.
            MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY
                      ON ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS



       On 22 September 2006, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department,
received the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


      I.         General Comments

      1.     Management greatly appreciates OED's efforts to respond expeditiously
      to the Development Effectiveness Committee's request for an evaluation of the
      environment safeguard elements of ADB's 2002 Environment Policy as an input
      to ADB's safeguard policy update.

      2.       We are aware that the Special Evaluation Study (SES) has significant
      limitations, which need to be taken into account when considering its findings and
      recommendations (paras. 22-25 of SES). In view of the research methodology,
      the narrow country coverage of the study, and the limited range of case studies
      reviewed, Management believes that there is a mismatch between the data and
      analysis provided in the SES and the sweeping nature of its findings, some of
      which are presented in rather definitive and generalized terms. We also note that
      the SES is specifically focused on the safeguard element of the environment
      policy, and therefore it has not reviewed ADB's wider efforts at mainstreaming
      the environment in its operations.1

      3.      The SES nevertheless raises a number of important issues, which are
      relevant to ADB's safeguard policy update. Management believes that the
      ongoing policy update process, including the planned consultations with a wide
      range of stakeholders, provides an appropriate vehicle for further examining the
      report and addressing the relevant recommendations of the study. The current
      status and timeline of the safeguard policy update is provided on
      http://www.adb.org/Safeguards/policy.asp.

      II.        Comments on Recommendations

                 A.      Review of the 2002 Environment Policy and Potential
                         Refinement (paras. 195­207)

      4.      The SES suggests that there is a need to refocus efforts "from front-end
      loan processing and approval to results delivery, and from safeguards to
      enhancement" (paras. 196­199). Management fully agrees that ADB's safeguard
      policies and procedures need to be outcome oriented. In this regard,
      Management would emphasize the importance of achieving an appropriate
      balance between front-end processing and implementation to ensure effective
      delivery of results. A key issue for the safeguard policy update is to identify
      (i) front-end processing requirements that are needed to ensure improved

      1
           The Environment Policy is only partially concerned with environment safeguards, which it
           addresses through the environment assessment process. The policy also addresses
           environment as a thematic crosscutting issue.
delivery of results, such as upstream environment assessment to influence
project design, formulation of environmental management plans (EMPs), and
appropriate specification of loan covenants; and (ii) specific measures that will
ensure that the environment assessment process translates into action during
implementation, such as updating of EMPs after detailed design, incorporation of
EMPs into tender documents and civil works contracts, monitoring and reporting,
and appropriate supervision of environmental management measures.

5.      With regard to SES proposals to refocus from "safeguards to
environmental enhancement", we would note again that ADB's activities to
address the wider, non-safeguard elements of the environment policy were not
reviewed in the SES. Management would like to point out that ADB is already
pursuing a broader environment sustainability agenda through an active program
of environment oriented loans, technical assistance, knowledge products and
policy dialogue. This thrust has most recently been reconfirmed in the Medium-
Term Strategy II, which accords a prominent role to environmental management
as a strategic priority for ADB. Management has also appointed Director General,
RSDD as Special Advisor on Clean Energy and the Environment to further
advance ADB efforts in this area. We therefore assume that the SES is referring
to the role of environment assessment in promoting environment enhancement at
the project level, and we agree that this should be emphasized in the safeguard
policy update.

6.       We note the SES recommendation on "integration with national
procedures" (paras. 200-204). We agree that ADB needs to pay due attention to
the respective policy and institutional contexts in which ADB's safeguard policies
are to be applied. While several developing member countries (DMCs) have
developed environment assessment systems, often with the assistance of ADB
and the World Bank that meet or approach international standards of practice,
the issue of enforcement at the level of projects remains a crucial consideration.
Since all ADB projects must comply with both ADB policies and each DMC's own
environment assessment requirements, there is a clear need to ensure alignment
in the delivery of these requirements. This is dealt with further in section E below
in the context of country safeguard systems.

7.      The SES recommends that ADB should broaden the focus of its
safeguard activities from "the project" to "environmental capacity" (paras. 205­
206). The SES suggests that attention paid to project compliance with safeguard
requirements has come at the cost of broader safeguard capacity building efforts
at country or sector level. If we understand the text correctly, the suggestion is
that efforts at broader capacity building may substitute for attention to safeguards
at project level. Our experience is that both project compliance and broader
capacity building are important and that they are complementary. To the extent
that a trade-off exists in the allocation of scarce resources, we would need to
continue to ensure procedural and substantive compliance of individual projects
with ADB's safeguard policies. At the project level, this includes capacity building
in the context of environmental management plans.

8.      We note the SES recommendation on "integrating environmental and
social safeguards" (para. 207). The SES does not explain what it means by
integration nor does it appear to have studied or presented substantive findings
on the issue of integration. However, Management agrees that there is merit in
ensuring consistency and synergies across the safeguard policies and
procedures. This will be considered in the context of the safeguard policy update.

       B.     Strengthening Organizational Effectiveness (paras. 208­211)

9.      The SES recognizes that safeguard compliance has improved as a result
of the 2002 reorganization, including the establishment of an environment and
social safeguards division (RSES) and the appointment of a Chief Compliance
Officer, as well as through the subsequent adoption of the 2002 Environment
Policy. As noted in the SES, the more recent 2005 reorganization within RSDD
has formalized the expansion of RSES's mandate to serve both as an
environment division and a safeguard division. We agree that this clarifies ADB's
corporate "home" for environment as a crosscutting theme as well as for
environment safeguards.

10.     The SES proposes to consolidate regional department environment
specialists in the sector divisions within a safeguard unit under the regional
department director general. Management believes that arrangements within
operations departments need not adopt a "one size fits all" approach. Operations
departments are responsible for implementation of ADB's safeguard
requirements as well as the broader environment agenda in their regions and
DMCs. They need the flexibility to tailor their arrangements to the needs of their
clients. Furthermore, all environment specialists perform a mix of safeguard and
non-safeguard functions, and placing them within a safeguard unit would limit the
role of operations departments in mainstreaming environment in ADB operations.
The proposals to strengthen Resident Missions with environment specialist
expertise certainly merit serious consideration.

       C.     Improving the Quality of ADB's Environment Assessment
              Process and Lowering Transactions Costs to Make it More
              Cost Effective (paras. 212­217)

11.    The SES makes several suggestions to strengthen ADB's environment
assessment process and recommends that these be reviewed in the context of
ADB's safeguard policy update. In particular, we agree with the suggestions to
review environmentally sensitive Category B project classification, opportunities
to reduce transaction costs included for sector loan sub-projects, and the need to
improve monitoring. We also agree that ADB should not shy away from
environmentally sensitive projects, where appropriate capacity exists to address
the environmental impacts. We recognize that the quality of environment
assessment has varied across projects, ranging from high quality assessments
for complex and sensitive projects to more basic assessments for routine
subprojects in sector loans, and we are seeking to improve both procedural
compliance and substantive quality through ADB's safeguard compliance
system. The peer reviews of EIAs now organized by the Environment Community
of Practice are also seeking to ensure ADB-wide consistency and quality. We are
also committed to continuing to seek to promote international best practice
through ADB projects, and together with the World Bank and other MFIs, we
have developed common principles for environment assessment in the context of
harmonization efforts. In this regard, we would note the increasing application of
strategic environment assessment, assessment of cumulative and induced
impacts, and third party monitoring especially in the context of complex and
sensitive projects. Regular training programs are also being provided to ensure
that environment specialist and mission leaders are abreast of evolving
environment assessment practice. Management agrees that the suggestions
made by the SES should be reviewed in the safeguard policy update.

       D.     Improving the Effectiveness of Public Disclosure and
              Partnerships with Nongovernment Organizations and Civil
              Society on the Environment (paras. 218­223)

12.    The SES appears to highlight three issues in this section (paras. 218­
223). Firstly, the SES recommends that ADB revisit the rule that summary
environmental impact assessments (SEIAs) are disclosed 120 days before Board
consideration of a category A project. Management agrees that the timing of
disclosure of SEIAs should be reviewed, and that there may be merit in
shortening the disclosure period. It is noted that, in addition to subsequent
disclosure of SEIAs, Category A projects also require consultation with affected
people at least twice during the environment assessment process, including
disclosure of information in a form and language that they can readily
understand.

13.     Second (para. 222), the SES states that the "involvement of the
environment specialists within the project team directly responsible for gaining
approval has compromised the perceived independence of the (environment
assessment) process." Management believes that involvement of operations
department environment specialists in project teams is crucial to successful
integration of environmental concerns in ADB projects. We also believe that
ADB's safeguard compliance system led by ADB's Chief Compliance Officer
provides appropriate independent review of environment assessments.

14.    Third (para. 223), the SES makes a suggestion that "ways of
constructively engaging with nongovernment organizations in monitoring and
implementation should be explored in RSDD's review of the environment policy".
Management agrees with this suggestion.

       E.     Moving Towards Adoption of Improved Country Systems and
              Harmonization with Other Development Partners in Selected
              DMCs (paras. 224­228)

15.     Management agrees that the strengthening of country safeguard systems
is an important development objective, and ADB should continue to support
DMCs in this regard. We are pleased that the final version of the SES has taken
into account earlier internal comments on the need for a cautious and phased
approach to any proposals for wide application of country systems for ADB
projects. Such proposals would need to be based on a transparent and rigorous
assessment of the commonalities between a country's system and ADB
safeguard policy requirements, and also the capacity within countries to deliver
and enforce their own safeguard requirements. Such assessments should also
take into account the complexities of country systems, including the reality that
the nature and robustness of environment assessment processes vary across
sector and sub-national levels. The individual country assessments undertaken
within the scope of the SES were not able to respond to these considerations
probably because of time and resource constraints (para. 201) and therefore are
not a basis for categorizing countries in various groups (as suggested in para.
226). TA 6285-REG: Strengthening Country Systems is currently reviewing
country systems in selected DMCs and identifying possible approaches to be
considered in the safeguard policy update.

16.     With regard to proposed harmonization with other partners, we would like
to note that close consultation is already taking place with the World Bank on its
pilot application of country systems for safeguards, both in the context of the MFI
working group on environment and at country level. We agree that lessons from
the World Bank experience will be relevant, including those on the incremental
costs of upstream due diligence and downstream supervision.

       F.      Developing an Action Plan to Implement the Revised
               Environment Policy (para. 229)

17.     Management agrees that an action plan will be required to implement the
updated policy on environment safeguards, which should include a realistic
assessment of required resources. Management, however, does not share the
view that ADB should consider a dilution of its safeguard policy objectives and
principles [para. 229 (ii)]. The safeguard policy update will instead explore more
efficient and effective delivery mechanisms of these policy objectives and
principles.
                            BOARD OF DIRECTORS
                    DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE


                  CHAIR'S SUMMARY OF THE COMMITTEE DISCUSSION
                              ON 27 SEPTEMBER 2006


Independent Evaluations of ADB's Safeguard Policies

1.     In November 2005, in the process of reviewing the proposed work program of the
Operations Evaluation Department (OED) for 2006­2008, the Development Effectiveness
Committee (DEC) recommended that an independent evaluation by OED precede
Management's planned review of ADB's safeguard policies. OED had originally proposed
evaluation of the safeguard policies in 2008, after updates of the policies had been considered
by the Board in 2006. DEC argued that the value and impact of independent evaluation would
be greater before rather than after Management review of the policies. The findings of the
evaluations could thus be fed into the Management review and the Board's consideration of
updated or revised policies. Accordingly, the evaluations were advanced to 2006.

2.      Furthermore, DEC recommended that sufficient time be allowed between completion of
the evaluations and preparation of the Board W-paper (the working paper to be discussed by
the Board, after being posted on the ADB website for public consultation for a 90 day period,
and before a final policy paper with Management's recommendations, or R-paper, is considered
by the Board). This way an effective feedback process involving further consultation could take
place. It was likely that some fundamental issues would be identified in the consultation process
and through the evaluation, that would require more than a "fine tuning" of the policies. At the
same time, Board consideration of Management proposals for safeguard policy revisions should
not be delayed beyond 2007 given their importance to ADB operations.

3.      Management agreed with DEC's recommended approach and process. Consequently,
OED has completed its evaluations of the safeguard policies for the environment and
involuntary resettlement. Given their potentially contentious nature and that various
stakeholders are known to have differing views on the policies, DEC decided to discuss the
evaluations individually at separate meetings. The goal set by DEC members for themselves
was to identify the most central issues and to try to narrow differences of views through an
objective consideration of the issues.

Special Evaluation Study on Environmental Safeguards

4.      On 27 September 2006, DEC discussed OED's independent assessment of the
effectiveness of ADB's Environment Policy. On 21 September, Management had given its
response to the evaluation. The evaluation focused on safeguards with respect to actual
environmental impacts of ADB-supported projects and any positive catalytic impact in non-ADB
funded projects. Based on its review of the report, DEC considered that the process it had
recommended--to allow time for an independent evaluation to feed into Management's review
of the policy--had yielded useful results: it served to raise many of the right questions for the
review; the issues identified and recommendations made addressed not only implementation of
the policy but also provisions in the policy itself; and, by its response to the evaluation,
Management started the critical corporate-level dialogue that would lead to the policy review.

5.     DEC members found the Management response comprehensive and many of
Management's reservations about certain report findings reasonable. However, DEC advised
Management not to find fault in the methodology used for the evaluation, which had to be
accomplished under severe time constraints, and not to adopt a defensive stance on some of
the report's recommendations since these were "directional" rather than firm, intended to
suggest areas for priority consideration in the policy review.

6.      DEC affirmed that, especially in the light of the critical state of the environment in the
region, the objectives and principles of the policy on environmental safeguards could not be
compromised. Rather the debate should revolve around the key issue of effective policy
implementation under the resource constraints faced by ADB. The current imbalance between
policy requirements and resource availability has, as documented in the evaluation, impeded
satisfactory implementation of the policy in some ADB-assisted projects. How this imbalance
can be resolved remains the key consideration in moving forward.

7.     DEC also takes this opportunity to respond to the formal memorandum issued by a
Board director, not a member of DEC, expressing concern about a recommendation in the OED
study to reduce the present requirement for the posting of SEIAs for category A projects and
SIEEs for B sensitive projects on the ADB website at least 120 days before Board consideration
of loan approval. DEC understands the reasons for the concern and has forwarded the full
memorandum as an input to the Management review. It is DEC's understanding, however, that
the evaluation study's recommendation is only for the upcoming policy review to consider any
potential or perceived issues in relation to the disclosure rule and that an outright reduction in
the disclosure period is not necessarily put forward as a recommendation. Indeed, several
Board as well as staff participants at the DEC meeting made the point that, rather than the
length of the disclosure period, it may be the timing and timeliness of the SEIA/SIEE that may
pose difficulties in relation to the project consideration process. In this context, the director
general of the Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD) informed the DEC
that a modified document management system, to be administered by the Department of
External Relations (DER), will collect full IEE and EIA reports as well so that these may be
available upon request.

8.      Three areas that require further discussion among DEC members before clearer
directions for a consensus can be reached are the following:

       a) While there is full agreement with the Paris Declaration on moving toward adoption
          of harmonized country systems for environmental safeguards, there remains a range
          of views on how this should be accomplished. Some DEC members feel that the
          existing project-based standards were designed more to protect ADB than the
          environment. They question whether it is reasonable to ask developing member
          countries (DMCs) to meet standards in ADB projects that arguably they could not
          meet in domestically financed activities. They believe that stronger overall
          environmental outcomes could be achieved more efficiently if the focus changed to
          upgrading country systems for overall environmental management. Other members
          envision a more cautious, sequential, and evolutionary process, integral to which is
          building country capacity to deliver and enforce its own safeguard requirements in
          order to achieve results equivalent to those aimed at by ADB policy.
       b) While there is broad agreement on the need to strengthen collaboration among all
          stakeholders, there remains some disagreement on the degree and depth of
          continuous partnership with NGOs, including use of NGOs for third party monitoring.
       c) DEC agrees with Management's view that, while there is merit in ensuring
          consistency and synergies across the safeguard policies and procedures, the issue
          of "integration" of environmental and social safeguards, what this means in practice
          and what the advantages and disadvantages would be needs to be further debated
          in the DEC, with supporting analysis by staff.

9.      Nevertheless, based on the DEC discussion, there are certain key directions on which
DEC members have reached agreement to recommend to Management in moving forward on
the policy review. These are as follows.

       i)     While DEC notes the concerns of the DMCs regarding the transaction costs of policy
              implementation, it must be understood from the onset that the driving objective of the
              policy review must be that of achieving the desired results of a sustainable
              environment through implementation of an appropriate environment policy and not
              that of reducing perceived constraints brought about by the policy on the
              competitiveness of ADB products.
       ii)    In relation to Recommendation 1 of the OED report, DEC considers that, rather than
              a "refocusing" in the environment policy, it is a balancing between the dual objectives
              of compliance to safeguards and achievement of positive environmental results that
              is called for. This implies a balance of attention between loan processing and project
              implementation, and between project level interventions and country level system
              capacity development. In this context, DEC was reminded by staff that, in a previous
              classification system, ADB had initiated inclusion of a category `D' to capture and
              credit projects that contributed to positive environmental benefits, but this was later
              abandoned in the process of harmonization with other MDB systems. DEC
              recommends that a new business model incorporating such overall balance should
              replace the business model dwelling on compliance in the current policy.
       iii)   In relation to Recommendation 2, DEC considers the strengthening of the
              environmental capability in resident missions to be critical.
       iv)    In relation to Recommendation 5, DEC considers that the primary responsibility for
              achieving the desired environmental results rests with the country. What is needed is
              a practical and agreed framework for stakeholder collaboration in applying
              safeguards to achieve optimum, sustainable results. DEC recommends that the
              updated policy define such a framework with the objective of ultimately relying on the
              country system.
       v)     In relation to Recommendation 6, DEC recommends that the revised policy
              incorporate a "flexible" implementation approach that distinguishes between medium-
              term steps and milestones and the desired long-term standards so that a progressive
              achievement of sustainable results becomes more realistic for ADB, given its
              resource constraints, and for the country, given resource and capacity constraints.

10.    Finally, DEC recommends that between now and the time a W-paper is circulated to the
Board, staff consultation with Board members and other key stakeholders be undertaken
through an iterative, instead of one-time, process. DEC considers such a process critical to
achievement of stakeholder agreement on, and ownership of, an updated or revised policy.
Comments of NGO Forum on ADB

11.     After the DEC meetings, on 3 November 2006, committee members received and, by
this Chair's Summary, publicly acknowledge the comments of the NGO Forum on ADB on the
two evaluation reports, respectively entitled "Safeguarding Safeguards" and "Stocktaking ADB's
Role in Displacement". These stakeholder comments have been forwarded to the staff directly
involved in the policy review and, with the agreement of the NGO Forum, have also been
publicly posted on the ADB website, accompanying the evaluation reports.



                                           Agus Haryanto
                                           Chair, Development Effectiveness Committee
                                           22 December 2006
