ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                       SST: STU 2001-15




               SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY


                        ON THE


      PRIVATIZATION OF PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES:


                     LESSONS FOR


            DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES




                      December 2001
                     ABBREVIATIONS

ADB     -    Asian Development Bank
BOT     -    build-operate-transfer
DMC     -    developing member country
EBRD    -    European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ECNZ    -    Electric Corporation of New Zealand
GDP     -    gross domestic product
IFC     -    International Finance Corporation
IPO     -    initial public offering
JEDB    -    Janatha Estate Development Board
NGO     -    nongovernment organization
OECD    -    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PDMC    -    Pacific developing member country
PDR     -    People's Democratic Republic
PPIAF   -    Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
PPP     -    public-private partnership
PSE     -    public sector enterprise
RPC     -    regional plantation company
SLSPC   -    Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation
TA      -    technical assistance
UK      -    United Kingdom
UNDP    -    United Nations Development Programme




                            NOTE

            In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.

        Operations Evaluation Department, SS-50
                                          CONTENTS
                                                              Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                ii

I.     BACKGROUND                                                1

       A.    International Agenda                                1
       B.    Asian Development Bank Privatization Support        1
       C.    Special Evaluation Study                            2

II.    GLOBAL EXPERIENCE                                         3

       A.    Country and Regional Experience                     4
       B.    Empirical Results                                   5
       C.    Emerging Institutional and Sector Developments      7
       D.    Global Lessons                                     10

III.   DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRY EXPERIENCE                     13

       A.    Asian Development Bank Involvement                 13
       B.    Progress and Rationale                             14
       C.    Perceived Impediments                              16
       D.    Approaches and Methods Applied                     17
       E.    Institutional Framework                            18
       F.    Results and Impacts                                19
       G.    Future Plans                                       20
       H.    Developing Member Country Need for Support         20

IV.    INSIGHTS FROM STUDY                                      21

       A.    Strategy for Development                           21
       B.    Principles for Effective Privatization             22
       C.    Critical Issues                                    22
       D.    Recommendations                                    25

APPENDIXES                                                      26
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


       Privatization is a process for change of ownership and control. Differences in approach
and outcome are the prime reason for this special evaluation study, namely, to provide more
comprehensive understanding of privatization and guidance on how it should be managed. The
study is part of the review process of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for evaluating its
operations.

        At concept stage, it was envisaged that the study would be conducted so as, first, to
understand the global lessons drawn from privatization and relate the experiences to the
different economic and political circumstances, approaches, and methods applied; second, to
assess ADB's involvement and developing member country (DMC) experience; and third, to
draw insights for strategizing future assistance and for identifying principles and critical issues
relating to privatization design.

        To assess the global experience, a review of the published experiences of governments,
multilateral and bilateral funding agencies, university research, and literature generally was
undertaken. Assessment of ADB's support for privatization involved an analysis of all ADB loan
and technical assistance projects since 1984, with the view to determining whether or not
privatization was a direct or indirect objective. To assess the DMC experience, a survey
questionnaire was sent to ADB's 37 active borrowers. The purpose was to understand (i) why
DMC governments privatize, (ii) what constraints prevent faster privatization, (iii) the approach
and methods adopted, (iv) the major lessons of their experience, (v) the perceived operational
results, (vi) which public sector enterprises (PSEs) should not be privatized, (vii) how social
issues that arise should be dealt with, and (viii) each DMC's future divestment program.
Missions to 10 DMCs were arranged to discuss questionnaire answers with government
representatives and the managements of divested enterprises.

       Study Findings. Beginning with Chile in the mid-1970s, and continuing with the United
Kingdom in 1979, New Zealand and France in 1984, Singapore and Malaysia in 1985, and Latin
America and other European countries in the 1990s, the global push to privatization has
heralded a change in governance practices.

         Unsustainable budget deficits, high taxation, and burdensome funding are common
factors precipitating the need to privatize. But while fiscal crisis has been a prime reason in
many countries, including several in Asia, justification is also driven by ideology and efficiency
grounds. In general, countries have privatized industries to achieve several objectives. These
include (i) raising revenue for the government, (ii) raising investment capital for the industry or
company being privatized, (iii) reducing the government's role in the economy, (iv) promoting
wider share ownership, (v) increasing efficiency, (vi) introducing greater competition,
(vii) exposing firms to market discipline, and (viii) decreasing government subsidies. For some
countries, capital market development has been an explicit objective of privatization.

       The United Kingdom's experience with privatizing monopoly enterprises provides
evidence for the importance of regulation and competition, while privatization through the
voucher system in Eastern Europe shows the importance of the institutional framework and
operating environment. Other experiences demonstrate the importance of issues concerning
public and corporate governance, banking deregulation, capital market development, and the
need for more appropriate social welfare policies and compensation to mitigate negative
impacts of privatization.
       The general pattern among DMCs has been to privatize retail businesses (e.g., hotel
and resort accommodation); followed by manufacturing (e.g., textiles, construction, and
engineering); and road transport services, before privatizing monopoly and oligopolistic entities
such as banks, airlines, telecommunications, electricity and water utilities, ports, and energy
enterprises.

        Numerous evaluations and empirical studies have documented the overwhelming
success of privatization as part of good governance reform leading to improved operational
efficiency, higher investment, and stronger economic growth. Consumer benefits are derived in
the form of increased output, improved quality, increased range, and generally reduced prices.1
Governments benefit from the savings in capital and subsidy expenditure and enhanced
capacity to increase social services, retire international and domestic debt, and meet current
expenditures.

        No single institutional framework stands out as the best for privatization. Studies show,
however, that for privatization to be successful, it is essential to define the roles and powers of
participants, and ensure that legal, regulatory, and enforcement mechanisms precede
divestment. In the banking sector, privatization without deregulation seriously disrupts
effectiveness, as does privatizing monopoly enterprises before restructuring (to create
competition) and before introducing regulation.

        Demonstrating the impact of privatization on capital market development is the growth in
capitalization of the main stock exchanges, which in the last five years have grown in Europe by
a factor of two to four and in some Latin American countries nearly 30 times. Capital markets
increase the available financing sources for firms to fund new investment, improve efficiencies
in investment banking, increase pressures to allow pension funds to make direct stock market
investments, and enhance corporate transparency.

        The privatization link with poverty reduction stems from the relative ineffectiveness of
public ownership to fulfill economic growth needs. Under private ownership, consumer demand
from the poorest members of society is met sooner, while lower government expenditure on
PSEs in terms of subsidies and capital investment provides governments with an opportunity to
increase expenditure on poverty-reducing social services.

       No established framework is evident as to how nongovernment organization participation
should be structured into the planning and implementation of privatization. Study observations
suggest that nongovernment organizations can be the most effective in the design and
implementation of social awareness campaigns, retraining, and compensation for displaced
employees and communities.

       The study lists some 30 lessons drawn from global experience, which have relevance to
ADB's operations and DMC privatization programs. It is clear that privatizing PSEs has often
taken precedence over implementing higher priority reforms necessary for effective market
operations of the private sector.

        Proceeds from privatization in Asia are estimated to exceed $30 billion. Early ADB
support emphasized improving the operational and financial performance of PSEs through
strengthening management autonomy, commercializing activities, and pricing reforms. These
efforts were reinforced with wider macroeconomic liberalization policies for promoting

1
    Where subsidies were prevalent before privatization, higher prices have generally followed. For many enterprises,
    including telecommunications, textiles, agro-industries, tourist and hotel accommodation, chemical manufacture,
    and bus services, lower prices have generally followed.
competition, removing protection, and during the 1990s with governance reforms and
strengthening the financial and capital market sectors. The number of ADB's public sector loans
and advisory technical assistance grants directly or indirectly supporting privatization has
significantly increased in the past 15 years. This has been complemented by ADB's direct
assistance to the privatization in the form of loans without government guarantee and equity
investments totalling almost $2 billion.

         The DMC experience of privatization is judged positive, but to date, privatization has
proceeded largely without attention to the sequencing of reforms and appropriateness of
approach for maximizing its effectiveness. DMCs' growing political commitment to privatization
provides scope for repositioning ADB's country strategies and programs. Most needed is
assistance for (i) developing the policy, legal, and regulatory framework; (ii) establishing the
institutional framework for privatizing; (iii) organizing workshops and advisory sessions;
(iv) funding implementation including support for the separation of noncore activities; and
(v) restructuring and retraining.

        Several crucial points emerge from the study including (i) a tendency for ADB and DMCs
to support privatization while ignoring the need for a more comprehensive approach to carrying
out political, legal, institutional, and economic reforms; (ii) the importance of sequencing in the
design of privatization programs/projects; (iii) a preoccupation with regulation before creating
competition; (iv) the counterproductive aspects of excessive regulation; (v) the merits of rapid
privatization; (vi) the ineffectiveness of some forms of public-private partnership (PPP) as a
method of privatizing; and (vii) social barriers and the need for more comprehensive welfare
programs.

         Comments on Study Findings. Although the notion of sequencing and need for a more
integrated approach received a high degree of support in responses to the preliminary findings
of the study, a number of concerns were raised. These were related to (i) accepting that DMC
experience parallels the wider global evidence and lessons, though lagged in time and scale;
(ii) accepting that privatization leads to improved enterprise efficiency; (iii) understanding
advantages of rapid privatization; (iv) seeing the appropriateness of deregulating the banking
sector before privatizing PSEs; (v) seeing the benefits of privatization for capital market
development; (vi) accepting notions concerning PPPs, regulation, and foreign investment; and
(vii) skepticism about the sufficiency of privatization to fully meet social requirements. These
concerns reflect the need to enhance understanding of the privatization process in the DMCs
through comprehensive awareness campaigns.

       Outlook. The positive efficiency impact, spur to economic growth, and growing
commitment of DMC governments make it likely that privatization in DMCs will follow the global
momentum, which shows annual proceeds have increased since 1990 from $33 billion to
approximately $180 billion, of which 25 percent is from privatization in developing economies.
Most DMCs have divestment programs indicating enterprises earmarked for privatization with
targeted disposal dates. Notwithstanding the gathering global momentum, privatization among
DMCs is likely to remain a political issue. A cautious approach is dominant and tends to
undermine the effectiveness of privatization.

       Recommendations. The study's findings in relation to its objective of providing
guidance on how privatization should be managed highlights the importance of sequencing and
a more integrated approach to implementing privatization. The need to understand more
comprehensively the privatization process is another major finding of this study.
        ADB is encouraged to review its strategy for assisting DMCs with privatization, taking
into account the need for a more integrated approach to reforms to promote economic and
private sector development, the importance of sequencing, and the need for more
comprehensive social welfare assistance. Attention is drawn to the problems of PPPs and the
need for more appropriate mechanisms for (i) dealing with social welfare services that are not
core to PSE activities, and (ii) making future pricing adjustments on PPP activities.

        DMCs are encouraged to adopt policy reforms that take into account (i) the global
lessons for prioritizing the legal framework and institutional requirements, (ii) the need to
restructure to infuse competition, (iii) the need to regulate only where competition is limited, and
(iv) the need to ensure that accompanying social programs are comprehensive and fully
supported by the community and persons affected.
                                             I.       BACKGROUND



A.        International Agenda


1.      The privatization of public sector enterprises (PSEs) has been a recurrent theme on the
international development agenda since the early 1980s. Assistance for this purpose from
international aid agencies has been cautious, placing priority first on supporting stabilization
programs and improving existing operational efficiencies. Assistance has also taken the form of
technical and financial support for institutional strengthening, enhancing autonomy, and price
reforms. Although international aid has been successful in promoting economic and social
development that would not have been supported by commercial funding, international aid
agencies and governments have been unable to keep pace with funding requirements and
technology advances. Supply constraints have been in evidence, particularly in nonurban areas,
and technical innovation and economic growth have been curtailed. These situations contrast
with the evidence from reform-minded economies where more conducive operating
environments exist, and privatization reforms have led to higher national levels of investment,
higher economic growth, increased outputs, and improved availability and quality of goods and
services.

2.       The International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD), and the World Bank have promoted privatization in
structural policy reforms since the mid-1980s. Monitoring and evaluation of experience have
provided a valuable global perspective while identifying changes in the operating environment
necessary for privatization reforms. Mixed and often seemingly unpredictable results revealed
early the need for a liberal macroeconomic framework, deregulation of banking, and reforms to
enhance competition and enforce good governance. Appropriate policy reform for capital market
development, together with better management of pension funds and other assets, has become
part of the evolving process for effective privatization.


B.        Asian Development Bank Privatization Support


3.        Beginning around 1984, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) integrated privatization as
a goal into its operational strategies and assistance plans for its developing member countries
(DMCs). The process of privatization is defined as any action that helps reduce the level of
public ownership and control, i.e., broader than just divestment in existing PSEs. In the broader
context of restructuring before divestment, privatization includes preparatory reforms aimed at
facilitating private sector operations and any action that increases participation in market-driven
activities, such as removing subsidy support, commercializing operations, and introducing
enabling policy reforms.2 ADB's Medium-Term Strategic Framework 1992-1995 identified



2
    Reforms aimed at improving the enabling environment that are part of the privatization process include economic
    stabilization, trade liberalization, strengthening the institutional framework for implementation, governance, and
    credit recovery. The privatization process, before partial or whole divestment, may also include preparatory
    measures aimed at enhancing the commercial viability of PSEs, such as removing subsidy support, separating
    noncore welfare activities, strengthening financial management, and contracting to the private sector noncore
    activities such as maintenance.
privatization as a desirable strategy to help meet economic growth objectives.3 In the late
1990s, renewed attention was given to developing strategies for effective reduction of poverty.
In 1999, ADB's Board approved a poverty reduction strategy that set poverty reduction as
ADB's overarching goal.4 In 2000, ADB's private sector development strategy was approved to
help promote growth and support poverty reduction efforts;5 and in 2001, ADB's long-term
strategic framework encompassing these two strategies and the integrated goals of international
aid agencies was finalized.6

4.      ADB support began with some of its larger DMCs, notably Bangladesh, India, Pakistan,
and Philippines. Support for privatization among the smaller DMCs is more recent, e.g., Papua
New Guinea and Sri Lanka. For transition economies such as Lao People's Democratic
Republic (PDR), Viet Nam, and the republics of the former Soviet Union (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz
Republic, and Uzbekistan), interest in privatization became a more explicit ADB policy
consideration in the second half of the 1990s, with an aim to strengthen institutional capacity
and build a better enabling environment. In small countries such as Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal,
and Pacific developing member countries (PDMCs), privatization has been limited. Even so,
there exist select examples of privatization, such as the divestment of minihydro operations in
Nepal, contracting of roadworks in the PDMCs, and contracting of electricity distribution
maintenance in Sri Lanka. For DMCs such as the Republic of Korea (henceforth Korea),
Malaysia, and Singapore, privatization has proceeded largely without ADB assistance. In the
case of Indonesia, ADB documentation avoids reference to privatization, even though there
exists long support for the concepts of privatization through improved autonomy measures,
better management information systems, removal of price controls, introduction of more
responsive pricing systems, and promotion of deregulation and competition. Since the 1997
Asian financial crisis, the need to improve governments' financial and operational efficiencies,
governance, and management of pensions has emerged as important issues among DMCs.


C.        Special Evaluation Study


5.      The special evaluation study originated as part of ADB's review process for evaluating
its operations and relevance for strategy development, country strategies and programs, and
new projects.7 The overall objective is to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
privatization process and guidance on how the objectives of privatization should be managed
and incorporated into project designs.8




3
    Five development objectives were defined: (i) economic growth as the main engine of growth, (ii) poverty reduction
    with emphasis on raising living standards of the poor, (iii) women in development with emphasis on equality of
    opportunity, (iv) population control with emphasis on family planning, and (v) environmental protection.
4
    R179-99: Fighting Poverty in Asia and the Pacific: The Poverty Reduction Strategy of the Asian Development
    Bank, 19 October.
5
    R78-00: Private Sector Development Strategy, 30 March.
6
    Moving the Poverty Reduction Agenda Forward in Asia and the Pacific, The Long-Term Strategic Framework of the
    Asian Development Bank (2001-2015), approved on 14 March 2001.
7
    The study was prepared by Mr. Timothy M. Hutton, Evaluation Specialist (Mission Leader); Dr. Alister McFarquhar,
    Professor Dieter Reineke, and Dr. Norbert Schmitz (consultants).
8
    The study follows TA 5753-REG: Developing Best Practices for Promoting Private Sector Investment in
    Infrastructure, for $600,000, approved on 7 October 1997, that produced five reports discussing global experiences
    for power, water supply, expressways, ports, and airports. Best practices covered sector policy issues such as
    pricing and competition, legal and regulatory frameworks, and restructuring.
6.      Because ADB's direct involvement with divested enterprises is limited,9 it was
considered that the most meaningful way to achieve the study aim was first to understand the
global lessons drawn from experience and to relate them to the different economic and political
circumstances, and to the approaches and methods adopted. Appendix 1 summarizes the focus
of privatization efforts by the World Bank, OECD, and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP).10 First, global experience with privatization is reviewed. Second, ADB's
involvement and DMC experience are assessed. Third, based on the global experience, lessons
learned, aid agency focus, and identified DMC needs, insights are drawn for strategizing ADB
assistance, principles for effective privatization are developed, and critical issues relating to
privatization design are discussed.

7.      To review the global experience (including that in DMCs), an evaluation was undertaken
which took into account the published experiences of governments, international and bilateral
funding agencies, university research, and case study experiences reported in official published
journals. From this review, the principal lessons of experience were identified and collated under
one of four categories: politics, framework and institutions, economics and efficiency, and social
welfare.

8.      To obtain more specific details of the DMC experience and progress toward
privatization, a survey questionnaire was sent to 37 active ADB borrowers. The questionnaire
was designed to gather information on (i) the prime reasons DMC governments choose to
privatize; (ii) the constraints affecting faster privatization; (iii) the approach and methods
adopted; (iv) the major lessons of experience; (v) operational results; (vi) which PSEs should
not be privatized; (vii) how social issues should be dealt with; and (viii) future DMC divestment
plans. In addition, missions were arranged to 10 DMCs to discuss answers with government
representatives and the managements of divested enterprises.11 The DMCs selected were
chosen so as to obtain a sample set reflective of differences in economic size, known
privatization experience, ADB involvement by way of loan or technical assistance (TA), and to
obtain a sample of divested enterprises from all economic sectors.

9.       To understand the extent of ADB's involvement in privatization, the study made an
analysis of all ADB loans and TA projects since 1984. The analysis extended to examining the
objectives and scope of each loan and TA project, with a view to identifying whether
privatization had been a direct or indirect objective, or not an objective at all. At the same time, a
review was undertaken of stated intentions under each DMC's development plan and ADB's
operational strategy. In addition, ADB in-house interviews were conducted with staff involved for
their views of the strengths and weaknesses of the DMCs and the operations of ADB.

9
   ADB's involvement in supporting privatization aims has largely been toward commercializing activities, removing
   subsidy support, strengthening operational efficiencies, and introducing enabling policy reforms. Involvement in the
   design, planning, and funding requirements for divestment has been limited.
10
   Case study information of IFC, OECD, and the World Bank on privatization and lessons of experience is extensive.
   The World Bank and IFC globally disseminate their case study experiences. OECD, through an annual symposium
   of members and nonmembers, reviews the problems and best practices of regulation, competition, and
   privatization. Reports by other international development agencies (Canadian International Development Agency,
   Department for International Development of the United Kingdom, Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau of Germany,
   UNDP, and United States Agency for International Development) are few, though all these agencies have
   considerable experience with loan and technical assistance support aimed at commercializing and strengthening
   PSE operational efficiencies. UNDP has placed special emphasis on improving governance through
   decentralization and developing stronger and more effective local government. Bilateral lending agencies have
   tended to concentrate on the start-up and development of small businesses under the broader aims of private
   sector development. Institutional documentation of the global privatization experience is also available from other
   sources, for example, universities, which have been the forerunners in theorizing privatization, and publish
   extensively on case study experiences.
11
   The DMCs visited were Bangladesh, India, Korea, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Maldives, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore,
   and Thailand.
                                   II.   GLOBAL EXPERIENCE


10.    This section gives an overview of the global development toward privatization, results of
empirical studies, significant institutional and sector developments, and global lessons.


A.       Country and Regional Experience


11.      Appendix 2 provides a comparative overview of the essential features and results of the
world's privatization programs. The overview includes country information on the economic and
political status prior to privatization, and approaches and methods applied.

12.     The push for privatization started with Chile in the mid-1970s and the United Kingdom
(UK) from 1979. Large budget deficits, high taxation, unemployment, and burdensome funding
to meet PSE expansion requirements precipitated the need to privatize in both cases. Other
European countries, led by France, followed the UK example. In 1984, New Zealand, faced with
high inflation and balance-of-payments difficulties, introduced radical fiscal, monetary, and labor
regulation reforms leading to a fast-track program for privatizing from 1987. In 1986, the Latin
American economies looked toward privatization to overcome problems of growing internal
budget deficits, and in 1989 privatization became a central reform element in the transition from
planned to market economies in Central and Eastern Europe and in the former Soviet Union.
The Asian financial crisis led to increased pressure for enterprise restructuring and stronger
government finances among DMCs. Figure 1 summarizes the historical milestones in global
privatization.

                         Figure 1: Milestones in Global Privatization


     1979              1984                 1986                 1989                1997


   The United         New Zealand          Latin America         Fall of Berlin
Kingdom (UK)           starts public             starts               Wall:
                      sector reform
                                                                                      Asian
       starts                                privatization        Privatization
    privatizing      and privatization          efforts             becomes           crisis
its public sector                            to overcome            a central
  enterprises;                            lingering effects          reform             increases
    budgetary        Other                  of debt crisis       element in the       pressures for
     reasons                                                                               greater
                     European                                                         efficiency and
driving force at                                               transition
 the beginning;                                                                           stronger
                      countries start
 later systemic      following the UK                                from
    approach              example                                 planned to
                                                                                      governmen
   (economic                                                                          t
                                                                    market
growth through
                                                                  economies
  privatization)
                     European                                     in Central           finances in
                                                                    dE t                emerging
                     Union provides
13.     For most African countries, privatization and private sector development have been a
part of broader economic reforms, but progress has generally not gone beyond privatizing small
business manufacturers, agro-industries, and tourism enterprises. As with the initial Latin
American experience, many African countries are finding it difficult to sustain program reforms.
Zambia and Egypt are in the middle of extensive privatization programs. Large privatizations in
telecommunications and airlines are planned for Morocco and South Africa as well as Jordan
and Oman in the Middle East.

14.     Most Asian economies see privatization as ideologically inspired, but several, including
Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, began denationalizing their manufacturing and retail
operations in small businesses, textiles, and agro-industries from the mid-1970s. With the
notable exceptions of Korea, Malaysia, and Singapore, Asian governments have tended to
retain government ownership and management of their infrastructure and large manufacturing
industries. Only in the last four years have PDMCs introduced policy reforms that allow broad
privatization programs.


B.         Empirical Results


15.     Numerous studies document the effects of privatization. The common measures of
economic impact include gross domestic product (GDP), government revenue, the budget, and
economic efficiency in terms of productivity and pricing. Other common measures include the
effects of privatization on overall availability and quality of goods and services, on employment,
and on incomes.

16.     The overall impact of privatization reforms has been dramatic. While policy reforms were
similar, total government expenditure as a proportion of GDP fell, in the case of New Zealand
from 18 percent of GDP to around 16 percent, and in Chile from about 23 percent of GDP to
10 percent.12 The contrast in impact reflects differences in how subsidies, other transfers, and
capital expenditure were used. Significantly, in low-income economies, the share in GDP of
PSEs has fallen from around 16 percent to around 6 percent, and in middle- to high-income
economies from around 9 percent to around 5 percent. Table 1 shows the estimated annual
savings in government capital expenditure following privatization for selected countries reviewed
in the study.




12
     Associated changes with privatization reform reflect different time periods.
          Table 1: Privatization Proceeds and Public Capital Expenditure Savings
                                    Total          Estimated Annual Savings in
                                 Proceedsa             Capital Expenditure
                                  ($ billion)     % of GDPb            $ billionc

      Country/Region

      New Zealand                           14             2.8                    1.5
      United Kingdom                       120             3.3                   42.8
      Continental Europe
           France                           69             1.1                   13.6
           Hungary                          12             1.9                    1.0
      Latin America
           Chile                            51             4.0                    3.1
           Mexico                           32             1.2                    7.2
      Transition Economies
           Czech Republic                    5             3.6                    2.0
           Poland                           12             4.9                    7.4
      Asian Economies
           Philippines                       2             0.2                    0.1
           Singapore                        14             5.0                    4.2

     GDP = gross domestic product.
     a
       Accumulated proceeds to end 1999.
     b
       Savings reflect general trend changes.
     c
       Based on GDP for 1999.

17.     Perhaps the most significant impact has been the impact on foreign investment. Gross
investment quadrupled as a proportion of GDP in Latin America, nearly tripled in New Zealand
and the UK, and increased from zero to more than 30 percent of GDP in the Central and
Eastern European transition economies. There has been little or no change in most Asian
economies with the exception of the Philippines (where investment doubled to around
13 percent of GDP) and Singapore (also doubling, to around 26 percent). Allowing foreign
investors to take part in privatization is seen to increase the pool of qualified buyers, technology
transfer, privatization proceeds, and foreign exchange. Appendix 3 provides further background
indicators relating to privatization.

18.      At the enterprise level, privatization has positive effects on incentives, profitability,
operational efficiency, and consumer benefits in a relatively short time. Consumer benefits
typically arise in the form of enhanced quality and availability of goods and services, increased
range, and reduced prices (footnote 28). The measured effectiveness is strongly dependent on
(i) the elimination of regulatory distortions, and (ii) restructuring to create competition.
Institutional reforms are confirmed as necessary to ensure that the legal, banking, and financial
environments are conducive to private sector market operations. Privatization is also more
effective where capital market development exists and where regulatory controls are
transparent and unambiguous. Table 2 summarizes key results for a selection of empirical
studies. The results of further studies for different enterprise sectors and countries are shown in
Appendix 4.
                               Table 2: Some Key Results of Empirical Studies
         a
Study
                                                            Impacts from Privatization

1994-1999                  ·    Increases output (real sales, operational efficiency, profitability, capital spending,
Jones, Megginson,               dividend payments).
and Nash                   ·    Increases profitability (net income divided by sales) from an average of 8.6 percent to
Study of 18 countries,          12.6 percent.
32 industries              ·    Increases efficiency measured by sales per employee.
                           ·    Increases capital investment spending from an average of 14 percent of sales to
                                19 percent.
                           ·    No evidence of decline in employment.
                           ·     Significant changes in firm directors.
1998                       ·    Where privatization resulted in the direct introduction of competition, the benefits (price,
Serra, Holder                   quantity, quality range) to consumers were considerable.
Studies of Chile and       ·    Where privatization was not followed by the introduction of competition, the benefits to
the United Kingdom              consumers were significantly less.
1998                       ·    Significant to the effectiveness of privatization is the sequence (conception,
Salej, Stefan                   restructuring, regulation, divestment).
Study of Brazil            ·    Restructuring should occur before regulation.
1998                       ·    Putting a regulatory framework in place before privatization is one of the most
Saba, Paolo                     important prerequisites for the successful privatization of infrastructure industries.
Study of competition
policy
1998                       ·    The voucher system approach in transition economies revealed the problem of
Weiss, Nitikin                  insufficiently regulated privatization.
Study of banks             ·    Citizens diversified their risk by selling to investment funds controlled by banks and, in
                                turn, the State. Bankruptcy law and enforcement was weak, and credit typically was
                                rolled over, leading to covert practices diminishing the need for financial market
                                discipline.
2000                       ·    Government ownership is more extensive in the poorest countries.
La Porta, Shleifer         ·    Government ownership retards financial system development.
Study of 92 countries,     ·    Government ownership restricts economic growth rates.
banks
a
     Refer to Appendix 4 for details of study references.



C.        Emerging Institutional and Sector Developments



          1.        Legislation and Regulation


19.     No single institutional framework stands out as best for privatization. However, studies of
the success of privatization show that it is essential to define the roles and powers of
participants, and to ensure that legal, regulatory, and enforcement mechanisms precede
privatization. Two predominant institutional structures emerge: (i) a centralized model where all
decision-making powers are vested in a single autonomous institution, and (ii) a decentralized
model where the privatization process is split among the branch ministries responsible for the
enterprises to be privatized. Some case studies of privatization illustrate the benefits of
delegating responsibility to an independent commission with powers to restructure and divest,
free from insider resistance.
20.     The desirability of a general law governing privatization depends on the existing
constitutional order, political environment, administrative capacity, and intended scope of
privatization. A general law sets a framework on the conditions of sale, the institution
responsible for referrals, and scope of executive powers to restructure the entity concerned,13
and enable divestment. A general law may also define the type of privatization, the special
rights of the state after privatization, provisions for employees, and foreign ownership, and set
incentive schemes for small investors. Alternatively, a specific privatization law may legislate on
these areas.14

21.     Most countries adopt legislation on corporate governance of PSEs covering reporting
obligations; rules on the selection and responsibilities of directors; timely disclosure for financial
statements and transparency; compliance with general policies of the government; evaluation of
management performance; budgeting, accounting, auditing; and other internal monitoring
systems such as staff management and control issues. Special regulatory contracts may apply
to infrastructure monopolies that are privatized and remain monopolistic. Regulatory contracts
cover granting licenses; approving charges for services provided by the enterprise; monitoring
service quality; and meeting satisfactorily expansion, quality, and service requirements.


         2.       Banking


22.    Governments have adopted different approaches to retaining banks as a policy
instrument. Some countries treat their banking sector as infant industries by encouraging local
ownership and by limiting foreign competition. However, market diseconomies, the advent of
technological advances in communications, and the lack of world linkages reduce the
competitiveness of local ownership. Crucial, overall, for the efficacy of banking is the capacity of
the regulatory and supervisory institutions and the general need for consolidation.15

23.     The consequences of bank failure are generally recognized.16 Except in countries
undergoing a rapid transition to privatization, the preferred approach is to proceed with bank
privatization immediately after the institutional and regulatory framework is established,17 and
before privatization of nonbanking enterprises. If the banking sector is not privatized, then the
empirical evidence points to the need to deregulate the banking sector and infuse competition.

24.     The privatization of Creditanstalt in Austria shows how a local bank can join the
100 biggest banks in the world. A similar pattern was followed in Italy, but bank ownership was
transferred ultimately to foreign investors. The Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland are other
examples where privatization was pursued with the intention that the banks would remain
13
   Including the separation of commercial and noncommercial activities.
14
   Legislation for privatization was seen as necessary in France but not in all European countries. Spain, like New
   Zealand, opted for powers governing privatization to be set under budget laws. In Australia, corporate governance
   regulations are covered by legislation affecting all corporations, whether public or private.
15
   Good examples of the differences in banking reforms are the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, and the
   Russian Federation. In Hungary, most banks were privatized with the participation of foreign strategic investors and
   privatization was generally successful. Poland opted to attract foreign strategic investors and at the same time
   encourage consolidation of the banking industry. The Czech Republic and the Russian Federation favored
   domestic ownership, and the privatization of banking has been the least effective there.
16
   Experience suggests that a high degree of bank exposure to privatization-related loans can lead to a systemic
   crisis, as in Chile during the early 1980s. The level of lending and resultant defaults in many transition economies
   of Central and Eastern Europe also proved counterproductive. On the other hand, the absence of finance from
   banks can significantly inhibit the effectiveness of privatization and any stimulus to economic growth.
17
   Another pertinent observation is the impact of stabilization on strengthening the macroeconomic situation and law
   and order in the economies of the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland, which, in turn, increased the attraction of
   banks to bidders and secured much better prices for the governments.
predominantly local entities. However, a surge in the volume of bad debt portfolios resulted in
the lifting of restrictions on foreign investment. Consequently, privatization deals were
concluded with foreign participants in all three countries.18


         3.      Infrastructure Enterprises


25.     The trend toward privatizing natural infrastructure monopolies has evolved from
technology advances in telecommunications, liberalization that promotes competition,
deregulation of financial markets, capital market development, market restructuring to remove
vertical integration, and regulation for enterprises that remain monopolistic after privatization.19

26.     The method of divestment for infrastructure enterprises depends on the strength of the
country's capital market and legal infrastructure, on the size and number of similar enterprises
to be transferred, and on the need for a strategic investor.20 Commonly, the divestment methods
involve (i) an initial public offering (IPO) followed by the sale of the controlling interest to a
strategic investor, (ii) trade sales to strategic investors,21 (iii) sale by tender, and
(iv) management buy-outs. Asset sales are also common with liquidations and/or restructuring,
as well as the introduction of competitive units in the market. Joint ventures, build-operate-
transfer (BOT) investments (and variations thereof), and/or production-sharing agreements are
also used to increase private sector involvement.

27.     The emergence of the international and combined service company has been an
unexpected consequence of privatization. In the power and energy sector, oil and gas
companies have become electricity companies; domestic regional utilities have become
multinational electricity companies; electricity distribution companies have become power
generation companies; and power generation companies have become distribution and
transmission companies. Many telecommunications enterprises have merged after privatization
with a global technology partner. There has also been a tendency after privatization for airlines
to merge operations with other airlines serving larger international links. Thus, while national
policy reforms have emphasized competition by breaking up monopolies, global market forces
have a tendency to reintegrate operators.


         4.       Capital Market Development and Pension Reform


28.     Underlying the significance of privatization for capital market development is the
expansion in capitalization of the main stock exchanges, which in five years to August 2000,
grew in Europe by a factor of two to four. In some Latin American countries, expansion in
capitalization over the same period was nearly 30 times. The 10 largest, and 30 of the
35 largest, share offerings in history have been privatizations (Appendix 3).22

18
   In Hungary, the Hungarian Credit Bank was acquired 90 percent by ABN-AMRO; the Hungarian Foreign Trade
   Bank 50.8 percent by Bayerische Landesbank and 17 percent by the European Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development (EBRD); and the Budapest Bank 58.9 percent by GE Capital and EBRD.
19
   A notable exception occurred with the privatization of British Gas, which was divested as a monopoly, and with a
   regulatory body to protect consumer interests. Discrimination complaints followed, and rulings against British Gas
   were made, but to no good effect. Eventually, the monopoly structure of British Gas was dismantled.
20
   A strategic investor is a term commonly used to describe an investor from the same industry who invests for
   management control.
21
   Trade sales refer to sales made to investors operating in the same industry or trade.
22
   The 10 share offerings were all larger than the biggest nonprivatization share offering of $10.76 billion for ATT
   Wireless stock in April 2000.
29.     An important spin-off from privatization has been the increasingly liquid and efficient
nature of capital markets, which has increased financing opportunities for firms to fund
investment. Capital market development promotes investment and economic growth,
consolidation and economies of scale in investment banking, and improves corporate
transparency. For some governments, capital market development has been an explicit
objective of privatization.

30.     Most privatizations include a strong, small-investor component. Deliberate underpricing
of IPOs, together with shareholder incentives, are prominent design features that have led to a
significant overall increase in the number of private shareholders.

31.     Equity raised from privatizations (and subsequent rights issues) has expanded the
number of funding sources and investors. One outcome has been to increase the onus on
pension reform to allow investments by pension funds in IPOs.23 In some countries, particularly
those with underdeveloped capital markets, privatization has provided pension funds with a
broader range of equities for diversifying portfolios. At the same time, pension funds have
become an important influence on corporate governance, through, for example, their
participation at shareholders' meetings and providing underwriting support.


         5.       Poverty Reduction and Nongovernment Organization Participation


32.     The link between privatization and poverty reduction stems from the relative failure and
ineffectiveness of public ownership. Not only are privatization reforms associated with higher
economic growth, capital market development, and promotion of an equity culture, but the
responsiveness of privatized PSEs to meeting consumer demand from the poorest members of
society is met sooner.24 Savings on PSE subsidies and capital investment expenditure have
enabled some governments to allocate increased budget expenditure to social services in the
fields of health and education.25 A fairly important impact of privatizing through IPO is that it
helps redistribute the concentration of wealth and increases the availability of commercial
opportunities for the private sector generally.

33.      Nongovernment organization (NGO) involvement in privatization issues has been largely
associated with their demanding a more participatory approach to planning and implementing
privatization. Among the various criticisms of the top-down approach to privatization have been
insufficient attention to human development as well as social, gender, and environmental
impacts. Regulatory frameworks are also seen as needing a better balance covering private and
social interests. How NGOs should be involved in the planning and implementation of
privatization follows no established pattern. Study observations suggest involvement in the
design and implementation of social awareness campaigns, retraining, and compensation
packages for displaced employees and communities is where NGO assistance can be most
effective.



23
   Pay-as-you-earn pension schemes performed poorly up to the end of year 2000 in relation to stock markets. In
   some countries (e.g., Bolivia), pension reform has required a specific proportion of the proceeds from privatization
   to be used to support pension funds which undertake to reinvest in the stock market.
24
   Supply constraints evident for meeting electricity, water, gas, and telecommunications demand are commonly cited
   examples.
25
   The potential for reallocation can be large. Estimates for India, of diverting direct subsidies from PSEs to basic
   education, suggest the diversion would allow increased expenditure on education of about 500 percent.
D.     Global Lessons


34.   The following lessons are identified from the global experience according to four
dimensions: politics, framework and institutions, economics and efficiency, and social welfare:


       1.      Politics


       (i)     In general, governments have privatized industries to achieve one or more
               objectives. These include (a) raising revenue for the government, (b) raising
               investment capital for the industry or company being privatized, (c) reducing the
               government's role in the economy, (d) promoting wider share ownership,
               (e) increasing efficiency, (f) introducing greater competition, and (g) exposing
               firms to market discipline.

       (ii)    In most countries, privatization has been a long-term process of policy changes
               and institution building. A few countries with market-conducive policies, strong
               administrative capacity, and strong private sectors have tried rapid privatization.
               Most countries in the former eastern bloc countries have also adopted a rapid
               approach to privatization.

       (iii)   Privatization has been hardest to achieve in low-income countries, where political
               commitment to privatization is weak and where the environment is not conducive
               to permitting market-oriented activities.

       (iv)    Foreign share ownership bringing new capital, management, and technology
               leads to a higher performance than does pure domestic ownership.


       2.      Framework and Institutions


       (i)     Six common techniques are used to privatize PSEs: (a) share issues, (b) trade
               sales, (c) asset sales, (d) management buy-outs, (e) public-private partnerships
               (PPPs), and (f) voucher privatization.

       (ii)    Common to the inferior results of rapid mass privatization approaches in the
               Russian Federation and Central and Eastern Europe is the lack of
               complementary institutions to ensure that the environment for conducting private
               transfers is competitive, regulated, and transparent. Notable failings include
               (a) no enforcement system for contracts, (b) no operative bankruptcy procedures,
               (c) inappropriate accounting systems, (d) no mechanisms by which credible
               information is given to new investors, and (e) poor governance practices in
               securities markets.

       (iii)   Risks and risk sharing between the public and private sectors are critical in PPP
               projects (e.g., BOT models). These projects are difficult to design so that the
               risks are shouldered without unduly disadvantaging either the public or investor
               interests. Projects require careful and rigorous formulation to ensure that an
               appropriate balance of private incentives with public interest is preserved.
        (iv)     Deregulation of the banking sector before (rather than after) privatization is found
                 to work best. Restructuring an enterprise to create competition and ensure a
                 clear separation of commercial and social functions is of prime importance prior
                 to privatization.26

        (v)      Delaying the introduction of competition after privatization or rationing it by tightly
                 limiting entry tends to lessen the benefits of privatization.

        (vi)     Regulation is critical where restructuring cannot ensure a fully competitive
                 industry. There should be a clear division of responsibilities between central
                 government and local authorities. At the same time, regulation should be
                 designed with the flexibility to cope with force majeure circumstances operating
                 against the spirit and objectives of regulation.27

        (vii)    Governments play a central role in shaping the legal, institutional, and regulatory
                 framework by which good governance systems develop. If the framework
                 conditions are not in order, the governance regime is unlikely to be either.

        (viii)   Privatization programs that aim to raise capital through the creation of cross-
                 shareholdings with other PSEs diminish the longer-term benefits of privatization.

        (ix)     The interests of the public are best served by a regulator focused on ensuring
                 that competition prevails.

        (x)      Transparency in the divestment process is critical for the economic and political
                 success of privatization.

        (xi)     The absence of a stock market diminishes the potential effectiveness of
                 privatization, but not so much that privatization is a nonviable policy option.


        3.       Economics and Efficiency


        (i)      Privatization works best when it is part of a larger program of reforms promoting
                 markets and efficiency. Chiefly, these include reforms for removing subsidies and
                 protection, and liberalizing trade, as well as stabilization programs that peg
                 inflation and float the exchange rate.

        (ii)     Countries that have launched large privatization programs through the stock
                 market have experienced rapid growth in their national stock market
                 capitalization and trading volume. Those that have not, or have emphasized
                 trade sales and vouchers over IPOs, appear to lag behind in market
                 development.




26
   Where the separation does not occur prior to privatization, subsequent attempts to separate commercial and
   noncommercial activities have commonly led to conflict between the privatized enterprise and regulator.
27
   As might be brought about through change caused by unforeseen exchange rate movements or unreasonable
   requirements that might cause deterioration in the quality of services.
        (iii)    National benefits from privatization are derived in the form of lower consumer
                 prices,28 increased outputs, higher tax revenues, reduced fiscal deficits, and
                 social benefits.

        (iv)     The impact of wholly privatized companies seeking to expand in countries freed
                 from stringent regulatory requirements has been a positive factor in the global
                 momentum toward privatization.

        (v)      Private ownership is associated with a higher level of enterprise performance,
                 and the higher the private ownership stake the greater the performance
                 improvement.

        (vi)     Majority ownership by outside investors tends to generate a greater level of
                 enterprise performance than any form of insider control.

        (vii)    Enterprises controlled by nonemployee investors make bigger restructuring
                 improvements than employee-owned enterprises.

        (viii)   Privatization with competition benefits consumers and the economy more than
                 privatization with limited competition. Prices generally fall, at least in real terms.29
                 Services improve and, in most cases, exceed the minimum quantity and quality
                 standards set at the time of privatization. The range of products available to
                 consumers (both industrial and retail) increases, and the economy benefits from
                 better maintained infrastructure.

        (ix)     Privatization without competition and a weak regulatory environment reduces the
                 effectiveness of privatization, and can result in a contraction of benefits to
                 consumers and the economy.

        (x)      The banking sector in transition and developing economies is invariably crippled
                 with nonperforming loans to insolvent PSEs. Experience reveals that one-off
                 restructuring aimed at quickly dissolving outstanding debt is preferable to debt
                 rescheduling, and to applying and adopting more commercial internal practices.


        4.       Social Welfare


        (i)      The fears of employees and dependent communities over the detrimental impact
                 of privatization programs on their personal future have often been a major
                 deterrent. In many transition economies, the social cost and disruption have been
                 generally overlooked, and/or insufficiently addressed.
        (ii)     The most successful privatization programs take account of the historical,
                 cultural, religious, and social framework of a country. Accompanying social
                 programs are needed to offset the negative employment effects, and the loss of
                 fringe benefits, pension rights, and displacement costs associated with
                 relocation. Negative social impacts on the local community should also be
                 addressed.
28
   However, where subsidies were common before privatization, higher prices have generally followed. For many
   enterprises, including telecommunications, textiles, agro-industries, tourist and hotel accommodation, chemical
   manufacture, and bus services, lower prices have generally followed.
29
   Where tariffs are subsidized, and/or the quality of the product or service is greatly improved, actual prices may
   increase.
(iii)   Broad-based ownership helps overcome resistance to privatization. Broad
        information and communication campaigns on the objectives and benefits of
        privatization programs have also been effective for trade sales.
                      III.    DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRY EXPERIENCE


35.     In this section, ADB's involvement, the status before privatization, and perspectives of
privatization in selected DMCs are presented. The section is based on ADB's loan support for
privatization, analysis of a written survey in which 21 DMCs participated, and follow-up missions
to 10 of the 21 DMCs. The 21 participating DMCs were Bangladesh; Bhutan; Cambodia; Fiji;
Hong Kong, China; India; Kazakhstan; Korea; Lao PDR; Malaysia; Myanmar; Nepal; Pakistan;
Philippines; Samoa; Singapore; Solomon Islands; Sri Lanka; Taipei,China; Thailand; and
Tonga.


A.     Asian Development Bank Involvement


36.    ADB's operational support for privatization reflects the wide differences among DMCs in
terms of their size, wealth, natural resources, stage of development, economic performance,
and capacity to mobilize resources. Country programming missions, which are fielded annually,
include intensive discussions with DMC governments to reaffirm the status, progress and thrust
of each DMC's development plan, reassess resource constraints, review current and
prospective economic conditions, and agree on a three-year rolling assistance program.
Assistance for private sector development is an integral part of such program.

37.    ADB's support for privatization began around 1984. It was tailored to meet the individual
needs of DMCs appropriate to their stage of development and took into account strategic
considerations reflecting the limited resources of ADB, and purposes considered most critical in
promoting economic development. Between 1984 and the early 1990s, the development plans
of DMCs showed an increased focus on industrial development through the private sector.
ADB's loan and TA support was dominated by a sector focus toward increasing agriculture and
agro-industry production; expanding energy, transport, and communication infrastructure; and
enhancing the availability of credit for private sector development. In the process, the complexity
and scope of project/program design increased with more attention given to improving operating
entity performance and strengthening institutional capacity. Devolvement of public sector
responsibilities to the private sector for various activities such as construction and maintenance
of roads, provision of stevedoring services, and maintenance and servicing of power facilities
became common in project design. Strengthening management autonomy in PSEs became
also a common feature, as did attention to improving management information systems and
commercial orientation of PSEs, including enhancing the financial viability of PSEs through price
reform and the removal of subsidies. TA advisory studies for tariff adjustments were common.

38.     The early directional role of ADB privatization assistance was evident in the form of TA
advisory studies attached to loans to various DMCs such as Fiji, India, Lao PDR, Nepal,
Pakistan, Philippines, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Tonga. These studies were mostly
enterprise or sector specific, and helped increase awareness of the potential for privatization as
well as the need for accompanying reforms in legislation, governance, financial regulation, and
capital market development to enhance the effectiveness of privatization.

39.     Under ADB's Medium-Term Strategic Framework 1992-1995 (para. 3), which continued
to serve as an operational guide till 1999, privatization was identified as a desirable strategy for
achieving economic growth objectives. There was a notable increase in loans and TAs
supporting financial governance reforms, capital market development, power sector
restructuring and PPPs. For new transition economies such as Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic,
and Uzbekistan that followed voucher privatization between 1989 and 1993, ADB's loan and TA
support has been largely directed at strengthening corporate and public governance. Under
ADB's Long-Term Strategic Framework 2001-2015 (para. 3), ADB's involvement with the private
sector is expected to increase substantially. The need to improve governance and the enabling
environment for private sector operations and PPPs is recognized.

40.      Table 3 shows the upward trend in ADB's support for privatization. In particular, the
number of standalone advisory TAs with privatization aims has increased dramatically since
1985. Such TAs have typically included studies for (i) capital and stock market development;
(ii) developing and strengthening the regulatory framework; (iii) reform of pension and provident
funds; (iv) corporatization; (v) restructuring financial, monetary, and banking systems;
(vi) strengthening corporate and public governance; and (vii) establishing privatization
coordination units. There is still room for expanding the scope of ADB assistance, e.g., for public
awareness campaigns to explain the scope and method of privatization, conditions, support
structures, and social support programs necessary for success (paras. 58, 60, and 70).

                     Table 3: ADB's Increasing Support for Privatization
           Year
                    Loansa                              TAs

                      Number        % of the Total        Number      % of the Total

           1985          4                 8                 1              3
           1990          9                 16                13            11
           1995          12                17                22            14
           2000          13                18                39            25

           ADB = Asian Development Bank, TA = technical assistance.
           a
             Including attached TAs.

41.     The public sector loans and advisory TAs discussed above have been complemented by
ADB's direct assistance to the private sector in the form of loans without government guarantee
and equity investments. As of the end of 2000, such assistance had reached about $2 billion,
distributed among almost 150 projects and investment funds. Further details of ADB's
involvement in privatization support are discussed in Appendix 5.


B.     Progress and Rationale


42.      Figure 2 shows the chronology of privatization in DMCs. For Bangladesh, experience
with privatization began in the mid-1970s with the return of nationalized small businesses to
their original owners and the sale of others. Privatization in DMCs increased substantially after
the financial crisis of 1997, and several countries have made large divestments. Except for
Malaysia and Singapore, political pressure resulting from the financial crisis is the main impetus
to privatization. The most important reason for privatization is the expected improvement in the
government's budgetary position. Increased efficiency is another important reason, followed by
increased size and dynamism of the private sector (Figure 3). Reduction of corruption, access to
foreign expertise and technical skills, and poverty reduction are generally viewed as minor
justifications. Even so, the main rationale differs significantly among DMCs. Access to foreign
technology and capital is the prime motive of Sri Lanka.30 In Singapore, willingness to privatize
followed huge surpluses accumulated by the statutory boards under which PSEs were
managed.31 Significant divestments announced in Singapore's privatization program in 1985
have been achieved with a very strong emphasis on gradualism and partial privatization.
Malaysia announced its privatization master plan in 1985 which, after further review, was
approved for implementation in 1989. Actual implementation has been slow and also with a
strong emphasis on gradualism and partial privatization. The approach of Malaysia differs from
Singapore in that little attention has been paid to infusing competition before privatization.

     Figure 2: Start of Privatization Activities in Selected Developing Member Countries


               1975           1980        1985          1990         1995          2000




                                                   ei na

                                                     Sa a
                                                            oa
                                              ng La ic
                                        al S epu an


                                                       In a
                                                            a


                                            ub K tan
                                  zb K tan mb ia
                                    N ista yz R kis a
                                                   Bh nes




                                                            a


                                                            n
                                                    a n




                                       R na Bh d
                      h




                                            To ri bl
                                                   a nk
                                                          di
                                                    a i




                                              lic ore

                                                ip hi
                                                         hi
                                                M uta




                                                          n




                                                         m
                       s




                                                          s
                                     ek yrg P od
                                                          t
                                       kh C lay
                    de




                                                       la
                                                        u

                                             Ta of C
                                                      ,C
                                                     pi




                               op ng, nd hai
                 la



                                                 ilip
               ng




                                                 a




                                                T
                                             Ph
             Ba




                                   le C s
                                      ep n




                                     's hi
                                         ep
                                         s




                             Pe Ko Isla
                                     za e
                         ji



                                 Ka or
                       Fi



                                    ap




                              g n
                            on o
                                ng




                           H lom
                               U
                              Si




                            So




43.      DMCs have different views of how privatization will help the economy. In Bangladesh,
the monopoly enterprises experience significant operating losses and require substantial
expansion and rehabilitation support. Respondents there expect privatization to provide budget
relief. Those in Cambodia anticipate that state subsidies to PSEs will be reduced, and the
proceeds invested in infrastructure development. Pakistan respondents expect that privatization
will reduce the financial burden caused by persistent PSE losses, and this will enable the
Government to invest more in social sectors. Those in Hong Kong, China expect that
privatization will improve the international standing and stability of its stock exchange, and that
the proceeds will ease the burden on budget revenues. In the Central Asian transition economy
of Kazakhstan, respondents anticipate that privatization will provide increased job opportunities
and stronger economic growth, while those in Korea expect that privatization will help restore
foreign investor confidence, increase efficiency in management and the economy, and attract
foreign technology. Nepal respondents expect that privatization will benefit the economy by
increasing productivity, mitigating the financial and administrative burden on the Government,
encouraging private sector participation in economic development, and removing loss-incurring
PSEs. The current Philippine privatization program is expected to achieve higher levels of
efficiency and resource use, help develop the domestic capital market, and broaden the
ownership base of public assets.32




30
   As, for example, in the privatization of Sri Lanka Telecom. By 1996, the waiting list for telephones was larger than
   the number of lines in existence. It was estimated that to achieve a reasonable penetration rate of five telephones
   per 100 people, the Government would have to invest more than $500 million. In addition, qualitative indicators
   showed that Sri Lanka Telecom urgently needed to upgrade its facilities and apply new technology.
31
   These accumulations were causing an undue drain on domestic liquidity while the high taxes and statutory charges
   needed to support growth were undermining Singapore's competitiveness.
32
   The initial (1986) Philippine privatization program was intended to reduce the budgetary drain of the PSEs and
   generate revenues for the Government.
                Figure 3: Governments' Understanding of the Rationale/Justification
                     for Privatization in Selected Developing Member Countries


                   Improve Government Budgetary Position
                      Increase Efficiency and Effectiveness
          Increase the Size/Dynamism of the Private Sector
              Govt. Commitment to Free Market Philosophy
                          Develop Broad-Based Ownership
                                      Strengthen Competition
                                                               1
                                   Assist in reduction of corruption
                        Develop/Strengthen     Capital Market
                                                                2
                                      Access to foreign expertise/technical skills
                                 Promote      of povertyGrowth
                                          Economic
                                    Reduction              2

                            Support Public Sector Reforms
                                           Attract Investments
                                       Improve Management
                                               Reduce Poverty
          Gain Access to Foreign Expertise/Technical Skills                              Number of developing member
                                                                                              country answers
                                           Reduce Corruption

                                                                     0         2     4      6      8     10     12     14


44.     The Lao PDR, like a number of DMCs, has no stock exchange. To date, privatization
efforts have been largely directed at restructuring and commercializing the operations of the
Government through contracting out services to the private sector. Currently, the Government is
focusing on a transfer of the management function to the private sector in preference to
privatization. A study of the feasibility for a stock exchange in Vientiane has been completed.


C.         Perceived Impediments


45.      The respondents regard weak capital markets as the biggest overall impediment to
privatization, and sociocultural conflicts the least important (Figure 4). However, among specific
DMCs, the situation varies. In Korea, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, social resistance to
privatization dominates,33 while in the Philippines, privatization is widely favored. Lack of
political commitment and a weak investment climate are also major impediments in Pakistan
and a few other DMCs, including India (but there the political consensus of the major parties in
1999 supported privatization and sped up the process). In Singapore, none of the suggested
impediments was considered to apply. The biggest problem in Singapore is finding strategic
partners with sufficient financial resources to buy out the PSEs and add value to the enterprises.




33
     Research surveys released by the Office of State Enterprises in Thailand in 2001 suggest that public opinion is
     shifting toward supporting privatization.
                 Figure 4: Perceived Impediments Constraining Privatization
                                                           1 = most important                9 = least important


                   Weak Financial/Capital Markets                       ·
                     Negative Employment Effects                            ·
                             Lack of Social Support
                                                                                ·
                           Weak Legal Framework
                                                                                ·
                Weak Macroeconomic Conditions                                    ·
               Inadequate Management Expertise                                       ·
                 Resistance to Foreign Ownership                                         ·
                             Sociocultural Conflicts                                         ·
                                                       1      2     3       4        5       6     7     8         9



D.      Approaches and Methods Applied


46.      Most DMCs follow a straightforward approach with a common understanding that sector
reforms should precede privatization. One common approach to privatization is privatization by
attrition, whereby new development is open to tender from private investors.34 Only a few
countries consider that rehabilitation is necessary prior to privatization: the Philippines
implements predivestment restructuring only for "big-ticket" enterprises. In Samoa, decisions on
restructuring are made on a case-by-case basis. In India, it is current policy in the public sector
to restructure and revive potentially viable PSEs.

47.    Sales through IPO and listing of shares, open tender, private placement, and auction are
the most frequent privatization methods. Privatization of small companies is generally made
through trade sales or public tender, while large PSEs are privatized through the capital
market.35 The Philippines and Taipei,China have experience in all frequently used methods. In
Korea, privatization has been mainly through the capital market, with shares of large PSEs sold
to overseas financial markets through American Depositary Receipts.36 Domestic IPOs have
been used to sell shares in tobacco and gas companies. In Malaysia, four main modes of
implementing privatization have been applied, namely, sale of assets or equity; lease of assets;
management contracts; and BOT for new infrastructure. In Thailand, most privatization has


34
   As is common to meet new expansion requirements in electricity generation, gas production, and water supply.
35
   Where local markets are weak or small, IPOs are tailored accordingly. Records show that the initial offer can be
   less than 5 percent of the total enterprise equity.
36
   The Ministry of Commerce, Industry, and Energy raised $753.6 million from the sale of 62.8 million American
   Depositary Receipts. The Government raised nearly $2.5 billion from the sale of a 12 percent stake in Korea
   Telecom. Another substantial privatization effort was the sale of American Depositary Receipts in Pohang Iron and
   Steel Company (Posco), resulting in proceeds of $1 billion. Korea Gas Corporation raised $845 million from its
   domestic share offering, having abandoned discussions to sell a strategic stake to a foreign investor.
been through concessions, e.g., water utilities and ports, but equity offerings are expected in the
future to predominate. Leasing is the leading method in Bhutan.

48.      Most DMCs open their privatizations to foreign participation (e.g., Bangladesh,
Singapore), but most restrict the proportion of ownership allowed (e.g., Korea, Philippines, Sri
Lanka, Thailand). Cambodia is the only country in the study survey not open to foreign
participation. "Golden share" arrangements, which allow the government, in the event of a
conflict with public interest, to assume control where the government's shareholding is less than
50 percent, apply in Malaysia and Sri Lanka. Where privatization has been pursued through the
stock market, most DMCs have devised special programs and incentives to support small
investors.

49.     Where social and labor considerations are a constraint on privatization, DMCs address
these issues with a variety of measures, including public information programs, participatory
involvement of employees, financial compensation for displaced employees, and retraining for
others. Retained employees are often offered a significant wage increase. Even so, the study
found clear examples where compensation packages regarded as generous by respondents,
did not sufficiently meet the welfare concerns of PSE staff.


E.      Institutional Framework


50.    Two predominant models among the DMCs can be recognized (para. 19). Figure 5
shows the centralized organizational structure for privatization in Korea. The Privatization
Steering Committee oversees the overall privatization program. The line ministries are in charge
of developing and implementing privatization plans for their PSEs.

                        Figure 5: Organizational Structure for Privatization in Korea

                                                                                  President
                                                                                   President
                  Reporting directly



                                                                     Privatization Steering Committee*
                      Chairs committee;
                      oversees and
                      coordinates overall                                                   Line ministries represented in Steering Committee
                      privatization program                                                 Ministries prepare and execute privatization/restructuring plans


           Ministry                                                                                                                                     Line Ministries
           MinistryofofPlanning
                        Planning
               andBudget
              and   Budget
     Public Sector Management Team II
                                                                             Ministryofof
                                                                            Ministry                              Ministryof
                                                                                                                 Ministry                            Ministryofof
                                                                                                                                                    Ministry
                                              support, if required




        (focus on privatization issues)                                                                                    of
                                                                            Commerce,
                                                                            Commerce,                          Communication
                                                                                                                Communication                    Constructionand
                                                                                                                                                 Construction    and
                                              Coordination,




                                                                       Industry, and Energy                     andInformation
                                                                                                               and  Information                   Transportation
                                                                                                                                                   Transportation


                                                                           Execution of shareholders' rights
                                                                           Implementation of privatization/restructuring plans

      * Members of the Committee are Minister of Planning                             Korea Electric
      and Budget (Chairman), Vice Minister of Finance                                 KEPCO
                                                                                    Power Corporation
      (Vice Chairman), Vice Chairman of Fair Trade
      Commission, Secretary to the President for Policy and
      Planning, Head of Government Reform Office,                                     Korea Gas
      Assistant Minister for Economic Policy and                                      Corporation
      Coordination of the Prime Minister's Office, Deputy
      Governor of the Korean Development Bank, vice
      ministers of line ministries (currently three), two                          Pohang Iron and
      civilian experts.                                                                  ...
                                                                                   Steel Company                            ...                                ...



51.   In Thailand, a decentralized model is applied. Each privatization transaction is facilitated
on a case-by-case basis and managed by a separate committee chaired by the line ministry
with representation from the enterprise, the Ministry of Finance, and other agencies. For the
larger privatizations (e.g., Petroleum Authority of Thailand), financial advisors assist in the
preparation of the privatization plan to be submitted to the Cabinet for approval. The Office of
State Enterprises within the Ministry of Finance has a coordinating function.

52.     Privatization commissions in Bangladesh, Myanmar, and Pakistan are vested with
overall responsibility to implement the privatization of PSEs referred by the government.
Processing generally requires evaluations and recommendations back to the government for
approval before divestment.37 The Committee on Privatization in the Philippines fulfills a similar
function but, in addition, has a mandate to approve the sale and divestment of assets.


F.      Results and Impacts


53.      Respondents from most DMCs judge the overall impact of privatization as positive. A
few state that it is too early to evaluate the impact. Seventy percent of the DMCs declared that
availability and quality of output and services improved after privatization, and the other DMCs
that it remained the same. In isolated cases, the quality and range of output and services fell,
reflecting deficiencies in competition structure and regulatory supervision. A few DMCs
considered that privatization increased capital investment, technology development, and job
creation.

54.     Forty percent of the DMCs in the survey declared that prices increased after
privatization. Twenty-five percent reported that prices remained the same, and another
25 percent were unsure. The remaining 10 percent said that prices fell due to competition. Two
main reasons were given for the price increases: the first was that most of the goods and
services produced and sold by the PSEs were subsidized, and with privatization, these
subsidies were removed; the second was the associated increase in costs for improvements in
the quality and range of goods and services.

55.    Two common conclusions in the survey were that privatization was often linked to
powerful political and business interests, and that transparency and competitive bidding were
key elements of privatization but were not easily secured.

56.     Some countries have carried out evaluation studies on the impact of privatization. In
Malaysia, achievements are (i) efficiency gains;38 (ii) enhanced economic growth;39 (iii) reduction
in the Government's financial burden;40 and (iv) wealth redistribution.41 The benefits are less
significant for private-public infrastructure projects involving highways, mass transit systems,
and sewage systems where generated revenues have been lower than projected. In
Taipei,China, a postprivatization study of seven PSEs showed that all surveyed companies
diversified and downsized after privatization. Annual sales were subject to business cycles but
labor productivity significantly improved. Postevaluation in Sri Lanka showed that private
management of government-owned coconut, rubber, and tea estates significantly improved


37
   At present, no specific sectors or enterprises are targeted for privatization in Myanmar.
38
   As seen, for example, in a 24 percent reduction in average vessel turnaround time at a container port within two
   years of privatization; improved telecommunications services after corporatization of the national
   telecommunications company; and completion of a large water supply project significantly ahead of schedule.
39
   Identified with providing greater opportunities to the private sector.
40
   The deficit in the public sector account was reduced from 3.4 percent to 0.7 percent of GDP during 1983-1999.
41
   Evidenced by the argument that as most privatizations involved at least 30 percent Bumiputra participation,
   privatization furthered interethnic wealth redistribution objectives.
productivity. With privatization, lease management, and listing on the Colombo Stock Exchange,
tea productivity increased over four or five years by around 38 percent (Appendix 6).


G.     Future Plans


57.     The perception of most DMCs is that most public sector activities can be privatized
(Figure 6). Most have divestment programs, with companies earmarked for privatization at
targeted disposal dates. Cambodia does not have a specific divestment plan; nor does Hong
Kong, China, but privatization of the Mass Transit Rail Corporation is proposed. Singapore
plans privatizations in power, media, and ports operations when market conditions strengthen.
The Government of Malaysia wants to privatize only its loss-incurring PSEs, and wants the
profit-making, income-generating companies to stay in government hands. Pakistan's
privatization program is part of the Government's two-year economic plan 2000-2001 and
includes 53 PSEs in the power and energy sectors. Taipei,China is planning to privatize its
transport and utilities sectors. Sri Lanka is focusing on public utilities, and further divestments in
plantations and manufacturing enterprises. Tonga has assessed its government investment
portfolio and will make recommendations for privatization.

                  Figure 6: Perception in DMCs of What Should be Privatized

                Insurance Services
          Waste Collection/Disposal

           Agro-Industry Production
             Maintenance Services
                 Road Construction
                       Oil and Gas
               Telecommunications
                           Banking
                             Power
                      Airports/Ports                PSE
                      Water Supply
                      Civil Aviation
                   Television/Media
                    Postal Services
                  Security Services
                       Universities
                          Hospitals
                            Prisons                       Proportion of developing member countries
                           Schools                        (DMCs) in favor of privatization in the
                                                          respective sector (%)
                   Armed Services
                                   0%   10%   20%    30%     40%   50%    60%    70%   80%    90%     100%




H.     Developing Member Country Need for Support


58.     DMC experience with privatization parallels the wider global evidence and lessons,
though lagged in time and scale. Background, methods, and approaches are similar to Europe
and Latin America. Political commitment, proper preparation and planning, transparency, and
clear decision lines, as well as an empowered privatization unit within an enabling environment,
are critical factors. Weak domestic capital markets and financial sectors are a predominant
feature of DMCs. The institutional and regulatory framework for privatizing PSEs is also weak.
DMCs expressed the view that ADB should address the following needs:42 (i) policy and legal
framework; (ii) regulatory framework(s); (iii) capabilities of the privatization unit; (iv) privatization
awareness programs; (v) training for officers involved in privatization; (vi) study tours for labor
and political leaders as well as concerned agencies; (vii) lessons of global experience;
(viii) regional workshops on privatization; (ix) funding for upfront costs of restructuring (e.g.,
advisory services); (x) funding for the financial restructuring of PSEs; (xi) funding for (re-)training
schemes for affected employees; (xii) funding for voluntary retirement/separation schemes; and
(xiii) postprivatization monitoring capability.




42
     The Ministry of Finance of Thailand advised that TA provided directly to PSEs for the purposes of restructuring and
     reform is of less value in terms of outcomes than assistance provided to coordinating agencies.
                                      IV.      INSIGHTS FROM STUDY



A.         Strategy for Development


59.      The growing political commitment among DMCs to privatize provides scope for further
positioning of ADB's strategic objectives and assistance. Different DMCs require different
approaches relating to (i) their stage of development and strength of legal and financial
institutions; (ii) the capacity of domestic investors, stock market, and institutions to support PSE
divestment; and (iii) the size and organizational structure of PSEs being considered for
divestment. Strategies should reflect the different privatization stages and need for support.

60.      Three stages of privatization merit support, namely early, intermediate, and advanced
reform. Figure 7 summarizes the three stages and support needed. Most needed is assistance
for (i) developing the policy, legal, and regulatory framework; (ii) establishing the privatization
unit and starting its operations; (iii) organizing workshops and advisory sessions; and
(iv) funding restructuring and advisory costs. These can be essentially met by ADB, OECD, the
World Bank, and others--but only a few governments are aware of the support available--and
most are unaware of the importance of sequencing (para. 64).

61.     DMC experience suggests that aid agencies should emphasize and support policy
reforms, competition, and the regulatory environment, in preference to providing equity or loan
assistance to wholly or partly divested enterprises.43 TA might typically help in restructuring
enterprises, establishing an institutional and regulatory framework, and meet social welfare
needs. Loan assistance might be provided for mitigating social costs, and programs for dealing
with displaced workers. Program loans before divestment might facilitate enabling reforms,
establish regulatory authorities, set up consumer protection and investment trusts, and meet
interim and residual costs of separate noncore activities including hospitals, housing, and
community facilities that require liquidation and/or temporary continuation.




43
     Advisory assistance from investment banks, while expensive, is generally favored for the divestment of large
     infrastructure and commercial banking enterprises.
                      Figure 7: Privatization Stages and Need for Support


      Early Reform Stage:                    Intermediate Reform Stage:               Advanced Reform Stage:
        Legal and institutional framework       Legal/economic framework                Institutional framework is
        lacking                                 inconsistent                            consistent
        No consensus over privatization         Privatization strategy realized         The private sector
        strategy                                Privatization experience available      dominates
        Little privatization experience         Medium and large enterprises to         Enterprises to be privatized
        Enterprises to be privatized are        be privatized                           include monopolistic and
        mainly small enterprises in the         Foreign investors admitted, but         strategic enterprises
        processing and services sector          only those familiar with the            (defense industry, transport,
        Sale mainly to nationals or return      country                                 telecommunications, power)
        to previous owners                      Public support decreases with
        Wait-and-see attitude of potential      negative consequences of
        investors                               privatization (unemployment and
        Relatively wide support among           decrease in production)
        the public




      Need for Support:                      Need for Support:                       Need for Support:
        Privatization strategy, legal, and     Strengthening legal and                 Implementation of privatization
        institutional framework                institutional framework                 studies, continued introduction
        Privatization agency and               Privatization studies                   of rehabilitation and privatization
        operations                             Promotion of investment                 expertise
        Accompanying macroeconomic             Creation of capital market              Strengthening of capital market
        measures                               institutions (e.g., investment and      institutions
        Transparency of educational            unit trust funds)                       Supervision and regulation
        campaigns                              Accompanying macroeconomic              Funding for separated
        Initial formulation for public         policies                                noncommercial activities
        awareness                              Cushioning of negative
                                               privatization effects
                                               Separation of noncommercial
                                               and social welfare activities




B.     Principles for Effective Privatization


62.     Based on the global lessons (section II) and the survey results of DMC experience
(section III), the following principles for privatization and strategy development emerge (see
Box). The principles are considered an essential checklist for evaluating the
comprehensiveness of privatization program/project designs, and ensuring the effectiveness of
privatization.


C.     Critical Issues



       1.         Enabling Environment


63.     There is a tendency to support privatization with a selective and isolated approach, and
to ignore the need to introduce privatization as an integral part of economic reforms and
strategy for implementation. Related to the need for policy reforms is the finding that reforms
pertaining to public and corporate governance, commercial redress, and credit recovery are, in
practice, difficult to implement and enforce. These findings point to the need for programs that
give more emphasis to the macroeconomic framework and to strengthening institutional
enforcement capacity.



                                       Privatization Principles

    ·   Privatization should be viewed as a good governance reform.

    ·   There must be commitment by government politically and within line ministries.

    ·   Privatization programs must be an integral part of a country's economic policy.

    ·   Privatization programs must include a strong institutional and regulatory framework.

    ·   The environment must be competitive, regulated, and transparent.

    ·   Deregulation of the financial sector should precede privatization.

    ·   Restructuring to create competition and ensure a separation of commercial and social
        functions should precede divestment.

    ·   Regulation is required only where restructuring is unable to ensure a fully competitive
        industry.

    ·   Rehabilitation prior to privatization should be avoided.

    ·   Privatization programs should be accompanied by extensive public awareness campaigns.

    ·   Privatization programs should be complemented by comprehensive social welfare
        programs.



        2.     Sequencing


64.      ADB's loan and TA programs need to keep in mind sequencing of implementation in the
design of privatization programs/projects. The need for political commitment and the right
institutional framework is of paramount importance to avoid delays and implementation
constraints. Economic stabilization and trade liberalization programs are essential for success.
Deregulation of the banking sector; legal, judicial, and enforcement reform; public governance
reforms; capital market development; restructuring to induce competition; and regulation should
precede the divestment process, in this order, for best privatization results. Significant too is the
need to carry out public governance reforms before corporate governance reforms.
         3.       Regulation


65.     DMC experience reflects a preoccupation with regulation without first considering the
scope for competition and how to increase it to minimize regulation.44 In the process,
subsequent actions by the regulator may create major conflict, which detracts from the
effectiveness of privatization.45 The larger regulatory authorities are typically structured with a
mandate to approve prices, operating expenditure, accounts, quality of output and investments,
and to monitor compliance with concessionaire agreements. Where competition has been
established, small regulatory authorities consisting of no more than an appointed commissioner
and secretarial staff (often covering several sectors) seem to work best. Some merit is seen in
transferring the responsibility of regulators for consumer interests to a separate anticompetition
trust authority. This limits the role of the regulator to monitoring and ensuring compliance with
agreed operational and investment contracts.

66.     Overregulation reduces profit and the incentive to invest, a situation that has occurred
both globally and in some DMCs. Restructuring to infuse competition helps avoid regulation and
offsets political strategies aimed at maintaining government control. With regulation, maintaining
pricing reflective of least-cost development and normal profits is of paramount importance in the
success of privatization.


         4.       Rapid Privatization


67.     For most DMCs, the idea of rapid privatization runs counter to the caution of political
leaders and government administrators. While there still remains the need for comprehensive
preparation, not readily appreciated is the windfall capital that is raised and available for
alternative investment.46 Enterprise and national efficiency, as well as economic growth, are
enhanced on a major scale. Output is expanded, range and quality improved, and prices
generally reduced. Industry capacity to export and compete with imports is also found to expand
faster following rapid privatization.


         5.       Public-Private Partnerships and Welfare Transfer


68.     Some types of PPPs have proven difficult. They are typically structured so that the
government retains ownership of the land and fixed assets. Problems that arise relate largely to
overregulation and an emphasis on maintaining tariff levels without timely adjustment for
variations in factor prices, force majeure circumstances, physical contingencies, and
restructuring to create competition. Sometimes, PPPs are unnecessary, and a reflection of
opposition to privatization. The example of privatizing, as a lease operation, the plantation
estates in Sri Lanka demonstrates the lesser effectiveness of PPPs (Appendix 6). Total


44
   Regulatory authorities often become a de facto government department and can seriously undermine the
   autonomy of management (which privatization was intended to safeguard), thereby removing the benefits of
   privatization and competition.
45
   In the power sector for example, separating through corporatization, or other means, the operations of generation,
   transmission, and distribution is not enough and much more can be done to ensure that the deintegrated
   components also operate within a competitive regime.
46
   Capital is raised from net privatization proceeds, ongoing capital development expenditure is avoided, and loan
   servicing and subsidy support are reduced.
privatization--as is generally the case--would have been more effective. PPPs are particularly
appropriate where the capital costs of new projects are high relative to operating returns.

69.    The tendency of governments to foist, with the sale of PSEs, welfare activities that are
not core to PSE operations also enters the politics of privatization. Typical welfare attachments
include hospitals, theaters, sports facilities, sponsorship programs, community residences, and
schooling. If welfare services are to be provided, then the additional operation and maintenance
costs should be factored in as a subsidy. The practice of privatizing without appropriate pricing,
adjustment, or subsidy is unrealistic, and the prime cause of public-private conflict.


           6.        Social Barriers/Incentives


70.     Social obstacles to privatization vary between countries, reflecting differences in
historical background, culture, religion, and social framework. Across DMCs, there are marked
differences over which government assets and services should be retained. Singapore supports
the interplay of competitive market forces. In countries like Bhutan, government enterprises
function in an environment where the incomes of beneficiaries are so low that the supply of
services can be provided only with a subsidy.47 In many DMCs, resistance to privatizing
represents an aversion to transferring assets and services to society members who would be
enriched by the transfer. These differences emphasize the need for extensive public awareness
programs in DMCs for leaders, constituents, government agencies, and PSE staff on the
benefits of privatization.

71.     Tacit agreement for privatization often goes with a lack of commitment within
government. This situation arises from misconceptions of the consequences of selling too
cheaply, without adequate rehabilitation, without retaining a vested interest, without regulatory
controls, and without appropriate due diligence. Prominent staff often defend the capacity of
management to operate PSEs efficiently and are not interested in the wider benefits of
privatization. These factors point to the need for vesting decision-making powers in an
autonomous institution (para. 19), and ensuring that privatization programs are packaged with
appropriate community/staff support and widely promoted.


D.         Recommendations


72.      In meeting its objective of providing guidance on how privatization should be managed,
the study has identified the importance of sequencing and the need for a more integrated
approach to implementing privatization. Some respondents had difficulties in (i) accepting that
DMC experience parallels the wider global evidence and lessons, though lagged in time and
scale; (ii) accepting that privatization leads to improved enterprise efficiency; (iii) understanding
advantages of rapid privatization; (iv) seeing the appropriateness of deregulating the banking
sector before privatizing PSEs; (v) seeing the benefits of privatization for capital market
development; (vi) accepting notions concerning PPPs, regulation, and foreign investment; and
(vii) believing that with privatization, social requirements can be fully met. In this regard, the
need to enhance understanding of the privatization process in the DMCs is a major finding of
this study and an important task for ADB to pursue.

47
     These tend to be basic services covering national highway maintenance, airline services, electricity supply, water
     supply, telecommunications, health, and schooling where the population base is small, there is little or no industrial
     development, subsistence production is predominant, and the money system is not fully developed.
73.     ADB, through its operations departments, is encouraged to review its strategy for
assisting DMCs with privatization, taking into account the need for a more integrated approach
to reforms to promote economic growth and private sector development, the importance of
sequencing, and the need for more comprehensive social welfare assistance.

74.     DMCs are encouraged to adopt policy reforms that take into account (i) the global
lessons for prioritizing the legal framework and institutional requirements, (ii) the need to
restructure to infuse competition, (iii) the need to regulate only where competition is limited, and
(iv) the need to ensure that accompanying social programs are comprehensive and fully
supported by the community and persons affected.
                                    APPENDIXES




Number   Title                                           Page   Cited on
                                                                (page, para.)



1        Other International Aid Agency Efforts           27         2, 6

2        Global Experience                                29        4, 11

3        Privatization Statistics                         33        6, 17

4        Results of Empirical Studies on Privatization    36        6, 18

5        ADB Involvement in DMC Privatization             43      14, 41

6        Privatization Results for Sri Lanka              47      20, 56
         Estate Plantations
                                                                              Appendix 1, page 1

                      OTHER INTERNATIONAL AID AGENCY EFFORTS

1.      In conjunction with macroeconomic liberalization and stabilization programs,
international aid agencies have promoted privatization as an extension of structural reforms.

2.      The World Bank Group's work on privatization has been to help governments meet the
challenges of privatization and increase the quality and number of bidders. The International
Finance Corporation focuses on the latter, while the World Bank tries to create a climate
conducive to the completion and success of these transactions. Client countries are assisted
with privatization programs in four ways: (i) advice on policy; (ii) technical assistance loans to
help develop the policy, institutional, and legal framework; (iii) adjustment loans to help
governments offset the one-time costs associated with privatization, e.g., separation payments;
and (iv) investment loans, usually providing capital to the banking system to help privatized
companies restructure. In the postprivatization environment, the services are offered to (i) help
enterprises adjust to new situations; (ii) find ways to develop equity and debt financing and other
capital market mechanisms for private and newly privatized enterprises; and (iii) assist in the
areas of enterprise governance, labor retrenchment, and the improvement of property
ownership rights. In a second area of involvement, the World Bank provides support for private
sector participation in infrastructure, reflecting the fact that globally, governments are
increasingly transforming their roles from suppliers of infrastructure services to facilitators and
regulators of services provided by private firms. Areas of assistance include advice, finance, risk
mitigation, knowledge and information, and dispute settlement. In addition, the Public-Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) has been set up to assist client governments improve
the quality of their infrastructure through private sector involvement. The PPIAF is a multifunding
agency facility, which provides technical assistance to governments and identifies and
disseminates emerging notions of best practice in a rapidly evolving area. A second support
organization, the International Forum for Utility Regulation, is improving utility regulation in
member countries through training and knowledge sharing.

3.      Since 1986, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has
monitored developments in corporate affairs covering regulation, competition, and privatization.
Under the Center for Cooperation for Nonmembers, OECD has annually brought together
administrators and privatization experts from OECD member countries, nonmember countries,
international organizations, and research institutes, to discuss privatization experiences and
problems faced. These have proved useful for understanding best practices associated with
implementing privatization.

4.       The United Nations Development Programme has, since 1997, helped countries in
Central and Eastern Europe focus on six areas: (i) democratic governance and public sector
reform aimed at creating enabling legislation; (ii) decentralization and strengthening the capacity
of local government; (iii) support for parliaments through enhancing the capacity, effectiveness,
and efficiency of parliamentary structures; (iv) ombudsman-type institutions concerned with
basic human rights issues; (v) participation and strengthening civil society through promoting
grassroots participation, including that of nongovernment organizations, in governance; and
(vi) strengthening audit and evaluation capacity through promoting transparency, accountability,
and effective management.
                                                                                            Appendix 1, page 2

5.     Other monitoring and information dissemination is organized through the Asian
Development Bank Institute,1 the European Investment Bank's Evaluation Cooperation Group,
and individual government ministries. These groups supplement university research studies,
which assess the best privatization-related approaches, levels of effectiveness, impediments,
and solutions to problems.




1
    The Asian Development Bank Institute was established in Tokyo in December 1997, and is jointly sponsored by the
    Asian Development Bank and Government of Japan for the purpose of disseminating appropriate development
    paradigms.
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 1

                                            GLOBAL EXPERIENCE

1.      Chile and New Zealand. In Chile and New Zealand, progress with privatization was
achieved against a background of extreme macroeconomic imbalance and the need for
stabilization. Both economies were governed with extensive interventions across market
sectors, and experienced high inflation and balance-of-trade deficits.1 The common approach
was to reduce government interventions in fiscal management of the economy, and increase the
role of markets and private firms. The goods market was first liberalized to eliminate tariffs, price
controls, and subsidies. Devaluation was used to stem import expenditure and stimulate
resource transfers to the export sector, and major tax reforms were also put in place.2 Next,
finance markets, foreign exchange controls, and labor markets were deregulated, and lastly a
program for divesting and reducing government ownership in public sector enterprises (PSEs)
was followed.

2.      The extent and speed of policy reforms stand out. The actual divestment program was
faster for New Zealand and substantially complete in four years. In Chile, early privatization
involved the sale of small stakes in banking and industrial groups. More complete privatization
began in 1984 with mining, forestry, electricity, and telephone companies. In both countries,
privatization used auctioning to a strategic shareholder. In New Zealand, where PSEs could
operate in competition, the approach was to divest up to 50 percent to the public through the
stock market, prior to divesting the balance to a strategic operator by way of closed tender. In
the case of New Zealand Telecom, the Government retained a "golden share" to ensure that
agreed policies for residential telephone services continued to be observed.3 In order to
demonopolize the Electric Corporation of New Zealand (ECNZ), generation, transmission, and
distribution were separated; and monopoly in local distribution was eliminated. To create a
competitive power generation sector, ECNZ was initially divided into two companies, in 1998
into four companies, followed by strategic investor sales in each to three foreign utilities. Sales
of the New Zealand Government's strategic holdings in PSEs went largely to foreign investors.

3.     For Chile, the proceeds from divestment were used primarily to support the domestic
budget; while in New Zealand, the proceeds were used almost exclusively to reduce the
Government's international debt.

4.      United Kingdom. The United Kingdom (UK) privatization program was introduced with
already developed stock exchanges and effective banking law enforcement. Like Chile and New
Zealand, privatization was introduced at a crisis time of high inflation, high taxation, and
persistent internal and external balance-of-payments disequilibria.4 Although privatization
1
    By late 1973, inflation in Chile was more than 300 percent per year, the money supply (M2) was increasing at a
    similar rate, the fiscal deficit was 22 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), unemployment stood at 5 percent,
    the current account deficit represented 7 percent of GDP, and international reserves had fallen to 1.2 months of
    imports. In 1985, inflation in New Zealand was 15.4 percent per year, M2 was increasing at an annual rate of
    32 percent, the internal budget deficit was 8 percent of GDP, unemployment was at 9 percent, the current account
    deficit stood at 15 percent, and international reserves had fallen to less than two months of imports.
2
    The exchange rates of Chile and New Zealand were handled differently. In Chile, devaluation until 1978 was linked
    to movements in the current account and the difference between domestic and foreign inflation. After 1978, a
    monthly crawling peg system was introduced; and in 1979, the peso was pegged to the US dollar. New Zealand
    devalued by 25 percent against the US dollar before floating the exchange rate, and shortly thereafter experienced
    a de facto devaluation of another 25 percent.
3
    Golden shares known as "kiwi shares" were also issued for Air New Zealand and Radio New Zealand. Investor
    undertakings are enforceable by the Government through court injunction proceedings.
4
    Disconcerting economic performance indicators were inflation running at 16 percent, interest lending rates at
    around 15 percent, productivity growth of around 0.5 percent per annum, and a growing uncompetitiveness of
    industries compared with European and Japanese counterparts.
                                                                                               Appendix 2, page 2

coincided with a serious macroeconomic imbalance, the motivation to privatize was largely
ideologically inspired and based on the need for a more equitable capital sharing of assets. The
initial emphasis was on the sale of government-subsidized low-cost housing.

5.      More than 1 million homes were sold during 1979-1981, and only the Government's
interests in British Petroleum (44 percent) and Cable and Wireless (94 percent) were divested.
In subsequent terms of office, the Government emphasized privatizing PSEs.5 Early experience
pointed to the need for deregulating the UK's banking and financial sector to open trading to a
wider range of financial institutions, including foreign banks.

6.       The general order of privatization was housing, industrial firms, infrastructure, and
utilities--the latter being privatized as complete monopolies or with limited competition. The
general approach was to float these enterprises on the stock exchange before selling the
controlling shareholding of the Government to a strategic investor. For monopolies with limited
competition, regulation was introduced to protect the public interest and ensure that surrogate
elements of competition prevailed. Share prices to the public were generally cheap, and
provided windfall gains to these investors. Management buy-outs were the next most common
method of privatization with, for example, the National Freight Corporation, British Shipbuilders,
and the National Bus Company. Significant in the UK case is the time (more than two decades)
that the privatization program has taken. It is continuing for the management of immigration
controls, prison services, police and inland revenue records, pension funds, health insurance,
and local government.

7.    To date, total proceeds from privatization exceed $120 billion. The earliest privatization
proceeds were used to finance the exchequer's budget deficit attributable to rising
unemployment.6 Thereafter, receipts have been part of consolidated revenue.

8.      Latin America. Apart from Chile, other Latin American countries, including Argentina
and Uruguay, were also preoccupied in the 1970s with reducing inflation, improving resource
allocation, and economic recovery. Adjustment programs included announcements to divest
nationalized industries.7 However, unlike Chile, other countries did not consistently follow
through the macroeconomic reforms planned. Some reforms, including removal of protection
and plans for privatization, were stalled or reversed for lack of political confidence. The hesitant
approach to privatizing arose from the fear of unemployment and social unrest. But by the end
of the 1980s, privatization was widely accepted.8 Brazil, in 1990, created a National Privatization
Program as an integral part of its economic reforms. In the first five years, the Government
stressed privatizing companies in production including the steel, fertilizer, and petrochemical
sectors. Some 83 companies were privatized with total proceeds amounting to $8.5 billion.9
Significant in this approach was the end to discrimination against foreign investment and the
use of public sector debt securities to meet initial loan financing requirements of privatized
enterprises. From 1995, emphasis was placed on privatizing the power, transport,
5
    Beginning with the selling of British Airways, British Gas, British Shipbuilders, British Leyland, Rolls Royce, and
    Amersham International (medical services); then coal mines, steelworks, water and power industries, nuclear
    power generation, hospitals, printing, ports, railways, and telecommunications.
6
    Unemployment increased from 1.2 million to 3.0 million from 1979 to 1982.
7
    The adjustment programs also included reducing protection, depreciating the exchange rate, lowering export tax,
    removing regulatory restrictions on the operations of firms, opening access to international capital flows, and
    freeing price controls on labor and key commodities. PSEs were also to be privatized.
8
    In June 1993, after a series of privatizations begun in 1985, Argentina's divestment program for the petroleum
    industry was completed with the sale of its shareholding in oil and gas giant Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales for
    $3.0 billion.
9
    During the 1980s, the Government reprivatized small companies with proceeds amounting to $780 million.
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 3

telecommunications, and financial sectors. Since 1990, privatization proceeds (including those
in Chile) have raised more than $67 billion, budget deficits have been contained, and proceeds
used to raise government expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic product.

9.      Continental Europe. Privatization in Western Europe other than the UK began seriously
in 1986.10 Industry privatization was the principal form, though some governments also looked
to the sale of government housing. The institutional framework, methods, and approach to
privatizing were similar to those of the UK. The French program from 1986 to 1988 provided for
the privatization of 66 PSEs: 42 in banking, 13 in insurance, 9 in the industry sector, and 2 in
telecommunications. About one third of the program was completed before the October 1987
stock market crash and a new President brought a halt to the program in 1993. Most other
Western European governments faced political controversy, and privatization of industry was
slow until 1989 when technical advances in telecommunications forced the issue. Privatization,
covering all economic sectors, proceeded throughout the 1990s and included large utility
monopolies. In Germany, Chancellor Kohl's Government disposed of the central stakes in VEBA
(energy), Volkswagen, VIAG (metals and chemicals), and Salzgitter (steel and engineering)--
raising DM10billion--and reduced its holding in Lufthansa to 50 percent. Governments in
Belgium and the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden followed with privatizations of SSAB (steel),
LKAB (ore mining), Vattenfalls (electric power), and Procordia (food, tobacco, and
pharmaceuticals). In 1989, Portugal expanded its 1986 plan for privatizing 510 enterprises
including those in steel, petrochemicals, paper, cement, banking, insurance, air transport, post,
and telecommunications. The 15 biggest enterprises represented one third of Portugal's gross
domestic product. Italy privatized AGIP (oil and gas exploration); SNAM (gas pipelines); Nuovo
Pignone (turbines and engineering); and in the banking sector ENI, Banca Commerciale
Italiana, and Credit Bancario San Paola di Torino (Italy's fifth largest bank). Other PSEs,
including those in electricity, telecommunications, and insurance, followed. The proceeds from
privatization in Western Europe (excluding the UK), amounting to more than $290 billion
equivalent since 1990, were primarily used to reduce budget deficits, improve institutional
efficiencies, and meet the social costs of privatization.

10.     The experience of the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe illustrates the
poor efficacy of privatization programs when insufficient attention was paid to institutional
frameworks, banking reform, and regulation to ensure that surrogate elements of competition
prevailed. Approach, scale, speed, and outcomes are in stark contrast to the way in which
privatization progressed elsewhere. Justification for rapid privatization was the belief that private
ownership through securitization of property rights11 would provide incentives for efficient
restructuring and a rapid transition to capitalism. In the Russian Federation, over 15,000
medium and large companies were privatized in only two years. In the Czech Republic, over
18,000 companies were privatized in less than four years, while between 1991 and 1996,
14 countries adopted similar rapid programs leading to the privatization of over 30,000 medium
and large companies. These programs were commonly implemented using a voucher
approach.12 Some Central and Eastern European countries, including Estonia, Hungary, and
Poland are considered successful models, but the efficacy of rapid privatization programs did
not everywhere lead to the outcomes that advocates had predicted. The Russian Federation, for

10
   After initiation in 1961 by German Chancellor Adenauer, when initial public offers were made for shares in VEBA
   and Volkswagen.
11
   Property rights have broad relevance and extend to the right of voting, behavioral rules, and incentives.
12
   The voucher approach involved distributing vouchers to all the population for free, or a nominal charge, as proxies
   for shares (stocks) in PSEs. The vouchers were transformed into certificates for share ownership through agents
   for investment funds and state-controlled auctions. The auction clearance price determined the capital value of a
   firm.
                                                                                              Appendix 2, page 4

example, suffered depressed development. Hungary and Poland, where privatization planning
took into account the need for complementary institutional restructuring, achieved higher and
more sustainable economic growth than the Czech Republic.13

11.      Another unique rapid privatization program was initiated with the unification of Germany.
A central trust institution (Treuhandanstalt) was established with ownership rights to all
companies in eastern Germany and with the mandate and powers to effect their rapid
privatization. The Treuhandanstalt's modus operandi also included provision to make decisions
for the prior restructuring of companies, and/or for providing for their closure. The emphasis was
put on implementing privatization as rapidly as possible, and in the space of two and a half
years, the Treuhandanstalt privatization process resulted in the divestment of 11,234 companies
and parts of companies,14 28,694 hectares of cultivable land, and 13,788 properties. These
divestments generated DM40.6 billion in privatization proceeds, DM173.2 billion in investment
pledges, and 1.4 million jobs. Without the Treuhandanstalt process, the object of integrating the
former Federal Republic of Germany and the Democratic Republic of Germany so as to achieve
political, social, and economic equality would not have been possible. Proceeds from
privatization were used to help meet the costs of infrastructure development and rehabilitation,
as well as the social costs of retrenchment, retraining, and relocation.

12.     Asia. Several countries have made progress with privatization, but less so than in
Europe, Latin America, and the Pacific Rim. Some Asia-Pacific nations (e.g., Bhutan, Kiribati,
and Solomon Islands) have experienced little or no privatization. Others (e.g., Bangladesh,
Pakistan, and Sri Lanka) have denationalized small businesses and secondary industry in the
same way that marked privatization in Latin America. Apart from Korea, Malaysia, Philippines,
and Singapore, most Asian nations are just beginning to address the privatization of banking,
infrastructure, transport, and welfare services.15 In Singapore, partial privatization prevails
across all economic sectors. For the transition economies of Cambodia, Myanmar, Viet Nam,
and the Central Asian republics, emphasis is on building a more enabling environment.16
(Further details of the progress on privatization among the Asian Development Bank's
developing member countries are discussed in section III of the main text.) Total proceeds from
privatization up to year 2000 are estimated to exceed $30 billion. These have predominantly
been used to meet recurrent expenditures, fund capital development, and reduce governments'
international debt.




13
   The Russian Federation and the Czech Republic failed to heed the regulatory importance of institutions in ensuring
   that privatization is implemented within an enabling environment.
14
   Including more than 2,000 companies that were privatized as management buy-outs.
15
   Korea's privatization program raised $3 billion in 1999, including $2.5 billion from the sale of American Depositary
   Receipts in Korea Telecom. Government ownership was reduced to 59 percent. Other transactions included the
   sale of its 70 percent interest in Seoul Bank and 5 percent in Korea Electric Power.
16
   Most Central Asian republics have already participated in the divestment process under mass voucher programs.
   With the collapse of the former Soviet Union, many of the privatized enterprises foundered as a result of diminished
   or collapsed market demand.
                                                                                                                                          Appendix 3, page 1

                                                        PRIVATIZATION STATISTICS
                                    Table A3.1: Country Breakdown of Amount Raised from Privatizationa
                                                            ($ million equivalent)


Country                  1990         1991         1992         1993         1994         1995         1996        1997         1998         1999b          Total

Australia                   19        1,042        1,893        2,057        2,055        8,089        9,052      16,815        7,146       15,048          63,216
        c
Austria                     32           48           49          142          700        1,035        1,300       2,654        2,426          138           8,524
Belgium                      0            0            0          956          549        2,748        1,222       1,817        2,277            0           9,569
Canadad                  1,504          808        1,249          755          490        3,998        1,770           0           11            0          10,585
Czech Republice             --           --           --           --        1,077        1,205          994         442          469          781           4,968
Denmark                    644            0            0          122          229           10          366          45        4,502           19           5,937
Finland                      0            0            0          229        1,166          363          911         835        2,068        3,645           9,217
France                       0            0            0       12,160        5,479        4,136        5,099       8,189       12,951        9,509          57,523
Germanyf                     0          325            0          435          240            0       13,228       1,125          364        6,734          22,451
Greece                       0            0            0           35           73           44          558       1,395        3,892        4,880          10,877
Hungary                     38          470          720        1,842        1,017        3,813        1,157       1,966          353           88          11,464
Iceland                      0            0           21           10            2            6            0           4          129          229             401
Ireland                      0          515           70          274            0          157          293           0            0        4,846           6,155
Italyg                       0            0            0        1,943        6,493        7,434        6,265      27,719       13,619       25,611          89,084
Japan                        0            0            0       15,919       13,773            0        6,379       4,009        6,641       14,856          61,577
Korea                        0            0            0          817        2,435          480        1,866         539          600        2,705           9,442
Luxembourg                   0            0            0            0            0            0            0           0            0            0               0
Mexico                   3,124       10,757        6,864        2,531          766          170           73       2,670          987          291          28,233
Netherlands                716          179            0          780        3,766        3,993        1,239         831          335        1,481          13,320
New Zealand              3,895           17          967          630           29          264        1,839           0          441        1,331           9,413
Norway                      73            0            0            0          118          521          660          35            0          454           1,861
Poland                      23          171          373          433          725        1,101        1,442       2,043        2,079        3,422          11,812
Portugal                 1,192        1,198        2,326          500        1,132        2,425        3,002       4,930        4,260        1,624          22,589
Spain                      172            0          820        3,223        1,458        2,941        2,679      12,522       11,618          964          36,397
Sweden                       0            0          378          252        2,313          852          785       1,055          172        2,071           7,878
Switzerland                  0            0            0            0            0            0            0           0        4,426            0           4,426
Turkey                     486          244          423          566          412          572          292         466        1,020           38           4,519
United Kingdomh         12,906       21,825          604        8,523        1,341        6,691        7,610       4,544            0            0          64,044
United States                0            0            0            0            0            0            0       3,650        3,100            0           6,750

Total OECD              24,824       37,599       16,757       55,134       47,838       53,048       70,081     100,300       85,886      100,765         592,232
of which: EU 15         15,662       24,090        4,247       29,574       24,939       32,829       44,557      67,661       58,484       61,522         363,565

Other Countries           8,516      11,605       17,458       17,983       18,436       14,551       22,026      57,155       45,153       44,000         256,883

               i
Global Total            33,340       49,204       34,215       73,117       66,274       67,599       92,107     157,455      131,039      144,765         849,115

-- = not available, EU = European Union, OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
 a
     The amounts shown are gross proceeds from direct privatizations.
 b
     Provisional.
 c
     Statistics refer only to privatizations by the central government.
 d
     There were no federal privatizations in 1997 and 1999. Provincial data are not available.
 e
     The cumulative amount for the period 1991-1993 is $2,240 million.
 f
     Up to 1997, information on trade sales is not available.
 g
     Including convertible bond issues of $2,055 million in 1996 and indirect privatizations raising $2,658 million in 1996, and $2,620 million in 1997.
 h
     Debt sales for years 1990-1997 (fiscal years) amounting to £5,347 million, £7,924 million, £8,189 million, £5,453 million, £6,429 million,
     £2,439 million, and £4,500 million, respectively.
 i
     Is not all inclusive, e.g., excludes former Soviet Union republics.
Source: World Bank Economic Indicators, 2000; 1999 data are OECD estimates.
                                                                                                  Appendix 3, page 2


                        Figure A3.1: Global Amounts Raised from Privatizationa
                      $
                   billion
                  180
                  160
                  140
                  120
                  100
                   80
                   60
                   40
                   20
                    0
                            1990   1991   1992    1993   1994    1995    1996   1997       1998   1999

                        a
                            Excluding amounts raised from former Soviet Union republics.




                   Figure A3.2: Percentage of Total Raised by Method, 1990-1999

Members of Organisation for Economic Co-                                          Other Countries
     operation and Development

                                                                                                    Public
                                                                                       a
                                                                                  Others
                                                                                  Others           Offerings
              b                                                                                       8%
      Othersa
      Others                                                                       14%
        30%




                                             Public
                                            Offerings
Trade Sales                                   62%
    8%

                                                                                                  Trade Sales
                                                                                                     78%

a
    Including management buy-outs.
                                                                               Appendix 3, page 3


             Table A3.2: Details of the World's Largest Share Offeringsa

      Date                           Company                           Country             Amount
                                                                                          ($ million)

1.    Nov 1987       Nippon Telegraph and Telephone              Japan                      40,260
2.    Oct 1988       Nippon Telegraph and Telephone              Japan                      22,400
3.    Nov 1999       ENEL                                        Italy                      18,900
4.    Oct 1998       NTT DoCoMo                                  Japan                      18,000
5.    Oct 1997       Telecom Italia                              Italy                      15,500
6.    Feb 1987       Nippon Telegraph and Telephone              Japan                      15,097
7.    Nov 1999       Nippon Telegraph and Telephone              Japan                      15,000
8.    Jun 2000       Deutsche Telekom                            Germany                    14,760
9.    Nov 1996       Deutsche Telekom                            Germany                    13,300
10.   Oct 1987       British Petroleum                           United Kingdom             12,430
11.   Apr 2000       ATT Wireless                                United States              10,600
12.   Nov 1998       France Telecom                              France                     10,500
13.   Nov 1997       Telstra                                     Australia                  10,530
14.   Oct 1999       Telstra                                     Australia                  10,400
15.   Jun 1999       Deutsche Telekom                            Germany                    10,200
16.   Dec 1990       Regional Electricity Companiesb             United Kingdom              9,995
17.   Dec 1991       British Telecom                             United Kingdom              9,927
18.   Jun 2000       Telia                                       Sweden                      8,800
19.   Dec 1989       United Kingdom Water Authorities b          United Kingdom              8,679
20.   Dec 1986       British Gas                                 United Kingdom              8,012
21.   Jun 1998       Endesa                                      Spain                       8,000
22.   Jul 1997       ENI                                         Italy                       7,800
23.   Apr 2000       Oracle Japan                                Japan                       7,500
24.   Jul 1993       British Telecom                             United Kingdom              7,360
25.   Oct 1993       Japan Railroad East                         Japan                       7,312
26.   Dec 1998       Nippon Telegraph and Telephone              Japan                       7,300
27.   Oct 1997       France Telecom                              France                      7,080
28.   Jul 1999       Credit Lyonnais                             France                      6,960
29.   Feb 1994       Elf Acquitaine                              France                      6,823
30.   Jun 1997       Halifax Building Society                    United Kingdom              6,813
31.   Jun 1998       ENI                                         Italy                       6,740
32.   May 1994       Autoliv Sverige                             Sweden                      5,818
33.   Oct 1996       ENI                                         Italy                       5,864
34.   Oct 1998       Swisscom                                    Switzerland                 5,600
35.   Jul 1999       United Parcel Service                       USA                         5,500

a
  As at 15 August 2000. The 10 largest issues (and 30 of the 35 total) are offerings of shares
  in privatized firms. Private sector offerings are presented in bold type. Amounts reported
  are at the time of the issue.
b
  Indicates a group offering of multiple companies that trade separately after the initial public
  offering.
Source: Megginson and Netter. 2000. "From State to Market: A Study of Empirical Studies
          on Privatization," Journal of Economic Literature .
                                                RESULTS OF EMPIRICAL STUDIES ON PRIVATIZATION
                                        Summary of Recent Academic Studies of Privatization that Examine the
                                       Relative Performance of State-Owned Versus Privately-Owned Companies

Study                          Sample Description, Study Period, and Methodology                            Summary of Empirical Findings and Conclusions
1
Boardman and Vining         Examines the economic performance of the 500 largest non-United         Finds that state-owned firms and MOEs are significantly less profitable and
(1989)                      States firms in 1983, classified by ownership structure as state        less productive than privately-owned companies. Also finds that MOEs are
                            owned, privately owned, or MOEs. Employs four profitability ratios      no more profitable than pure state-owned companies--so full private
                            and two measures of efficiency.                                         ownership is required to gain efficiency.
2
Boardman and Vining         Asks whether ownership "matters" in determining the efficiency of       After adjusting for size, market share, and other factors, finds that private
(1992)                      state-owned enterprises, or whether only the degree of competition is   firms are significantly more profitable and efficient than MOEs and PSEs,
                            important. Presents a performance model using 1986 data from the        though now finds that MOEs outperform PSEs. Thus, ownership has an
                            500 largest nonfinancial Canadian companies--including 12 PSEs          effect separable from competition alone.
                            and 93 mixed enterprises.
3
Levis                       Examines long-run returns on 806 UK IPOs during 1980-1988.              While private sector IPOs underperformed the market by over 10 percent
(1993)                      Sample includes 12 public sector IPOs, accounting for 76 percent of     over three years, public sector IPOs outperformed the market by over
                            total IPO value.                                                        15 percent.
4
Menyah, Paudyal, and        Examines initial and long-term returns on 40 UK public sector IPOs      Finds a significant positive 33 percent market return for public sector IPOs
Inganyete                   and 75 private sector IPOs executed on the London Stock Exchange        versus an insignificant 3.5 percent return for private sector IPOs.
(1995)                      between 1981 and 1991.
5
Ramamurti                   Survey studies of one toll-road, two airline, and four                  Concludes that privatization is very positive for telecommunications, partly
(1996)                      telecommunications privatization programs in Latin America during       due to scope for technology, capital investment, and attractiveness of offer
                            1987-1991. Also discusses political-economy issues, and methods         terms. Much less scope for productivity improvements for airlines and
                            used to overcome bureaucratic and ideological opposition to             roads, and little improvement observed.
                            divestment.
6
Boles de Boer and           Estimates the impact of the 1987 deregulation and 1990 privatization    Finds significant declines in the price of telephone services, due mostly to
Evans                       of Telecom New Zealand on the price and quality of telephone            productivity growth and a significant improvement in service levels. Initial
(1996)                      services. Also examines whether investors benefited.                    shareholders also benefit significantly.
7
Petrazzini and Clark        Using International Telecommunications Union data through 1994,         Both deregulation and privatization are associated with significant
(1996)                      tests whether deregulation and privatization impact the level and       improvements in the level and growth in teledensity, but have no consistent
                            growth in teledensity (main lines per 100 people), prices, service      impact on service quality. Deregulation is associated with lower prices and
                            quality, and employment by telecommunications in 26 developing          increased employment; privatization has the opposite effect.
                            countries.
8
Barberis, Boycko,           Surveys 452 shops sold in the Russian Federation in the early 1990s     Finds that the presence of new owners and managers raises the likelihood
Shleifer, and Tsukanova     to measure the importance of alternative channels through which         of value-increasing restructuring. Finds that equity incentives do not
(1996)                      privatization promotes restructuring.                                   improve performance; instead, points to the importance of new human
                                                                                                    capital in economic transformation.
IPO = initial public offering, MOE = mixed-ownership enterprise, PSE = public sector enterprise, UK = United Kingdom.
Study                          Sample Description, Study Period, and Methodology                               Summary of Empirical Findings and Conclusions

9
Eckel, Eckel, and Singal    Examines the effect of the privatization of BA on the stock prices of      Stock prices of US competitors declined on average by 7 percent on BA's
(1997)                      competitors. Also tests whether fares on competitive routes declined       privatization, and fares on routes served by BA and its competitors fell by
                            after privatization. Such findings would suggest a more competitive        14.3 percent after divestment. Compensation of BA executives increased
                            BA resulting from privatization.                                           and became more closely related to performance.
10
Newberry and Pollitt        Performs a cost-benefit analysis of the 1990 restructuring and             The restructuring/privatization of CEGB was "worth it," leading to a
(1997)                      privatization of the CEGB. Compares the actual performance of the          permanent cost reduction of 5 percent per year. Producers and
                            privatized firms with a counterfactual, assuming CEGB had remained         shareholders capture all this benefit and more. Consumers and the
                            state owned.                                                               Government lose.
11
Claessens, Djankov, and     Examines determinants of performance improvements for a sample             Finds that the more concentrated the postprivatization ownership structure
Pohl                        of 706 Czech firms privatized during 1992-1995. Tests whether a            is, the higher the firm's profitability and market valuation. Large stakes
(1997)                      concentrated ownership structure or the presence of an outside             owned by strategic investors are particularly value enhancing.
                            monitor (bank or investment fund) is superior to dispersed ownership.
12
Smith, Cin, and             Using a sample with 22,735 firm-years of data drawn from the period        Finds that a 1 percentage point increase in foreign ownership is associated
Vodopivec                   of "spontaneous privatization" in Slovenia (1989-1992), examines the       with a 3.9 percent increase in value added, and for employee ownership
(1997)                      impact of foreign and employee ownership on firm performance.              with a 1.4 percent increase in valued added. Also finds that firms with
                                                                                                       higher revenues, profits, and exports are more likely to exhibit foreign and
                                                                                                       employee ownership.
13
Dyck                        Develops and tests an adverse selection model to explain the               Shows that privatized eastern German firms were much more likely to have
(1997)                      Treuhandanstalt's role in restructuring and privatizing eastern            transferred western (usually German) managers into key positions than
                            Germany's state-owned firms. In under five years, the                      were companies that remained state owned. Also finds that the
                            Treuhandanstalt privatized more than 13,800 firms and parts of firms       Treuhandanstalt emphasized sales open to all buyers rather than favoring
                            and, uniquely, had the resources to pay for restructuring itself--but      eastern Germans. Principal message: privatization programs must carefully
                            almost never chose to do so. Instead, it emphasized speed and sales        consider when and how to carry out managerial replacement in privatized
                            to existing western firms over giveaways and sales to capital funds.       companies. Plans that are open to western buyers and that allow
                            Rationalizes the Treuhandanstalt's approach.                               management change are most likely to improve firm performance.
14
Earle                       Investigates the impact of ownership structure on the (labor)              Regressions show a positive impact of private (relative to state) share
(1998)                      productivity of industrial firms in the Russian Federation. Using 1994     ownership on labor productivity, with this result due primarily to managerial
                            survey data, examines differential impact of insider, outsider, or state   ownership. However, only outsider ownership is significantly associated
                            ownership on the performance of 430 firms--of which 86 remained            with productivity improvements. Stresses that leaving insiders in control of
                            100 percent state owned, 299 were partially privatized, and 45 were        firms, while politically expedient, has very negative long-term implications
                            newly created. Adjusts empirical methods to account for tendency of        for the restructuring of industry in the Russian Federation.
                            insiders to claim dominant ownership in the best firms being divested.
15
Davidson                    Studies 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-year market-adjusted returns for SIPs from      Finds that, after a long period of underperformance, averaging 1-1.5 percent
(1998)                      five European countries (Austria, France, Italy, Spain, and UK)            per year, SIPs outperformed European market averages during the
                            through March 1997.                                                        previous 12 months.


BA = British Airways, CEGB = Central Electricity Generating Board, SIP = share-issue privatization, UK = United Kingdom, US = United States.
Study                        Sample Description, Study Period, and Methodology                           Summary of Empirical Findings and Conclusions

16
Foerster and Karolyi      Examines long-run return for 333 non-US companies that list stock     Finds insignificantly positive three-year abnormal returns for the 77 SIPs
(1998)                    on US markets in the form of ADRs during 1982-1996. Compares          compared to (insignificantly) negative returns of -1.7 percent for the full
                          returns for 77 SIPs (38 IPOs, 39 existing) with private offers.       sample of 333 non-US companies.
17
Verbrugge, Megginson,     Studies terms of offer and share ownership results globally for       Finds only moderate performance improvements in Organisation for
and Lee                   65 banks fully or partially privatized from 1981 to 1996. Then        Economic Co-operation and Development countries. Ratios proxying for
(1998)                    compares pre- and postprivatization performance for 32 banks in       profitability, fee income (noninterest income as a fraction of total), and
                          Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries      capital adequacy increase significantly, while the debt leverage ratio
                          and five in developing countries.                                     declines significantly. Finds significantly positive initial returns to IPO
                                                                                                investors.
18
La Porta and López-de-    Tests whether the performance of 218 PSEs privatized across           Output of privatized firms increased by 54.3 percent, while employment
Silanes                   90 countries through June 1992 improves after divestment.             declined by half (though wages for remaining workers increased). Firms
(1999)                    Compares performance with industry-matched firms, and splits          achieved a 24 percentage point increase in operating profitability,
                          improvements documented between industry- and firm-specific           eliminating the need for subsidies equal to 12.7 percent of gross domestic
                          influences.                                                           product. Higher product prices explain 5 percent of the improvement;
                                                                                                transfers from retrenched workers, 31 percent; and incentive-related
                                                                                                productivity gains, the remaining 64 percent.
19
Weiss and Nikitin         Performs econometric analysis of the effects of ownership by          Finds that ownership concentration and composition jointly affect
(1999)                    investment funds on the performance of 125 privatized Czech firms     performance of privatized firms. Concentration of ownership in the hands of
                          during 1993-1995. Assesses these effects by measuring the             a large shareholder, other than an investment fund or company, is
                          relationship between changes in performance and changes in the        associated with significant performance improvements (for all measures of
                          composition of ownership at the start of the privatization period.    performance). Concentrated ownership by funds did not improve firm
                                                                                                performance.
20
Claessens and Djankov     Examines the relationship between ownership concentration and         Finds that concentrated ownership is associated with higher profitability
(1999)                    corporate performance for 706 privatized Czech firms during the       and labor productivity. Also find that foreign strategic owners and nonbank-
                          period 1992-1997. Uses profitability and labor productivity as        sponsored investment funds improve performance more than bank-
                          indicators of corporate performance.                                  sponsored funds.
21
Frydman, Gray, Hessel,    Compares the performance of privatized and state-owned firms in the   Privatization "works," but only when the firm is controlled by outside owners
and Rapaczynski           transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe, and asks the      (other than managers or employees). Privatization adds over
(1999)                    question: "When does privatization work?" Examines the influence of   18 percentage points to the annual growth rate of a firm sold to a domestic
                          ownership structure on performance using a sample of 90 state-        financial company, and 12 percentage points to a firm sold to a foreign
                          owned and 128 privatized companies in the Czech Republic,             buyer. Privatization to an outside owner also adds about 9 percentage
                          Hungary, and Poland. Employs panel data regression methods to         points to productivity growth. Finds that insider-controlled firms are less
                          isolate ownership effects.                                            likely to restructure, and that outsider-controlled firms grow faster.




ADR = American Depositary Receipt.
Study                      Sample Description, Study Period, and Methodology                               Summary of Empirical Findings and Conclusions

22
Djankov                 Investigates the relationship between ownership structure and              Show that foreign ownership is positively associated with enterprise
(1999a)                 enterprise restructuring for 960 firms privatized in five newly            restructuring at high ownership levels (>30 percent), while managerial
                        independent states and the Russian Federation between 1995 and             ownership is positively related to restructuring at low (<10 percent) or high
                        1997. Employs survey data collected by the World Bank in late 1997         levels, but negative at intermediate levels. Employee ownership is
                        from Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russian                beneficial to labor productivity at low ownership levels, but is otherwise
                        Federation, and Ukraine.                                                   insignificant.
23
Djankov                 Using the same survey data as in Djankov (1999a) above, studies            Privatization through management buy-outs is positively associated with
(1999b)                 effects of different privatization modalities on the restructuring         enterprise restructuring, while voucher-privatized firms do not restructure
                        process in Georgia (92 firms) and Moldova (149 firms). Georgia             more rapidly than firms that are still state owned. Implies that managers
                        employed voucher privatization, while the majority of Moldovan firms       who gain ownership for free may have less incentive to restructure, as their
                        were acquired by investment funds (and numerous others were sold           income is not solely based on the success of the enterprise.
                        to managers for cash).
24
La Porta, López-de-     Using data from 92 countries, examine whether government                   Finds that government ownership is extensive, especially in the poorest
Silanes, Shleifer       ownership of banks impacts the level of financial system                   countries, and that these holdings retard financial system development and
(2000)                  development, rate of economic growth, and growth rate of                   economic growth rates, mostly due to impacts on productivity.
                        productivity.
25
Wallsten                Performs an econometric analysis of the effects of                         Competition is significantly associated with increases in per capita access
(2000)                  telecommunications reforms in developing countries. Using a panel          and decreases in cost. Privatization alone is not helpful, unless coupled
                        dataset of 30 African and Latin American countries from 1984 to            with effective, independent regulation. Competition with privatization is
                        1997, explores the effects of privatization, competition, and regulation   best. Increasing competition is the single best reform. Privatizing a
                        on telecommunications performance.                                         monopoly without regulatory reforms should be avoided.
26
Boardman, Laurin, and   Compares the three-year average postprivatization financial and            Finds that profitability, measured as the return on sales or assets, more
Vining                  operating performance ratios to the five-year preprivatization values      than doubles after privatization, while efficiency and sales also increase
(2000)                  for nine Canadian firms privatized from 1988 to 1995. Also computes        significantly (though less substantially). Leverage and employment decline
                        long-run (up to five-year) stock returns for divested firms.               considerably, while capital spending increases appreciably. Privatized firms
                                                                                                   also significantly outperform the Canadian stock market over all long-term
                                                                                                   holding periods.
27
Frydman, Hessel, and    Examines whether privatized Central and Eastern European firms             Finds that all state and privatized firms engage in similar types of
Rapaczynski             controlled by outside investors are more entrepreneurial--in terms of      restructuring, but that product restructuring by firms owned by outside
(2000)                  ability to increase revenues--than firms controlled by insiders or the     investors is significantly more effective, in terms of revenue generation,
                        state. Study employs survey data from a sample of                          than product restructuring by firms with other types of ownership.
                        506 manufacturing firms in the Czech Republic, Hungary, and                Concludes that the more entrepreneurial behavior of outsider-owned firms
                        Poland.                                                                    is due to the incentive effects, rather than the human capital effects of
                                                                                                   privatization--specifically, the greater readiness to take risks.
Study       Sample Description, Study Period, and Methodology                              Summary of Empirical Findings and Conclusions

28
Harper   Examines the effects of privatization on the financial and operating     Finds that the first wave of privatization yielded disappointing results. Real
(2000)   performance of 174 firms privatized in the first wave, and 380 firms     sales, profitability, efficiency, and employment all fell significantly. However,
         divested in the second wave, of the Czech Republic's voucher             second-wave firms experienced appreciable increases in efficiency and
         privatizations of 1992 and 1994. Compares results for privatized firms   profitability and the decline in employment, though still considerable, was
         with those that remained state owned. Employs Megginson, Nash,           much less than after the first wave (-17 percent versus -41 percent).
         and van Randenborgh (1994) methodology and variables to measure
         changes.
                                                                              Appendix 4, page 6

Empirical Study References

Aggarwal, Raj and Joel T. Harper, 2000. "Privatization and Business Valuation in Transition
      Economies," in Financial Innovation and the Welfare of Nations. L.L. Jacque and P.M.
      Valles, eds. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publications.

Barberis, Nicholas, Maxim Boycko, Andrei Shleifer, and Natalia Tsukanova. 1996. "How Does
       Privatization Work? Evidence from the Russian Shops," Journal of Political Economy 104,
       pp. 764-790.

Boardman, Anthony E., Claude Laurin, and Aidan R. Vining. 2000. "Privatization in Canada:
      Operating, Financial, and Stock Price Performance with International Comparisons,"
      Working Paper, University of British Columbia: Vancouver.

Boardman, Anthony E., and Aidan R. Vining. 1989. "Ownership and Performance in Competitive
      Environments: A Comparison of the Performance of Private, Mixed, and State-Owned
      Enterprises," Journal of Law and Economics 32, pp. 1-33.

Boles de Boer, David and Lewis Evans. 1996. "The Economic Efficiency of Telecommunications
       in a Deregulated Market: The Case of New Zealand," Economic Record 72, pp. 24-35.

Claessens, Stijn and Simeon Djankov. 1999b. "Ownership Concentration and Corporate
      Performance in the Czech Republic," Journal of Comparative Economics 27, pp. 498-513.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Gerhard Pohl. 1997. Ownership and Corporate
      Governance: Evidence from the Czech Republic, Policy Research Paper 1737.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.

Dyck, I.J. Alexander. 1997. "Privatization in Eastern Germany: Management Selection and
       Economic Transition," American Economic Review 87, pp. 565-597.

Earle, John S. 1998. "Privatization, Competition, and Budget Constraints: Disciplining Enterprises
        in Russia," SITE Working Paper 128, Stockholm: Stockholm School of Economics.

Eckel, Catherine, Doug Eckel, and Vijay Singal. 1997. "Privatization and Efficiency: Industry
       Effects of the Sale of British Airways," Journal of Financial Economics 43, pp. 275-298.

Frydman, Roman, Cheryl Gray, Marek Hessel, and Andrzej Rapaczynski. 1999. "When Does
      Privatization Work? The Impact of Private Ownership on Corporate Performance in
      Transition Economies," Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1153-1191.

Frydman, Roman, Marek Hessel, and Andrzej Rapaczynski. 2000. "Why Ownership Matters?
      Entrepreneurship and the Restructuring of Enterprises in Central Europe," C.V. Starr
      Center for Applied Economics Working Paper, New York: New York University.

Harper, Joel T. 2000. "The Performance of Privatized Firms in the Czech Republic," Working
       Paper, Boca Raton: Florida Atlantic University.

La Porta, Rafael and Florencio López-de-Silanes. 1999. "Benefits of Privatization: Evidence from
       Mexico," Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:4, pp. 1193-1242.
                                                                             Appendix 4, page 7

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000. "Government
     Ownership of Banks," Working Paper 7620. National Bureau of Economic Research.
     Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Megginson, William L., Robert C. Nash, and Matthias van Randenborgh. 1994. "The Financial
      and Operating Performance of Newly Privatized Firms: An International Empirical
      Analysis," Journal of Finance 49, pp. 403-452.

Megginson and Netter. 2000. "From State to Market: A Study of Empirical Studies on
      Privatization," Journal of Economic Literature.

Newbery, David and Michael G. Pollitt. 1997. "The Restructuring and Privatization of Britain's
     CEGB: Was it Worth it?," Journal of Industrial Economics 45, pp. 269-303.

Petrazzini, Ben A. and Theodore H. Clark. 1996. "Costs and Benefits of Telecommunications
       Liberalization in Developing Countries," Working Paper. Hong Kong University of Science
       and Technology.

Pohl, Gerhard, Robert E. Anderson, Stijn Claessens, and Simeon Djankov. 1997. Privatization
       and Restructuring in Central and Eastern Europe: Evidence and Policy Options, Working
       Paper: World Bank Technical Paper 368. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Ramamurti, Ravi. 1996. "The New Frontier of Privatization," in Privatizing Monopolies: Lessons
     from the Telecommunications and Transport Sectors in Latin America, Ravi Ramamurti,
     ed., Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 1-45.

Salej, Stefan Bogdan. 1998. "Privatization Methods and Their Impact on Competition: The
       Brazilian Experience," Paper for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
       Development (OECD) Advisory Group on Privatization, Twelfth Plenary Session.

Salsa, Pablo. 1998. "Privatizing Network Industries: The Competition Policy Perspective." Paper
       for OECD Advisory Group on Privatization, Twelfth Plenary Session.

Serra, Pablo, and Stuart Holder. 1998. "Evidence from Utility and Infrastructure Privatization in
       Chile and the United Kingdom." Papers for OECD Advisory Group on Privatization,
       Twelfth Plenary Session.

Smith, Stephen C., Beon-Cheol Cin, and Milan Vodopivec. 1997. "Privatization Incidence,
       Ownership Forms, and Firm Performance: Evidence from Slovenia," Journal of
       Comparative Economics 25, pp. 158-179.

Verbrugge, James A., William L. Megginson, and Wanda Lee. 1998. "The Financial Performance
      of Privatized Banks: An Empirical Analysis," Working Paper. Athens: University of
      Georgia.

Weiss, Andrew and Georgiy Nikitin. 1999. "Effects of Ownership by Investment Funds on the
       Performance of Czech Firms," Working Paper. Boston: Boston University.
                                                                              Appendix 5, page 1

                             ADB INVOLVEMENT IN DMC PRIVATIZATION

1.      Privatization in developing member countries (DMCs) of the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) has varied in political commitment and extent of reform. ADB support for privatization
began around 1984 as a reflection of the individual development plans of DMCs, and guided by
strategic considerations reflecting the limited resources of ADB for promoting economic
development. Between 1984 and the early 1990s, most DMC development plans showed an
increased focus on industrial development through the private sector. Improving the enabling
environment so that the private sector could operate more effectively became an integral part of
ADB's loan and technical assistance (TA) support.

2.      Development plans of Bangladesh, Malaysia, and Pakistan in the mid-1980s included
specific provision for privatization. In the case of Bangladesh, many jute and textile mills had
already been divested, and it was planned to transfer undertakings of a commercial value
among the statutory corporations to the private sector. In Malaysia, the privatization of major
public sector activities included plans for airline divestment, and for the leasing of management
operations for Port Klang to the private sector. Legislation that would enable to transfer the
assets, rights, and liabilities of telecommunications to a successor corporation from the private
sector was also planned. Pakistan's Sixth Five-Year Plan (1983/84-1987/80) included provision
for a divestment commission to identify public sector enterprises (PSEs) to be sold to the private
sector, and a deregulation commission to reduce restrictions on the setting up of industries,
remove unnecessary controls, and privatize power distribution. The general approach of ADB to
these DMC plans for privatization was to support the need for economic restructuring and to
give priority to lending and TA that addressed economic stabilization, as well as showed
promise to enhance agricultural production and self sufficiency in essential food grains and/or
promoted export revenues. Priority was also given to developing the energy sector, physical and
social infrastructure, and improving the availability of finance to expand industrial production.

3.      Unlike Malaysia, progress toward privatization reform and divestment of the monopoly
enterprises in Bangladesh and Pakistan has been slow. Lack of political commitment and
general resistance from the bureaucracy and labor unions of the PSEs have impeded progress.
Even so, privatization remains a stated commitment. In Bangladesh, the government has
declared a policy of allowing private sector power generation companies to set up, produce, and
sell power to publicly-owned utilities. The telecommunications sector is being privatized slowly
and a number of private mobile operators have established businesses. The government is
currently considering private sector participation in improving existing ports and developing new
ports, and has agreed to partly privatize its national flag carrier (Biman Airways). Reforms are
under way for privatizing public sector banks and insurance companies. In the case of Pakistan,
privatization by attrition has increased the number of independent power producers to 19. The
government retains ownership and management operations of the major ports, railways,
airlines, gas and oil production and distribution, power transmission and distribution, the major
operations of the banking sector, and telecommunications. Presently, the Privatization
Commission is overseeing the divestment of government holdings including 93 percent in
Pakistan Petroleum Limited, 35 percent in Pakistan Oilfields, 35 percent in Attock Refinery, and
26-51 percent in Oil and Gas Development Corporation. Associated with the government's
intention to divest its holdings in the oil and gas sector has been the establishment of an
independent regulator in the National Gas Regulatory Authority. The monopoly of Pakistan
Telecommunications Corporation Limited is planned to end in 2002.1 In the transport sector, the
restructuring and privatization of the Pakistan Railways and Pakistan National Shipping

1
    Twelve percent was divested in 1994.
                                                                              Appendix 5, page 2

Corporation is under preparation. For the financial sector, the Government has concrete plans
for the sale of its interests, but delays have become commonplace. Two large commercial
banks, Muslim Commercial Bank and Allied Bank, were privatized in 1991 and Banker's Equity
in 1996. Habib Credit and Exchange was approved for privatization in 1997 through sale to
strategic investors either in whole or in parts, but several deadlines for expressions of interest
have passed without credible buyers emerging. Several more PSE banks have been scheduled
for privatization in 2000 and 2001. The poor macroeconomic situation, policy environment, and
high-risk perception by international investors are the main reasons hampering the privatization
process in the financial sector. ADB's loan and TA support to Bangladesh and Pakistan has
focused on enterprise restructuring, legal redress, governance, and capital market development.
Advisory studies for developing regulatory systems have also been supported. On a broader
macroeconomic front, ADB has, in conjunction with the International Monetary Fund's
stabilization programs, provided important policy-based loans aimed at restructuring the
financial, oil and gas, and power sectors. The loans have included specific provisioning for
privatization.

4.      Similar reasoning to promote economic development has applied to the Philippines and
Thailand. The Philippines development plan of 1984-1987 included plans to privatize the
Philippine National Oil Company, the National Food Authority, the Fertilizer and Pesticides
Authority, and the Philippine National Bank. Successive governments gave emphasis to the
quick and efficient divestment of some 600 PSEs and nonperforming assets. Further prominent
examples include Fort Bonifacio property ($1.5 billion), 60 percent of Petron Corporation
($970 million), Philippine Airlines, and National Steel Corporation. In recent years, in order to
meet the large capital expenditure requirements in the utilities and transport sector, promotion of
public-private partnerships has been favored. ADB has promoted predivestment support for the
restructuring and privatization of Manila Ports Authority, and Manila Waterworks and Sewerage
System. Direct loan and advisory support, together with an innovative political risk insurance,
was provided for the Manila North Tollway. Thailand's five-year development plan for 1986-1991
did not reflect the same state of readiness for privatization, but included a program for
continuing to focus on restructuring the economy, and retrenching the public sector. Plans also
included promoting the private sector to achieve increased export revenues, and
complementary loan support was provided by ADB to promote the private sector's participation
in shrimp aquaculture. In 1998, the Government of Thailand approved a master plan for State
Enterprise Sector Reform involving the privatization of PSEs in telecommunications, transport
and energy sectors, along with the privatization or partial divestiture of a further 29 PSEs in the
commercial and industrial sectors. ADB has financed preparatory studies for the privatization of
electricity distribution, oil production and distribution, and water supply.

5.       Sri Lanka in the mid-1980s expressed commitment to private sector development,
including privatization, but with no specific development program. Privatization gained impetus
in 1992, assisted by ADB's loan and TA support for the divestment of 14 regional plantation
corporations on the Colombo Stock Exchange (Appendix 6). Development strategy of the
Republic of Korea stressed economic liberalization and the promotion of private initiative as a
necessary condition for sustaining economic growth. Policy reforms included freeing import
restrictions, lowering tariffs, deregulating interest rates, and discontinuing credit allocation to
select industries and sectors. Privatization per se was not contemplated but private sector
development was to be encouraged through channeling ADB and other donor funds through
development finance institutions for industrial and private sector expansion. Restrictions on
public sector investment, accompanied by extending responsibility to the private sector, was a
stated intention. The Republic of Korea ceased to be an active borrower from ADB from 1988
                                                                                             Appendix 5, page 3

until the financial crisis of 1997 when ADB's major financial sector loan included provision for
progressing privatization reforms.2

6.      The smaller DMCs such as Lao PDR, Maldives, Nepal, and Papua New Guinea,
variously stressed in their development plans support for self sufficiency in food production and
improvement in basic infrastructure including transport, communications, power generation, and
distribution. The Maldives and Nepal also gave emphasis to development of the tourist sector as
a priority to address foreign exchange imbalances. ADB's loans and TAs supported medium-
term stabilization, infrastructure development, agriculture development (except Maldives), and
resource management.

7.      India's development plans for an already large and diversified economy focused during
the mid-1980s on accelerating economic growth with an emphasis on creating employment,
improving efficiency, and productivity. Though trade liberalization was planned, India's
development plans initially were largely structured for implementation through a closed
economy. ADB's operations were designed to assist the government in its industrialization
efforts by providing finance for rehabilitation and modernization. Within manufacturing,
preference was given to private sector finance. Divestment of India's PSEs was initiated in
1990. In 1999, the government reinforced its commitment to privatization with planned gradual
divestments in Air India, telecommunications, and National Power Corporation. The privatization
of PSEs in the fertilizer industry, engineering, chemical shipbuilding, and mining are also
planned. ADB's recent loan and TA support toward privatization has been directed at capital
market development and institutional strengthening of key infrastructure enterprises.

8.       The development plans of Indonesia during the 1980s focused primarily on facilitating
economic growth through productivity improvements and diversification in the agricultural
sector. Emphasis was also placed on expanding infrastructure for roads, energy, housing and
water, and strengthening the capacity of public executing agencies. Improving the financial
viability of public entities was a stated objective, but little attention was paid to promoting private
sector development, or expanding and improving the industrial sector, which operated behind
high protective barriers and with often substantial excess capacity. Concerted efforts to open
the economy commenced in the late 1980s, particularly through liberalization of the trade and
investment regimes as well as of the financial sector. Both of these areas received extensive
ADB support. ADB's loans and TAs mirrored support for the government's development plans.
After 1996, an increasing focus was given in the government's development plans for creating a
more enabling environment for private sector participation including the financing and operation
of infrastructure facilities. ADB's support is evident in loans aimed at enhancing the
competitiveness of small and medium enterprises, and TAs for reforms in financial
management, governance, and deregulation. Apart from moves to deregulate Indonesia's
banking sector, the required political commitment for divesting PSEs has not been unanimous.

9.     When the People's Republic of China became a member of ADB in 1986, the
government was emphasizing the process of reforming the structure of the economy. Reforms
included improving PSE management and incentives; increasing management autonomy in
production, pricing, and employment; increasing competition and accountability for performance;
and reforming human resource policy. The government's plans also included divesting small
PSEs to collective or individual management. ADB's assistance supported these goals through
loan assistance for enhancing the efficiency of PSEs in the energy and industry sectors, and
advancing credit to banking institutions for development investment. TA was predominantly for

2
    Loan 1601-KOR: Financial Sector Program, for $4 billion, approved on 19 December 1997.
                                                                                Appendix 5, page 4

institutional strengthening in the same areas. After 1995, ADB's TA included advisory support
for build-operate-transfer projects in power and water supply, restructuring of insolvent PSEs,
power sector restructuring, as well as capital market and trade law reforms.

10.    A generally stated intention to improve the efficiency of PSEs through privatization has
been a feature of the development plans of several Pacific DMCs since the mid-1980s. The
plans also focused on monetary policy and economic stabilization reforms. ADB's TA support
included studies for the privatization of PSEs, capital market development, and
commercialization and corporatization of monopoly enterprises. Whole or partial divestment has
since occurred for airlines, forestry, communications, civil aviation, water and ports (mainly Fiji).

11.     The Central Asian Republics and Mongolia, all newer DMCs, are countries where the
consequences of mass privatization in the 1990s did not live up to expectations and resulted in
social hardships. Empirical studies attribute failings to the insufficient attention to the need for
structural reforms in governance, judicial, banking, and regulatory frameworks. ADB loans and
TAs have predominantly aimed at rectifying weaknesses in these areas.

12.    Specific assistance toward privatization of PSEs has accompanied ADB private sector
operations, through the provision of both loan and equity finance. Recent examples include the
Bhutan National Bank, SBI Capital Markets (India), Karachi Electric Supply Corporation,
Hopewell Power (Philippines) Corporation, Batangas Power Corporation, Maynilad Water
Services (Philippines), Manila North Tollways Corporation, the Trade Development Bank of
Mongolia, and Uzbekistan Telecommunications. Of significance is the increasing need among
DMCs for advisory assistance as a prelude to providing loan and equity finance.
                                                                                   Appendix 6, page 1

               PRIVATIZATION RESULTS FOR SRI LANKA ESTATE PLANTATIONS

1.     Traditionally, tea, rubber, and coconut play an important economic role in Sri Lanka.
Currently, tea accounts for around 75 percent of the total export revenues generated by the
country's three plantation crops. The plantation industry was nationalized during 1972-1975,
and the management of nationalized estates placed in the hands of two government-owned
corporations, Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation (SLSPC) and Janatha Estate Development
Board (JEDB).

2.     Heavy taxation and weak financial discipline led to a deterioration in the performance of
SLSPC and JEDB, which had to rely heavily on long-term loans to meet working capital
requirements. The debt-equity ratios of the two entities were between 200 percent and
300 percent in 1992, and operating losses were approximately SLRs1.5 billion per annum.

3.      In 1992, the Government began the process of privatization. The first phase completed
that year was the privatization of the management of government-owned tea, rubber, and
coconut land. Four hundred and sixty-five estates managed by SLSPC and JEDB were
constituted into 23 regional plantation companies (RPCs), and management of these companies
was privatized on the basis of a five-year contract in 1992. The ownership of the companies
remained with the Government. Subsequently in 1994/95, the Government went ahead with
privatizing the RPCs by transferring a 50-year lease of the government-owned land to the RPCs
and divesting the RPCs to the private sector. The privatization was carried out by offering the
management agents of all RPCs the option to purchase 51 percent of the shares of their
respective companies at a market-clearing price.

4.     Under private sector management from 1991 to 1998, average tea yields increased from
1,086 kilograms (kg) per hectare (ha) to 1,495 kg, an increase of 38 percent. At the national
aggregate level, total production of tea increased from 231 million kg in 1993 to 280 million kg in
1998, or by 30 percent.1 Labor productivity, which before privatization was the lowest among
tea-producing countries, improved from 3.2 to 2.5 persons per ha.

                         Table A6.1: A Pre- and Postprivatization Comparison
                         --The Example of Sri Lanka's Tea Plantation Industry

Performance Indicator                             Before         Six Years After           Change
                                                             a
                                               Privatization      Privatization           (percent)


Average yield per ha                               1,086             1,495                 +37.7
Total production in million kg                       205               280                 +36.6
Exports in million kg                                210b              272                 +29.5
Labor per ha                                          3.2               2.5                -22.0

ha = hectare, kg = kilogram.
a
  1992 figures.
b
  1993 figure.




1
    Source: Planters' Association of Ceylon.
                                                                                Appendix 6, page 2

5.      Sri Lanka's rubber production increased from 106 million kg in 1995 to 113 million kg in
1996, but a declining trend has followed since. The reason for this decline is the collapse of the
international rubber markets following the Asian financial crisis and the resultant devaluation of
the currencies of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.

6.      Coconut production and exports show a similar trend, with production increasing from
2,546 million nuts in 1996 to 2,631 million nuts in 1997, and thereafter declining to 2,547 million
nuts in 1998.

7.      Fourteen of the 23 RPCs are quoted on the Colombo Stock Market and have added
value to the market by increasing total market capitalization. However, the overall effectiveness
of privatization is not as good as it could have been. Prior to privatization, the plantation estates
were heavily in debt to the state banks and unable to service mortgages. With privatization, the
land and fixed assets remained under government ownership and the plantation operations
were leased to the private sector. As the state banks were already overexposed to the
plantation sector, further lending for plantation development was unavailable and dependent on
the leaseholder infusing capital raised on external collateral. This method restricted not only the
availability of bidders but also curtailed the scope of plantation development needed. At the
same time, the debts of the Government to the state banks remained and, indirectly, restricted
the availability of local funding for general private sector development. From the perspective of
freeing up capital in the economy, privatization would have been more effective if the land and
fixed assets had been divested.

8.      Asset transfer constraints apart, private sector knowledge and capital, along with funding
from agencies, helped spur productivity through soil regeneration, new planting of high-yielding
teas, systematic application of fertilizers, systematic replanting and infilling, better plucking
practices, and linking wage increases to worker productivity.
