                 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
               Operations Evaluation Department




                  SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY ON

         URBAN SECTOR STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS

                                June 2006




In this electronic file, the report is followed by the Management response and
Development Effectiveness Committee Chairperson's Summary of the
Committee's Discussion on 26 July 2006.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: SST: REG 2006-03
Special Evaluation Study
June 2006




Urban Sector Strategy and Operations




Operations Evaluation Department
             ABBREVIATIONS

ADB     ­   Asian Development Bank
ADBI    ­   Asian Development Bank Institute
ADTA    ­   advisory technical assistance
AUWSP   ­   Accelerated Urban Water Supply Program
BOT     ­   build-operate-transfer
CBO     ­   community-based organization
CSP     ­   country strategy and program
DFID    ­   Department for International Development
DMC     ­   developing member country
DPR     ­   detailed project report
EA      ­   executing agency
FYP     ­   Five-Year Plan
GDP     ­   gross domestic product
GFI     ­   government financial institution
HDFC    ­   Housing Development Finance Corporation
HUDCO   ­   Housing and Urban Development Corporation
IA      ­   implementing agency
ICICI   ­   Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
IUDP    ­   integrated urban development project
JBIC    ­   Japan Bank for International Cooperation
JFPR    ­   Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction
KMC     ­   Kolkata Municipal Corporation
KUIDP   ­   Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project
LGU     ­   local government unit
MDG     ­   Millennium Development Goal
MDP     ­   municipal development project
MEPA    ­   Ministry of Employment and Poverty Alleviation
MIC     ­   middle-income country
MUD     ­   Ministry of Urban Development
MR      ­   metropolitan region
MWSP    ­   Municipal Water Supply Project
MWSS    ­   Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System
NGO     ­   nongovernment organization
NHB     ­   National Housing Bank
NURM    ­   National Urban Renewal Mission
OCR     ­   ordinary capital resources
OED     ­   Operations Evaluation Department
OEM     ­   Operations Evaluation Mission
PCR     ­   project completion report
PIU     ­   project implementation unit
PM      ­   project manager
PMU     ­   project management unit
PPAR    ­   project performance audit report
PPTA    ­   project preparatory technical assistance
PRC     ­   People's Republic of China
RM      ­   resident mission
RP      ­   resettlement plan
RRP     ­   report and recommendation of the President
RSDD    ­   Regional and Sustainable Development Department
                                                                                        iii


              RUIDP        ­       Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project
              SES          ­       special evaluation study
              SPD          ­       Strategy and Policy Department
              TA           ­       technical assistance
              TCR          ­       technical assistance completion report
              UN           ­       United Nations
              UN-HABITAT   ­       United Nations Human Settlements Programme
              USAID        ­       United States Agency for International Development
              USS          ­       Urban Sector Strategy
              WSS          ­       water supply and sanitation
              WSSWM        ­       water supply, sanitation, and waste management


                                            NOTE

                           In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




Director General      B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director              R. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

Team leader           W. Kolkma, Senior Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation
                      Division 1, OED
Team members          A. Anabo, Senior Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation
                      Division 1, OED
                      A. Alba, Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation
                      Division 1, OED

                      Operations Evaluation Department, SS-68
                                            CONTENTS
                                                                                             Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                               iii
MAP                                                                                             ix
I.        INTRODUCTION                                                                          1
          A.   Background                                                                       1
          B.   The 1999 Urban Sector Strategy                                                   1
          C.   Main Evaluation Questions                                                        2
          D.   Organization of the Study                                                        3
II.       URBANIZATION IN ASIA                                                                  6
          A.   Trends                                                                           6
          B.   Needs                                                                            8
          C.   Relation of Sector with the Millennium Development Goals                        10
III.      ADB'S FOCUS ON THE URBAN SECTOR                                                      12
          A.    Genesis of the Urban Sector Strategy                                           12
          B.    Organizational and Other Changes in ADB                                        14
IV.       ADB ASSISTANCE TO THE URBAN SECTOR                                                   17
          A.   Lending Program in Numbers and Volume                                           18
          B.   Project Developments after the Urban Sector Strategy of 1999                    22
          C.   Capacity Development in Urban Sector Projects                                   31
          D.   Technical Assistance Program                                                    33
          E.   ADB's Knowledge Management in the Urban Sector                                  35
V.        ADB ASSESSMENTS OF COMPLETED URBAN SECTOR PROJECTS                                   36
                                                                                               36
          A.   Assessment of Urban Sector Projects by Operations Departments                   36
                                                                                               36
          B.   Assessment of Completed Urban Sector Projects by OED                            39
                                                                                               39
          C.   Assessment of Completed TA Grants by Operations Departments and OED             42
                                                                                               42
          D.   Assessments of Benefits and Problems of Ongoing Projects                        43
                                                                                               43
               by Project Managers



     The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
     conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this
     report. The current Director General was involved in managing ADB's program in the People's
     Republic of China (PRC) from 1993 to 2004, and was the mission leader for two urban
     transport projects in Shanghai. He thus recused himself from the design and review of the
     PRC case study and from changing anything related to PRC operations in this report. James
     Arthur, Jose Antonio League, Narayanan Edadan, Edward Leman, and Zhang Rufei were the
     consultants. Imelda Baleta, Jennifer Simon, and Mary Grace Alindogan did background
     research and administered the questionnaire survey. Some of the consultants were earlier
     involved in ADB's urban sector technical assistance, but did not have responsibilities as loan
     project managers and did not review work in which they had been involved before. The team
     leader has not been involved in an operational capacity in ADB's urban sector before. To the
     knowledge of the management of OED, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
     preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
VI.    ADB'S ADDED VALUE: VIEWS FROM PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA,                      46
       INDIA AND PHILIPPINES
       A.    People's Republic of China                                               46
       B.    India                                                                    48
       C.    Philippines                                                              50
       D.    Conclusions from the Country Case Studies                                52
       E.    Potential Effect of ADB Policy Initiatives                               53
VII.   EVALUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                 54
       A.   Key Questions                                                             55
       B.   Rating of the Urban Sector Strategy and Urban Sector Operations           57
       C.   Suggestions for a New Urban Sector Strategy                               59
       D.   Recommendations for ADB                                                   60

APPENDIXES
1. Methodology of the Questionnaire Survey of Ongoing Urban Sector Projects           62
2. Urban Sector Projects Approved from July 1993 to June 2005                         66
3. List of All Urban Sector Related Technical Assistance Grants                       70
4. Urban Sector Needs                                                                 75
5. Asian Development Bank's Lending to the Urban Sector                               80
6. Findings from All 51 Project Completion Reports for Urban Sector Projects,         83
    Issued Between Mid-1998 and Mid-2005
7. Country Case Studies: People's Republic of China, India and Philippines             85
8. Comparison of Questionnaire Survey Findings in People's Republic of China, India   107
    and Philippines
9. Innovation and Efficiency Initiative and Other Policy and Business Process         109
    Initiatives, with Comments on Relevance for Urban Sector
10. Lessons from Urban Sector Experience                                              113
11. Lessons Drawn from 51 Project Completion Reports Issued Between 1998 and          121
    2005 in the Urban Sector

SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIXES (available on request)
A. Urban Sector Trends
B. Current Investment: Programs of Some Main External Agencies
C. Names of Asian Country Urban Ministries/Departments
D. Statistical Tables Derived from Study of 88 Reports and Recommendations of the
   President in the Urban Sector, by Period and by Subsector
E. Asian Development Bank Publications in the Urban Sector, 1993­2005, Annotated
F. Asian Development Bank Ratings of Completed Urban Sector Projects
G. An Assessment of Urban Sector Strategies
H. Executing Agency Questionnaire and Questionnaire Survey Response,
   by Subsector and by Country in the Urban Sector
I. Performance Assessments of Two Centrally Sponsored Schemes in India
J. Value Added and Lost as a Result of Asian Development Bank Involvement in
   Urban Sector Projects in India

Attachments: 1. Management Response on the Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector
                Strategy and Operations
             2. Development Effectiveness Committee
                Chairperson's Summary of the Committee's Discussion on 26 July 2006
                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       The urban sector strategy (USS) was one of several Asian Development Bank (ADB)
sector strategies formulated around the end of the 1990s, and was intended to bring more
coherence to ADB's work in the urban sector. At the time, ADB had two urban development,
water supply, and housing divisions: one for East Asia and one for West Asia. The USS took a
wide view of the scope of the urban sector and included urban water supply and sanitation,
housing, urban drainage and flood control, urban transport, urban environment, slum
improvement, sites and services, (urban) institutional strengthening and capacity building, urban
land management, urban governance, and urban finance. Poverty reduction components and
microcredit were also endorsed as part of the urban sector, when included in urban
development projects.

        The USS summarized urban challenges and presented objectives, guidelines, and good
practices. In response to rapid urbanization in Asia, the USS called for a systematic and
incremental expansion of ADB's involvement in the urban sector--in terms of the volume of
lending, the range of subsectors to be addressed, and the interrelationships of project
components. The USS also called for greater attention to poverty reduction; more community
participation in projects; more institutional strengthening and capacity development; more
private sector involvement; more policy lending; and more lending for urban transport, housing,
and land management projects. Consistent with ADB's approach to sector strategy development
at the time, the USS did not assess the resources needed to implement the strategy. The USS
highlighted the following operational objectives: (i) maximizing the economic efficiency of urban
areas, (ii) reducing urban poverty, (iii) improving quality of life, and (iv) achieving more
sustainable forms of urban development. However, these objectives were neither quantified nor
set out in a manner that could be monitored to assess progress. The USS was approved by
Management in July 1999 and sent for information to ADB's Board of Directors. The Board did
not discuss or approve it nor was there significant formal consultation with developing member
countries (DMCs) or other stakeholders in preparing it.

        ADB's Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD) planned to review
and revise the USS by the end of 2005. This was viewed necessary as some important
developments were not reflected, such as the adoption of poverty reduction as ADB's
overarching objective, the emergence of the Millennium Development Goals, and ADB's joining
of the Cities Alliance in 2002. The original USS was prepared before new guidelines on ADB
policies and strategies had been formulated, so it was viewed as lacking the appropriate
disciplined approach and procedural rigor. To provide the necessary analysis to revise the USS,
it was agreed that the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) would look at the
appropriateness and implementation of the existing strategy, while RSDD would identify and
analyze emerging urban sector trends, directions, good practices, and related issues. Revision
of the USS by RSDD is now expected to be completed in the fourth quarter of 2007.

        Given that the USS has been in effect for only 6 years and most projects approved after
it was adopted are still in various phases of implementation, this evaluation pays limited
attention to the on the ground impact of urban projects. Rather, the study analyzes ratings of
completed projects and technical assistance (TA) grants, analyzes whether the USS's targets
are being addressed, and assesses ongoing urban operations. Additional questions addressed
in the evaluation are (i) why is ADB's urban sector program not much larger than it is today,
given the rapid urbanization in the Asia Pacific region; (ii) what is the value added of ADB
involvement in urban sector projects against the transaction costs, as perceived by ADB clients;
and (iii) is a USS needed and under what conditions would it be most effective? The
iv


assessment of the changes in urban sector operations was based on a comparison of projects
approved in the 6 years before (mid-1993 to mid-1999) and after (mid-1999 to mid-2005) the
USS was adopted. The special evaluation study (SES) analyzed ADB databases, documents of
all 88 projects and 191 TA grants approved since mid-1993, and all available country urban
sector strategies. The SES also conducted a questionnaire survey of all 52 ongoing urban
sector projects (with an 85% response rate) and undertook case studies for People's Republic
of China (PRC), India and Philippines.

        Urbanization is a mega-trend in Asia. ADB's Long-Term Strategic Framework (2001­
2015) marked it as one of its main challenges. The region is in the midst of a transformation
from a rural, agriculture dominated region to an urban, industrial/service sector dominated
region. Asia has the fastest growing urban population in the world. Asia's share of global urban
population has risen from 9% in 1920 to over 48% in 2005. It is expected to exceed 50% by
2020. Asia's urban population may grow from 1.35 billion (37% of the total population) in 2000
to 1.94 billion (48%) in 2015. By 2010, 12 of the world's 23 megacities are expected to be in
Asian developing countries.

         Asia's urbanization has generally had positive effects on the countries' economies but is
also associated with serious negative externalities. There is strong evidence to suggest that
cities increase productivity, generate economic growth, and jobs. However, productivity rates
could be even higher if the efficiency of cities is enhanced. Unmanaged urbanization can lead to
poor quality of life for urban dwellers even if income poverty declines, and to significant urban
environment problems. With limited fiscal resources and poor planning, urbanization can lead to
large urban subpopulations living in squalid living conditions and abject poverty. Analysis of
current trends suggests that urban poverty and urban slum incidence in the poorer DMCs is
increasing. Financing requirements for just water supply, sanitation, and waste management
(WSSWM) and slum upgrading in urban areas may be $25 billion per annum for ADB's DMCs.
This would double to $50 billion per year if urban roads are included. Using a conservative
assumption that 100 kilometers of rail mass transit system are constructed in Asia's large cities
only, a further $10 billion per annum would have to be added to urban funding requirements.
The requirements in housing exceed all of these amounts by far. Current investment programs
of governments, external agencies, and the private sector fund no more than half of the demand
for water supply, sanitation, and urban transport. There is a pressing need for further investment
and greater capacity development of urban bodies to enable them to effectively extend, operate,
and manage these services.

        Problems related to urbanization are complex and cannot always be addressed
effectively from the perspective of a single sector. The platform offered by urban ministries and
urban governments for holistically addressing interrelated problems in different sectors offers
opportunities for effective interventions. Given the existence of such large numbers of potential
clients, there is ample scope for pursuing an urban strategy, provided that ADB can seize the
opportunity. If ADB were to maintain its position as Asia's premier development institution, going
forward would require a greater focus on urban development, which would also address many
of the poverty reduction and environment related issues.

        A major finding of this SES is that, although urbanization is increasingly driving
economic development in Asia, ADB's institutional focus on the urban sector has been lost.
One and a half years after the USS was adopted, ADB underwent reorganization and
introduced new business processes. ADB's professional expertise in the urban sector was
dissipated. The two urban sector divisions were dissolved and staff were scattered over five
new departments and four newly created regional social sector divisions, which included sector
                                                                                                 v


specialists in education, health, and other social themes. From an operational perspective, the
link between urban development, health, and education is tenuous. Housing finance and all
management and governance operations were shifted to four new governance and finance
divisions in the regional departments. The urban transport operations were to be identified by
the transport divisions, which historically focused on intercity and rural roads. The earlier
division and sector strategies were overshadowed by an increasing focus within ADB on country
strategies. ADB's water supply and sanitation operations, including those in urban areas, fell
increasingly under the framework of ADB's Water Policy, approved January 2001 by the Board
and managed by RSDD. As noted by a recent independent assessment of ADB's
reorganization, ADB's sector expertise has declined. ADB's sector classification of projects and
TA grants was streamlined in 2004. The new system did not include the urban development and
housing sector as a distinct group, leading to fewer options for monitoring the urban sector
portfolio. Urban development projects are now classified as multisector projects, a disparate
group that includes rural development projects, environment projects, and a variety of other
types of projects.

         Notwithstanding the loss of institutional focus, the urban sector portfolio grew modestly
after the issuance of the USS. Before the USS was adopted, urban sector lending constituted
9.0% of the total loans approved between 1993 and 1999 (11.0% if some large emergency
loans during the Asian Financial Crisis are excluded). After the USS was adopted, it accounted
for 11.5% of total lending from 1999 to 2005. An analysis of the pipeline suggests that this share
should increase in the future. However, in dollar terms, lending grew by only 5.9% (from an
average of $551 million per year in the 6 years before the USS to $583 million per year after)--
much less than the 15% growth in urban population in ADB's DMCs over the same period.
ADB's professional staff with an urban sector designation increased from 10 at the time the USS
was approved to 16 at present. Urban sector projects often involve many components and many
cities. These types of projects require intense supervision, which is facilitated by the increasing
number and strength of resident missions (RMs). It could be argued that the urban portfolio has
persisted in spite of the institutional dilution, and that it is due to continuing demand from DMCs
in the face of urbanization. With more institutional focus on the urban sector, ADB may be better
placed to respond to demands and opportunities and the urban portfolio could be larger than its
current size. A stronger institutional focus on the urban sector might have expanded or
strengthened ADB's knowledge products, TA, policy dialogue, project formulation, and portfolio
management. By comparison, the World Bank, with a similar sized lending program in the Asia
and Pacific region, has (i) 48 urban sector experts for this region, (ii) various urban theme
groups in the infrastructure department, (iii) urban sections in many RMs, and (iv) retained
urban development (like rural development) as one of its 11 main themes.

        Project completion reports (PCRs) show that urban multisector projects have generally
performed well, with 81% rated successful or highly successful between 1995 and 2005.
WSSWM projects have not performed quite as well (67% were rated successful). However, this
level of success is still on a par with the average for other sectors. OED's project performance
audit reports, issued on average 2­3 years after the PCRs, are somewhat less positive, and
raise issues related to the sustainability of many urban sector projects. Urban sector projects
were generally rated as relevant, effective, and efficient. Because of their complexity and the
often lower capacity at local government level, urban sector projects require more TA support
than some other sectors. However, increased TA was not forthcoming after the USS. In fact, it
declined by about 40% after the USS, whereas TA funds in other sectors increased by 29%.
OED reports in the period 2000­2005 confirm that the success rate of urban multisector projects
is comparable to that of the other sectors on average, whereas the performance of WSSWM
projects is somewhat weaker.
vi


       To broaden the context, the study also scanned ongoing operations in some countries. It
found that the success of the ongoing project portfolio varies with the country. The three country
case studies point to excellent progress with projects in the PRC, more uneven progress with
the relatively younger portfolio in India (but still encouraging prospects) and disappointing
progress with the current portfolio of complex projects in the Philippines. However, in all
three countries, the project managers were satisfied with some key features of ADB operations.
A questionnaire survey found that project managers in executing agencies were dissatisfied with
national decision-making systems, except in the PRC. SES missions reviewed some
evaluations of central government funded urban programs, and noted unsatisfactory
performance, indicating generic difficulties in the urban sector and in DMCs.

        Project managers in DMCs also voiced some consistent criticisms of some elements of
ADB's policies and practices. There is a widely shared view that many problems with urban
sector projects are caused by ADB's project processing and implementation model. These
concerns add to the occasionally lukewarm responses to the question regarding the clients'
willingness to engage in further urban borrowing from ADB, and a lack of lobbying for follow-on
projects.

        Some of the concerns identified by this study are being addressed by ADB-wide reform
processes, such as the Innovations and Efficiency Initiative. These should, in principle, increase
the potential for engaging in more and better urban sector interventions. ADB needs to restore
some of the institutional focus and urban sector leadership it has lost since 2002. As a result of
the urban sector review process initiated, it is already taking steps in that direction. ADB's
Medium-Term Strategy II (2006­2008), issued recently, identified urban infrastructure as one of
the core operational sectors where ADB plans to build up a critical mass of expertise to act as a
leading provider of assistance. The litmus test will be whether the pipeline of urban sector
projects, relying on growth in India and the PRC in particular, and perhaps a resurgence of
borrowing by Indonesia and Pakistan, will lead to the expansion in lending that the USS saw as
appropriate given the growing demand for capital investment in Asia's rapidly growing cities.

        As to the issue of capacity building, partnerships and anticorruption measures, the SES
findings imply that there is more desired. The use of consultants to support project
implementation is still widespread, long term partnerships with city clients have been limited,
and support to urban governance reform has been rare.

        Corruption is widely acknowledged to be a major threat to the efficiency of both projects
and service provision in the urban sector in Asia. About half of the reports and
recommendations of the President reviewed were found to have reported on and/or highlighted
specific anticorruption measures or capacity building.

       OED assesses the USS of 1999 as partly successful given lower efficiency in influencing
operations, in spite of good relevance to Asia and the Pacific. Its ambition to go beyond what
ADB was already providing up to that time was not realized, except in a few countries, like India.
OED assesses ADB's urban sector operations as broadly successful, mainly on account of the
above average effectiveness of projects and TA, and in spite of their higher than average
sustainability risks. Overall, ADB failed to seize the opportunity to significantly increase the size
and quality of its urban lending portfolio and TA activity. The rationale for the rating of the USS
and subsequent operations is summarized below, followed by a set of recommendations.
                                                                                                                   vii


          Rating of the Urban Sector Strategy

         Relevance. The USS was relevant in terms of highlighting urbanization as one of Asia's
mega-trends, and in identifying the need for ADB to focus on a response. All trends and issues
identified by the USS are still relevant in 2005. The strategy appropriately anticipated ADB's
increasing focus on poverty reduction. The 1999 USS was consistent with ADB's subsequent
2001 Long-Term Strategic Framework (2001­2015), which reflected urbanization as a major
challenge for ADB, and one that ADB was particularly suited to address. However, the USS had
little effect on the subsequent Medium-Term Strategy (2001­2005). The USS' objective of
increasing lending to urban areas was highly relevant given ADB's comparative strengths as an
organization promoting infrastructure and capacity development. The strategy could have been
more relevant as a guide to current operations if it had (i) made more distinction between
regions and countries within the Asia and Pacific region in terms of urbanization, needs, and
approaches; and (ii) given more guidance as to the role of the private sector in ADB's
operations.

         Efficiency. The number of goals and targets make the USS hard to pursue in practical
terms and hard to evaluate. After ADB's reorganization, the USS was even harder to pursue;
urban sector staff were scattered and the new RSDD was not staffed with sufficient specialists
to pursue special urban issues and coordinate effectively. The USS was not successful in
providing a statement that focused ADB, as an institution, on the urban sector. Economic and
sector work was not expanded. Country urban sector profiles and strategies have generally not
resulted in a clear urban focus in country strategies and programs. ADB's TA for the urban
sector diminished. ADB's 2002 reorganization and the new business processes led to much
greater attention on country planning rather than sector planning. ADB's leadership and
institutional focus on the urban sector, widely acknowledged in the 1990s, was due to the pre-
2002 division-centered organization. The efficiency of the USS within ADB is low, given its
incompatibility with the present organizational structure. Growth in lending, TA, and knowledge
products would normally need to be accompanied by appropriate levels of staffing. Given that
ADB currently has a cap on increased levels of staffing, this would mean a redeployment of
existing positions. The urban sector does not perform more efficiently in terms of preparing and
implementing projects than before; there are as many delays and loan cancellations as
(i) before the USS, and (ii) in many other sectors. Borrowers perceive ADB's transaction costs
as high, although many executing agencies recognize significant ADB added value. Since ADB
lost its specialized urban divisions and has few urban sections in RMs, there is a lack of focal
point for urban clients.1 This has led to the lack of an effective internal lobby to promote ADB
involvement in the urban sector.

          Rating of Urban Sector Operations

        Effectiveness. Urban lending operations increased but not significantly. Intended
expansions of operations into public-private sector partnerships, urban (mass) transit, and land
management were not achieved, although there was some growth in the housing sector. The
number of program loans and sector loans did not increase as planned. No more large urban
forums were organized. However, other knowledge products increased. PCRs have generally
rated the performance of urban sector projects as higher than the average of all ADB projects,
especially integrated urban development (multisector) projects. OED ratings of completed urban
sector projects have also been in the middle range, some sectors perform better and some

1
    However, after the drafting of this study, one urban development division was created in a restructured South Asia
    Regional Department (May 2006).
viii


perform worse. Given a reduced TA program in recent years and no growth in loan consulting
services and loan components for institutional development or training, it is unlikely that the
policy or capacity impact of current operations is higher than before the USS. Increased
cofinancing sources may have partly offset this trend, but more TA resources could have made
the impact larger. The USS did not specify outcomes across Asia and these are hard to
quantify. To give an indication of the coverage of ADB's lending operations, ADB urban sector
loans in the last 12 years covered 12% of the urban population in DMCs.

        Sustainability. The sustainability of urban operations varies according to subsector and
country, in line with country contexts. OED evaluations have given lower ratings than PCRs with
reference to the sustainability of urban sector projects and impact on institutions. There has
been some progress with appropriate tariff setting and cost recovery in water supply and
sewage systems, but practically all systems still need government subsidies, and are therefore
less than sustainable. The housing finance subsector program, relying on financial
intermediaries which add a margin when setting the cost of housing loans to final borrowers,
has not been sustainable in some countries because of increasing availability of competing
private sector sources and lower commercial interest rates. From ADB clients' point of view, the
need for urban sector projects continues to grow, but an exponential rise in demand is not
foreseen, partly because of external debt considerations for many DMCs. ADB has yet to decide
on a strategy for significantly increasing sub-sovereign lending. Doing so would increase the
lending modalities that could be used to assist the financially stronger municipalities.

       Main Recommendations

       The SES recommends:

              (i)     ADB should formulate an Urban Sector Strategy II.
              (ii)    The Urban Sector Strategy II should include a road map or business plan
                      for implementation to translate the broad goals and objectives of the
                      strategy into reality, given various constraints.
              (iii)   The Urban Sector Strategy II should also include a results-based
                      framework with clear, monitorable indicators.
              (iv)    The new strategy needs to be grounded in a custodian division in RSDD,
                      to coordinate across departments, monitor targets, and elaborate
                      common themes.
              (v)     ADB needs to provide some guidance to staff on how to engage in
                      anticorruption initiatives in the urban sector.



                                                           Bruce Murray
                                                           Director General
                                                           Operations Evaluation Department
                                           I.       INTRODUCTION

A.        Background

1.      The Asian Development Bank's (ADB) urban sector strategy (USS) was approved in
July 19991 and was widely disseminated. Five years later, in 2004, ADB's Regional and
Sustainable Development Department (RSDD) announced that it would review and then revise
the USS by the end of 2005.2 The adoption of poverty reduction as ADB's overarching objective,
the emergence of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and ADB's joining of the Cities
Alliance in 2002, were seen as developments that were not adequately reflected in the USS.
RSDD viewed the rate, scale, and pace of urbanization taking place throughout the Asia and
Pacific region as having profound impacts on developing member countries (DMCs). ADB's
recently issued staff instructions on the definition of directional documents and processing of
policy and strategy papers were also mentioned as a reason for the revision.3 The original USS
lacked the disciplined approach and procedural rigor now envisaged by these instructions. For
instance, it referred to "policy" at various places, but was not a policy document.4 The USS also
paid insufficient attention to the experience of other development banks, implementation
arrangements, and human resource and cost implications required to implement the strategy.

2.       An independent evaluation of the USS and related operations was included in the
2005 Work Program of the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) to contribute to the
revision process. The OED evaluation was designed to examine the existing strategy and the
effectiveness of urban sector operations. Work undertaken in parallel by RSDD would identify
and review emerging urban sector trends, directions, good practices, and related issues. OED
staff participated in an interdepartmental working group organized by RSDD to ensure that OED
results were made available during the course of the study. This special evaluation study (SES)
produced a number of intermediate outputs that have contributed to that review. The Strategy
and Policy Department (SPD) also drew on a draft of this report when preparing ADB's Medium-
Term Strategy II, 2006­2008 (MTS II).5 OED's recommendation to postpone the revision of USS
until after MTS II had provided guidance as to the role of the urban sector in ADB's operations,
was reflected in a new target for the revision of the USS, by the fourth quarter of 2007.

B.        The 1999 Urban Sector Strategy

3.     The USS codified the key subsectors in the urban sector as water supply, sanitation,
solid waste, drainage, transport, environment, sites and services, housing, institutional
strengthening and capacity building, land management, governance, and municipal finance. The
USS also foresaw urban poverty reduction activities, including community development and
microcredit, as possible components of urban sector projects.

4.      The strategy highlighted the following operational objectives: (i) maximizing the
economic efficiency of urban areas, (ii) reducing urban poverty, (iii) improving quality of life, and
(iv) achieving more sustainable forms of urban development. The objectives were to be
achieved through the promotion of urban sector policies to (i) encourage good governance;

1
    ADB. 1999. Urban Sector Strategy. Manila.
2
    ADB. 2004. Concept Paper for Policy or Strategy Paper: Urban Sector Strategy. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2004. Staff Instructions on Definition of Directional Documents and Processing of Policy and Strategy
    Papers. Manila.
4
    Policies (such as safeguard policies) carry mandatory elements; strategies do not. Existing sector and thematic
    policies are currently being revised and will be either retired or converted to strategies.
5
    ADB. 2006. Medium-Term Strategy II, 2006­2008. Manila.
2


(ii) improve urban management; (iii) mobilize financial resources; (iv) reduce urban poverty; and
(v) address urban development subsectors: water supply, sanitation, and solid waste
management; land management, transport, and housing. Because of the complexity of the
urban sector, the strategy was regarded as a flexible framework.

5.      The USS proposed a systematic and incremental expansion of ADB's involvement in the
urban sector in terms of the volume of lending, the range of subsectors to be covered, and the
interrelationship of project components. The USS called for more attention to poverty reduction;
community participation in projects; more institutional strengthening and capacity development;
more private sector involvement; more program loans; and more projects in urban transport,
urban housing, and urban land management. Integrated urban development projects were
expected to continue to be the mainstay of urban sector lending. The USS also called for more
staff resources for the sector and more research and knowledge products to support policy
dialogue.

C.        Main Evaluation Questions

6.     The goal of the study is to contribute to a discussion regarding urban sector
interventions in ADB's program, and particularly to the revision of ADB's USS of 1999. The main
questions that the SES addresses are as follows.

          (i)      Does urbanization in Asia need special attention by ADB?
          (ii)     What is the nature of the USS, the context of its issuance in 1999, and what
                   affected it afterward?
          (iii)    What were the changes in ADB's program in the years after the issuance of the
                   USS?
          (iv)     Are the particular ambitions of the USS being achieved?
          (v)      What are clients' perceptions of ADB's value added in the urban sector and
                   transaction costs?
          (vi)     How does the USS rate in terms of relevance and efficiency, and how do urban
                   sector operations rate in terms of their effectiveness and sustainability?
          (vii)    What are considerations in favor of a USS in ADB, including the (re-)designation
                   of an urban sector, urban theme, and urban sector divisions? Under what
                   conditions would a USS be most effective?
          (viii)   What could be the suggestions for a revised USS, emerging from an evaluation
                   of past and current operations?

7.      The assessment of the changes in urban sector operations is based on a comparison of
projects approved up to 6 years before the USS of mid-1999 with those approved afterward, up
to mid-July 2005. A survey-based evaluation of the impact of the USS on beneficiaries was not
undertaken because most of the projects approved post-USS are still under implementation and
are not yet delivering the expected benefits. The evaluation assesses whether priorities set out
in the USS have been followed in ADB's operations. Special attention is given to the question
why, given increasing urbanization in the region, ADB's urban portfolio has not grown more
rapidly. The evaluation also considers the possible effects of new initiatives in ADB, such as the
Innovation and Efficiency Initiative,6 the Enhancing Asian Development Bank Support to Middle


6
    ADB. 2005. Cost Sharing and Eligibility of Expenditures for ADB Financing: A New Approach. Manila; ADB. 2005.
    Pilot Financing Instruments and Modalities. Manila; ADB. 2005. Local Currency Loan Product. Manila; ADB. 2006.
    Revising the Procurement Guidelines. Manila; ADB. 2006. Policies and Procedures on the Use of Consultants.
    Manila.
                                                                                                               3


Income Countries and Ordinary Capital Resources Borrowers,7 and the Review of the Policy on
Supplementary Financing.8

8.      A question that the SES raises is whether ADB needs a USS, or whether it would be
more effective if various sector or country strategies paid greater attention to spatial or urban
aspects. Staff instructions on the preparation of strategies indicate that strategies should be
prepared for countries and/or regions, sectors, and thematic areas. Urban development is no
longer included in any of these three categories. Given that ADB has many policies and
strategies, this also raises the question of a strategy's role in general. Some other regional
development banks do not have urban sector strategies as such. The African Development
Bank has none; the Inter-American Development Bank has a broader strategy on subnational
development;9 and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has an elaborate
policy on municipal and environmental infrastructure. The World Bank has an urban and local
government strategy. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World
Bank have municipal divisions or urban theme groups; ADB does not have either of these.

D.      Organization of the Study

9.     The study was headed by an OED evaluation specialist, and relied on short-term
contributions of five urban planning consultants, three research assistants, and a national
evaluation officer. A small-scale technical assistance (TA) funded studies to support the
preparation of this SES.10 The SES was also supported by funds from OED's TA for Selected
Evaluation Studies for 2005,11 particularly for a country case study in the People's Republic of
China (PRC).

10.     The evaluation relied on the following sources of information: (i) interviews with relevant
ADB staff; (ii) study of ADB's policy and strategy documents; (iii) quantitative analysis of ADB
databases on sector trends, OED databases on project success ratings, and documentation for
all 88 urban sector projects approved between 1993 and 2004, for all 51 urban sector projects
with project completion reports (PCRs) issued between 1999 and mid-2005, and for all 191 TA
grants approved between mid-1993 and mid-2005; (iv) a questionnaire survey of all 52 ongoing
urban sector projects (the response rate was 85%); (v) a selective review of urban sector
evaluations undertaken by other agencies; (vi) an assessment of ADB urban sector profiles and
studies and some other ADB publications; and (vii) country case studies in PRC, India, and
Philippines. The country case studies included visits to all 15 ongoing projects in the sector
during July and August 2005, and interviews with various institutional stakeholders, including
project managers (PMs) and government officers in planning and finance agencies. A workshop
was held in August 2005 with stakeholders in the Philippine urban sector. Appendix 1 provides
methodological notes to the questionnaire survey. Appendix 2 lists all urban sector projects
approved from July 1993 to June 2004, and Appendix 3 lists all urban sector related TAs.


7
   ADB. 2006. Enhancing Asian Development Bank Support to Middle Income Countries and Ordinary Capital
   Resources Borrowers. Draft. Manila.
8
   ADB. 2005. A Review of the Policy on Supplementary Financing: Addressing Challenges and Broader Needs.
   Manila.
9
   The Inter-American Development Bank's Oversight and Evaluation Office concluded in 2003 that formal strategies
   provided relatively weak guidance in operations design (as a result, the office's future work would focus on
   evaluation of the projects themselves rather than sector and thematic strategies).
10
   ADB. 2005. Small-Scale Technical Assistance for the Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and
   Operations. Manila (TA 6240-REG, for $150,000, approved 21 April 2005).
11
   ADB. 2005. Technical Assistance for Selected Evaluation Studies for 2005. Manila (TA 6246-REG, for
   $1.25 million, approved 14 June 2005).
4


11.     The urban sector represents a wide range of interventions, combining a number of
currently independently classified functional sectors in ADB. Given time and resource limitations
and current topical interests in ADB, this SES gives more attention to process and
implementation oriented issues than to technical issues. This focus also reflected, in part, the
fact that OED reviewed such issues in a 1997 impact evaluation,12 and a 2002 impact
evaluation of water supply and sanitation projects.13 Many of the findings of those evaluations
remain relevant.




12
     ADB. 1997. Impact Evaluation on the Bank Assistance to the Urban Development and Housing Sector. Manila.
13
     ADB. 2002. Impact Evaluation Study of Water Supply and Sanitation Projects in Selected Developing Member
     Countries. Manila.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                 o                                                                                      o
                                               70 00'E                                                                               130 00'E

                                                                                                                                                                            Map 1
                                                                                                                                                             PERCENTAGE OF
                                           KAZAKHSTAN                                                                                                         POPULATION IN
ARMENIA                                                                                   MONGOLIA                                                          URBAN AREAS, 1970
            AZERBAIJAN
                                  UZBEKISTAN
        o              TURKMENISTAN                  KYRGYZ REP.                                                                         Sea of                                                             o
40 00'N                                                                                                                                  Japan                                                          40 00'N
                                             TAJIKISTAN                                                                         REPUBLIC OF
                                                                                                                                   KOREA            JAPAN
                                                                                PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA                   Yellow
                                                                                                                              Sea
                                      AFGHANISTAN


                                                                                                                                   East China Sea
                                          PAKISTAN                  NEPAL
                                                                                BHUTAN

                                                                        BANGLADESH                                                                          % Urbanization Rate
                                                            INDIA                                 LAO                          TAIPEI,CHINA                                 1 -- 25
                                                                                     MYANMAR
                                                                                                PEOPLE'S                                                                   25 -- 50
                                                                                               DEMOCRATIC
                                                                                                REPUBLIC                                                                   50 -- 75
                                  Arabian                                                                   VIET NAM
                                                                                             THAILAND                                                                      75 -- 100
                                    Sea                              Bay of Bengal
                                                                                                  CAMBODIA       South           PHILIPPINES
                                                                                                                                                                           International Capital
                                                                                                                 China
                                                                                                                  Sea                                       Boundaries are not necessarily authoritative.
                                                                    SRI LANKA
                                                                                                         BRUNEI                                   P A C I F I C               O C E A N
                                                                                                       DARUSSALAM
                                                                                                                             Celebes Sea
                                                         MALDIVES                                 M A L A Y S I A
    o                                                                                              SINGAPORE                                                                                                        o
0                                                                                                                                                                       PAPUA                                   0
                             N                                                                                                                                        NEW GUINEA
                                                                                                                Java   Sea
                   0        500   1000
                                                  I N D I A N           O C E A N                                  I N D O N E S I A

                         Kilometers                                                                                                   TIMUR-LESTE


                                                 o                                                                                       o
                                               70 00'E                                                                                130 00'E



                                                 o                                                                                      o
                                               70 00'E                                                                               130 00'E


                                                                                                                                                                            Map 2
                                                                                                                                                             PERCENTAGE OF
                                           KAZAKHSTAN                                                                                                         POPULATION IN
ARMENIA                                                                                   MONGOLIA                                                          URBAN AREAS, 2000
            AZERBAIJAN
                                  UZBEKISTAN
        o              TURKMENISTAN                  KYRGYZ REP.                                                                         Sea of                                                             o
40 00'N                                                                                                                                  Japan                                                          40 00'N
                                             TAJIKISTAN                                                                         REPUBLIC OF
                                                                                                                                   KOREA            JAPAN
                                                                                PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA                   Yellow
                                                                                                                              Sea
                                      AFGHANISTAN


                                                                                                                                   East China Sea
                                          PAKISTAN                  NEPAL
                                                                                BHUTAN

                                                                        BANGLADESH                                                                          % Urbanization Rate
                                                            INDIA                                                              TAIPEI,CHINA                                 1 -- 25
                                                                                     MYANMAR     LAO
                                                                                               PEOPLE'S                                                                    25 -- 50
                                                                                              DEMOCRATIC
                                                                                               REPUBLIC                                                                    50 -- 75
                                  Arabian                                                                VIET NAM
                                                                                             THAILAND                                                                      75 -- 100
                                    Sea                              Bay of Bengal
                                                                                                  CAMBODIA       South           PHILIPPINES
                                                                                                                                                                           International Capital
                                                                                                                 China
                                                                                                                  Sea                                       Boundaries are not necessarily authoritative.
                                                                    SRI LANKA
                                                                                                         BRUNEI                                   P A C I F I C               O C E A N
                                                                                                       DARUSSALAM
                                                                                                                             Celebes Sea
                                                         MALDIVES                                 M A L A Y S I A
    o                                                                                              SINGAPORE                                                                                                        o
0                                                                                                                                                                       PAPUA                                   0
                             N                                                                                                                                        NEW GUINEA
                                                                                                                Java   Sea
                   0        500   1000
                                                 I N D I A N            O C E A N                                  I N D O N E S I A

                         Kilometers                                                                                                   TIMUR-LESTE


                                                 o                                                                                       o
                                               70 00'E                                                                                130 00'E



                                                 o                                                                                      o
                                               70 00'E                                                                               130 00'E


                                                                                                                                                                       Map 3
                                                                                                                                              ANTICIPATED PERCENTAGE OF
                                           KAZAKHSTAN                                                                                                POPULATION IN
ARMENIA                                                                                   MONGOLIA                                                URBAN AREAS, 2020
            AZERBAIJAN
                                  UZBEKISTAN
        o              TURKMENISTAN                  KYRGYZ REP.                                                                         Sea of                                                             o
40 00'N                                                                                                                                  Japan                                                          40 00'N
                                             TAJIKISTAN                                                                         REPUBLIC OF
                                                                                                                                   KOREA            JAPAN
                                                                                                                             Yellow
                                                                                PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
                                                                                                                              Sea
                                      AFGHANISTAN


                                                                                                                                   East China Sea
                                          PAKISTAN                  NEPAL
                                                                                BHUTAN

                                                                        BANGLADESH                                                                          % Urbanization Rate
                                                            INDIA                                                              TAIPEI,CHINA                                 1 -- 25
                                                                                     MYANMAR      LAO
                                                                                               PEOPLE'S                                                                    25 -- 50
                                                                                              DEMOCRATIC
                                                                                               REPUBLIC                                                                    50 -- 75
                                  Arabian                                                                VIET NAM
                                                                                             THAILAND                                                                      75 -- 100
                                    Sea                              Bay of Bengal
                                                                                                  CAMBODIA       South           PHILIPPINES
                                                                                                                                                                           International Capital
                                                                                                                 China
                                                                                                                  Sea                                       Boundaries are not necessarily authoritative.
                                                                    SRI LANKA
                                                                                                         BRUNEI                                   P A C I F I C               O C E A N
                                                                                                       DARUSSALAM
                                                                                                                             Celebes Sea
                                                         MALDIVES                                 M A L A Y S I A
    o                                                                                              SINGAPORE                                                                                                        o
0                                                                                                                                                                       PAPUA                                   0
                             N                                                                                                                                        NEW GUINEA
                                                                                                                Java   Sea
                   0        500   1000
                                                  I N D I A N           O C E A N                                  I N D O N E S I A

                         Kilometers                                                                                                   TIMUR-LESTE


                                                 o                                                                                       o
                                               70 00'E                                                                                130 00'E


                                                                                                                                                                                       asia 06-0876 HR
6


                                    II.      URBANIZATION IN ASIA

12.     This chapter summarizes urbanization trends in Asia, the financing needs of the urban
sector, the current financing gap, and the relation of urban sector work to achieving the MDGs.
This analysis provides a context in which to evaluate the relevance of the USS and ADB's urban
sector operations.

A.      Trends

13.     Viewed over a 100-year perspective, the region is in the midst of a transformation from a
rural, agriculture dominated region to an urban, industrial/service sector dominated region. This
transformation is being accompanied by major demographic shifts. Asia has the fastest growing
urban population in the world (Maps 1, 2 and 3). With almost 3.9 billion people, Asia currently
has 61% of the global population. Its share of the global urban population has risen from 9% in
1920 to over 48% in 2005. Based on current projections,14 this proportion is expected to rise to
53% by 2030. Even if the United Nations' (UN)15 recent forecast of declining national and urban
growth rates in Asia over the next 30 years proves to be correct, Asia's urban population will
grow at a rate of 2.4% per year, increasing from 1.35 billion (37% of the total population) in 2000
to 1.94 billion (48%) in 2015,16 a period when population is expected to grow at less than half
this rate at 1.1% per year. The trend in some of ADB's major DMCs is shown in Figure 1.17

14.     There are currently 19 megacities in the world (i.e., with populations over 10 million),
10 of which are in Asian developing countries. By 2010, there will be 23 megacities, including 12
in Asian developing countries. These megacities will be home to 222 million people. By 2015,
three of the world's five largest megacities will be in Asia: Delhi, Dhaka, and Mumbai. More
significant in terms of urbanization will be the rise of metropolitan regions. By 2020, two-thirds of
the urban population of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is expected to live
in five metropolitan regions (MRs): the Java MR (100 million); the Bangkok-centered MR
(30 million); the Manila MR (30 million); the Singapore Triangle (10 million); and the Kuala
Lumpur­Klang MR (6 million). Southeast Asian MRs will be relatively small, compared to those
in East Asia, such as the Hong Kong­Shenzen­Guangdong MR (120 million); the Greater
Shanghai MR (83 million); and the Tokyo­Osaka­Kyoto­Kobe­Nagoya MR (60 million). With
the Beijing MR covering 16,870 kilometers and the Shanghai MR extending over 6,340 square
kilometers, East Asian MRs are introducing urban issues on geographic scales never before
experienced. The rapid development of small to medium sized cities places investment and
management pressures on what are often relatively weak local administrations. In both India
and PRC, small- and medium-sized towns and cities, which can have up to 1 million people, are
growing at a faster rate than large or megacities.




14
   Population projections 2004 based on United Nations (UN). 2002. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2001
   Revision. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. New York.
15
   UN. 2002. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003 Revision. Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
   Population Division. New York.
16
   This compares to current estimated growth rates for ADB's developing member countries (DMCs) of 1.2% for total
   population and 3.4% for urban population.
17
   More information is in Supplementary Appendix A.
                                                                                                                                            7



                                                              Figure 1: Urbanization Rates, 1950­2030a

                      1,000,000

                                 900,000

                                  800,000
  Urban Population (thousands)




                                  700,000

                                  600,000                                                                    281%


                                  500,000

                                 400,000
                                                                                                              168%

                                 300,000
                                                                                                              60%

                                 200,000                                                                     153%
                                                                                                             388%
                                 100,000

                                       0
                                       1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
                                                                              Year
                                             Bangladesh             Indonesia           People's Republic of China
                                             Brazil                 Japan                Philippines
                                             India                  Pakistan             Russian Federation
                                                                                         United States of America
 a
                                 From 1975­2010, People's Republic of China's urban population will have grown by 281%, although part of this is
                                 due to revision of administrative boundaries
 Source: United Nations. 2002. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003 Revision. Department of Economic and
         Social Affairs, Population Division. New York.



15.     Economic Importance of Cities. The rapid growth of urban Asia reflects the rapidly
increasing importance of cities as (i) focal points of economic activity and engines of economic
growth; (ii) centers of excellence for education, health care, innovation, entrepreneurship,
business, commerce, industry, culture and social services; (iii) large markets for a wide range of
products, goods and services; (iv) nodal points for transportation, telecommunications and
information technology systems; and (v) the primary location for employment and livelihood
opportunities. Given the positive correlation between levels of urbanization and gross domestic
product (GDP), there is strong evidence to suggest that urbanization enhances economic
productivity. There is also a strong positive correlation between city size and GDP per capita.
The ratio of city GDP per capita to national GDP per capita is found to be 1.9 for Metro Manila,
2.5 for Kolkata, 3.5 for Bangkok, and 3.7 for Shanghai. Mumbai is generating one sixth of India's
GDP, confirming the synergy of private entrepreneurs and investment in a single location,
despite insufficient infrastructure. However, productivity rates would be even higher if city
efficiency is enhanced.
8


16.     Combinations of an urban core or cores with an urbanizing hinterland linked to the core
by functional ties are becoming increasingly regarded as the engines of economic growth in a
globalizing world, which demand development and implementation of new modes of economic
governance. These city regions are of a scale which suggests they are the ideal point of entry
for public policy interventions. This presents strategic and management challenges to national,
regional, and city governments, and to ADB in seeking to support these regions.

17.      Urban Poverty. Over the past three decades, there has been an unprecedented decline
in poverty in the Asia and Pacific region. During the early 1970s, more than half the population
of the Asia Pacific region lived below $1 per capita per day, average life expectancy was
48 years, and only 40% of the adult population was literate. By 2002, a quarter of the people live
in income poverty, life expectancy has increased to 65 years, and about 70% of adults are
literate.

18.      Although there has been remarkable progress in reducing poverty in Asia, the continent
still accounts for two-thirds of the world's poor (living on $1 or less a day per capita), affecting
about 800 million people; 240 million­260 million of the poor live in urban areas. Both income
and non-income urban poverty (quality of life poverty) are major problems in the region. Crime
and corruption are often serious hazards. Street children begging and children used for sexual
exploitation are perhaps the most heartrending examples of urban poverty. The Asia and Pacific
region hosts about half of the world's urban slum dwellers. In 2001, 43% of the region's
1.2 billion urban residents were living in slums, with uncertain security of tenure, overcrowded
conditions, poor housing, lack of adequate services, and poor environmental conditions.18 The
requirements of the urban poor in both low and middle-income countries (MICs) for decent living
conditions and access to work need deeper consideration so that they too can enjoy the
benefits of economic growth. The majority of the urban poor are concentrated in Bangladesh,
PRC, India, Indonesia, and Pakistan. Nearly one third of the urban poor have no access to safe
water and more than two thirds do not have access to adequate sanitation.

19.     Environmental Problems. Because of lagging governance and lacking resources, cities
have often have negative environmental externalities. Traffic congestion, crowded environments
and housing conditions, overloaded infrastructure, flooding, water scarcity, and air and water
pollution have constrained the growth of cities' economic efficiency.

20.    Natural disasters affected almost 2 billion people worldwide in the 1990s, and over 80%
of the affected people lived in Asia. Populous parts of Asia are prone to earthquakes, storms
and flooding. Climatic change is increasing the risks of flooding in coastal or riverine cities, such
as Bangkok; Dhaka; Hong Kong, China; Manila; Mumbai; Shanghai; and Tokyo. Many poor
people live in slums on land vulnerable to floods or pollution.19

B.      Needs

21.      Urban sector development needs in the Asia and Pacific region span the full range of
activities, infrastructure, services, and facilities required to (i) improve the efficiency of cities as
places in which to invest and work, and (ii) improve the condition of cities as places in which to
live and prosper. Improved governance and regulatory environments are required to address
urban market distortions and attract private capital. Administrative reform and capacity building
is required to improve urban planning and management, and to ensure that cities develop
18
   UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements). 2003. Challenge of Slums-Global Report on Human
   Settlements 2003. Nairobi.
19
   ADB. 2006. Review of the Urban Sector Strategy. Draft. Manila.
                                                                                                                   9


efficiently and maximize their development potential. Improved and extended infrastructure,
utilities, and services are required to support economic development, improve peoples' quality
of life, and reduce poverty. In addition to the negative impact on quality of life, the economic
impact of pollution in Asian cities, in terms of loss of productivity, has been estimated at
between 1% and 5% of their GDP. Improved urban infrastructure and services are critical,
requiring both improved management and an enabling environment for the private sector
investment that is necessary to create economic growth and jobs.

22.     Future Urban Infrastructure Demand. A World Bank model was used to predict future
infrastructure demand in all sectors (net of requirements for rehabilitation).20 The resulting
estimation of the infrastructure investment needs for all developing countries over 2005­2010
amounted to $465 billion per year or 5.5% of their GDP (including both capital and maintenance
expenditures). A similar methodology adopted for East Asia21 and extended to include all ADB's
DMCs for the same period indicated a requirement of $230 billion per year, for the following
sectors: (i) electricity generation and supply, (ii) telephone landlines, (iii) mobile telephones,
(iv) paved intercity roads, (v) rail lines, and (vi) access to improved water supply and sanitation
(WSS).22

23.      A similar methodology was used to approximate urban development financing
requirements (excluding power, telecommunications, railways and intercity roads, but including
solid waste management and slum upgrading) for DMCs in the Asia and Pacific region. The
same best practice unit costs were used for WSS, and similar figures were derived for solid
waste management and slum upgrading based on recent field data.23 The analysis suggested
total financing requirements for just water supply, sanitation, solid waste management, and slum
upgrading in urban areas will be $25 billion per annum (Appendix 4). This number would double
to $50 billion per year if urban roads were included. The demand for mass transit systems is
more difficult to assess. However, megacities and large cities across the region are going to find
investment in such systems increasingly necessary as cities expand and traffic volumes exceed
the carrying capacity of urban road networks. Even the conservative assumption that 100
kilometers (km) of rail mass transit system are constructed annually across the region, adds a
further $10 billion per annum to the urban funding requirements.

24.     This study estimates that ADB's DMCs may need to spend about $60 billion per annum
on the development of urban infrastructure and services between 2006 and 2010 for water
supply, sanitation, solid waste management, slum upgrading, urban roads, and mass transit
systems. These figures agree quite closely with those generated for a number of countries,
including India, where estimates for capital, operations, and maintenance were estimated at
around $8 billion per annum for WSS and urban roads alone.24 Asia Watch 2015 recently
estimated the annual requirement for improved water supply for Asia (urban and rural) to meet
20
   Fay, Marianne and Tito Yepes. 2003. Investing in Infrastructure: What is Needed from 2000­2010? World Bank
   Working Paper No. 2545. Washington DC: World Bank.
21
   Cambodia, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji Islands, Indonesia, Kiribati, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
   Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Mongolia, Myanmar, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, PRC, Samoa, Solomon
   Islands, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Vanuatu, and Viet Nam.
22
   The methodology was based on infrastructure stock trends using real demand data from eight Asian counties for
   which data was available, and adjusting for economic growth and geographic variables to extend this analysis to
   other countries within the same income group. Costs of increasing infrastructure stock and associated
   maintenance requirements were based on best practice unit costs derived from the actual cost of infrastructure and
   service provision, and were reduced to an average cost per capita per year for middle-income and low-income
   economies to derive the total funding requirement. The figures for PRC and Malaysia were adjusted slightly from
   the middle-income country figure to provide a better fit with observed data.
23
   Figures taken from recent urban development projects with components in these sectors.
24
   Rakesh Mohan Committee. 1996. India Infrastructure Report 1996. Delhi: Government of India.
10


the MDGs at $8 billion; access for all would need $16 billion­$17 billion, and regulated in-house
supply would require $85 billion.25

25.     Overall, the funding requirements for infrastructure translate to 6.9% of GDP for PRC,
3.6% for other MICs, and 6.3% for low-income countries. While this analysis provides some
indication of the likely funding requirements, the cost of providing these services can be met by
a combination of cost recovery from users and fiscal revenues. Urban infrastructure has a long
operational life--thus, the most appropriate type of financing is a loan with long maturity.

26.     Current Investment. Data from a variety of sources show stagnation or a relative
decline of the share of multilateral agencies in financing urban infrastructure contrasted with a
rise in domestic financing. There is evidence of a recent recovery of confidence in infrastructure
financing by the private sector, although this has yet to be reflected in capital flows. While
decentralization has given more responsibilities to local governments in the region, there is no
evidence that this has resulted in additional resources being made available to fund local
infrastructure and services. Supplementary Appendix B summarizes the programs of some of
the main external agencies involved in the urban sector in Asia. The main external agencies are
the World Bank; ADB; the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC); Kreditanstalt für
Wiederaufbau of Germany; a large number of bilateral agencies such as Australian Agency for
International Development, European Union country agencies, EuropeAid, and the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID); and agencies such as the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT). The three largest financiers (ADB,
JBIC, and World Bank) account for 50% to 70% of the donor financed urban infrastructure.

27.     The conclusion is that perhaps half of the investment need of $60 billion per year
(exclusive of housing investments) is being covered by governments, external agencies, local
financial institutions, and the private sector. This leaves a huge funding gap.

C.         Relation of Sector with the Millennium Development Goals

28.     The urban sector is directly and indirectly related to ADB's overarching objective of
poverty reduction and achievement of the MDGs. Urban interventions have a direct impact on
some of the MDGs (Box 1) and an indirect impact on others. Urban economies-- particularly
economies of large urban agglomerations--generate proportionately significantly greater wealth
per capita than rural areas. The recent history of development in Asia bears out the role of
economic growth in achieving the MDGs. The MDG upon which urban development initiatives
may have the greatest direct impact is the seventh: ensuring environmental sustainability. This
MDG includes specific targets to halve the proportion of people without access to potable water
and adequate sanitation between 1990 and 2015, and to significantly improve the lives of at
least 100 million slum dwellers by 2015.

                  Box 1: Urban Sector and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

1.       MDG 1. The first goal--to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, halve the proportion of people
living on less than one dollar a day, and halve the proportion of people who suffer from hunger between
1990 and 2015--is impacted by the ability of cities to work more effectively to create jobs and generate
greater wealth. The positive impact which rapid growth in East and South Asia has had on poverty
reduction is well documented. Urban areas are the generators of economic growth and job creation.

25
     Asia Watch 2015. 2006. Are Countries in Asia on Track to Meet Target 10 of the Millennium Development Goals?
     New York: ADB, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
     Asia and the Pacific and World Health Organization.
                                                                                                         11


Continued support to urban areas, in terms of infrastructure provision and improved urban management
and governance, will be critical in ensuring the increasing efficiency of cities--thus, the sustaining of
economic growth and the continuing reduction of extreme poverty and hunger in both urban and rural
areas.

2.       MDG 4. Urban development has a direct impact on the fourth MDG to reduce child mortality by
two thirds by 2015. Improved water supply and environmental sanitation, especially when combined with
hygiene awareness for mothers, has a positive impact on reducing infant and child mortality. While
maternal health may only be marginally dependent on adequate service provision and environmental
sanitation, urban investments in infrastructure and improved management can have a significant impact
on the achievement of MDG5--reducing the maternal mortality ratio by three quarters--through better
environmental health resulting from improved access to better quality services.

3.       MDG 6. Urban development may have some impact on the sixth MDG, which calls for combating
HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases; and specifically for reversing the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Investments in drainage and sanitation remove stagnant water, reducing the opportunity for mosquito
breeding, and improving public health--which, in combination with improved hygiene practices, will
significantly reduce the incidence of faecal-oral diseases. Prostitution and drug use, which increase the
risk of HIV/AIDS infection, are often related to growing urban poverty.

4.      MDG 7. The relevant sub-targets are to halve the proportion of people without access to potable
water and adequate sanitation between 1990 and 2015, and to significantly improve the lives of at least
100 million slum dwellers by 2015. Connecting up poor people, with limited ability to pay, to piped water
supply systems is not an attractive option to the private sector. Slum eradication is notoriously difficult.
While the rapid economic growth of urban Asia has been responsible for lifting many out of poverty, the
continuing attraction of these cities to economic migrants from rural areas, coupled with the absence of
affordable serviced housing, means that there is a limitless supply of people for informal (slum)
settlements.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

29.     There is limited analytical work available on urbanization, and this makes the MDGs
hard to track. There are no solid figures as to whether reduced poverty levels in developing Asia
over the years have also meant reduced poverty incidence, or even slum incidence, in urban
areas. Certainly, urban poverty persists on a large scale and some of it is extreme poverty.
Many urban slums are expanding. Data available indicate that the proportion of urban poor is
increasing faster than the overall rate of urban population growth, especially in the poorer
countries.26 UN-HABITAT expects that (i) the estimated 30% level of global urban poverty will
grow to 45%­50% by 2020; (ii) urban areas of the world's least developed regions will absorb
nearly all the global population increase over the next three decades; and (iii) as a general rule,
least developed countries, although least urbanized, are experiencing the highest growth in
urban population and have the highest levels of urban slum incidence.

30.     Urban water and sanitation service provision are not improving in all DMCs. While the
proportion of urban population in DMCs with sustainable access to an "improved" water source
is estimated to be 85%, the proportion of households with house connections declined from
55% in 1990 to 53% in 2002 in South Asia and from 69% to 67% in the Pacific, due to rapid
urbanization and lagging expansion in systems.27 While the proportions went up in Eastern
(developing) Asia from 82% to 91% over the same period and from 37% to 45% in Southeastern
Asia, in many cities water is not available 24 hours a day and quality is poor.28 In many cities,
26
   UN-HABITAT. 2004. The State of the World's Cities 2004/2005. Globalization and Urban Culture. Nairobi.
27
   World Health Organization and United Nations Children Fund. 2004. Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and
   Sanitation Target. A Mid-Term Assessment of Progress. New York and Geneva.
28
   ADB. 2005. Water Utilities Data Book. Manila.
12


householders only receive piped water for a few hours a day, or in some cases a few hours
every two or three days. Fluctuating pressures contribute to contaminated water where network
leakage is high (average 35%). It is often routine for householders to boil water before
consumption, a costly and energy-wasting exercise, or to buy expensive bottled water. While
statistics show that 76% of urban households have access to "adequate" or "improved"
sanitation and the percentages are improving over time,29 this simply means growing access to
a sewer connection, septic tank, or improved pit latrine (footnote 27). All such systems have raw
sewage or wastewater effluent which must be disposed of without further endangering public
health or polluting the environment. Based on available data from 50 Asian cities,30 about 40%
of household sewage is treated prior to disposal. Frequently, only primary treatment is available,
leaving the bulk of pollutants to be discharged untreated to urban water systems or the ocean.

31.     ADB estimates (footnote 30) that while 75% of solid waste generated in urban areas is
collected, less than 60% is taken to a solid waste disposal site. Most sites are open dumps,
which sometimes provide a livelihood for poor urban scavengers. Only a fraction of solid waste
(perhaps 10%) is disposed of in properly managed solid waste landfill sites. The scale of
informal recycling is considerable: most developing cities achieve recycling of 5% to 25% of
waste collected. However, while often sophisticated operations, recycling activities frequently
involve manual picking by the poor at various stages in the waste disposal system, and present
health risks to those involved.

                          III.    ADB'S FOCUS ON THE URBAN SECTOR

A.      Genesis of the Urban Sector Strategy

32.     The USS of 1999 had a long genesis. ADB was established in the mid-1960s when
agriculture and the rural economy dominated the region. During its initial years of operation, the
agriculture sector accounted for a large part of ADB's operations. In the late 1980s, ADB began
paying more attention to urban issues. This was clearly reflected by increased levels of TA for
urban subsectors beginning in 1988, and two theme chapters in ADB's annual reports (one on
Asian urbanization in 1992 and one on Asian megacities in 1996). ADB sponsored five major
regional seminars on the urban sector in the 1990s: urban poor (1991), water resources in
megacities (1993), management of megacities (1995), urban infrastructure finance (1996), and
"Management of Cities: Establishing Networks and Cooperation" (1998). In 1996, ADB issued
one of its most widely read urban publications on urban infrastructure finance.31 A number of
groundbreaking urban poverty studies were published and ADB made major contributions to the
second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in 1996.

33.     During these years, the idea gained ground that ADB should have its own urban
development and housing "policy". A working group was produced in September 1996. In
March 1997, it was decided that preparation of a strategy paper would be more expedient than
a policy paper. A review of experience with some other policy papers had shown that such
papers, as approved by ADB's Board of Directors, ought to follow thorough external
consultations with governments, nongovernment organizations (NGOs), and private sector
parties. The urban sector was undergoing rapid change; it was felt that such a process would be
too complex and time-consuming. In addition, staff might be overly constrained by the resulting
policy guidelines. Progress with drafting of the strategy document was slow. Three years were

29
   Coverage went up from 64% in 1990 to 69% in 2002 in Eastern (developing) Asia, from 54% to 66% in South Asia,
   from 67% to 79% in Southeast Asia, and from 83% to 84% in the Pacific (footnote 27).
30
   ADB. 2001. Cities Data Book: Urban Indicators for Managing Cities. Manila.
31
   Brockman, Royston A. C., and Allen Williams, eds. 1996. Urban Infrastructure Finance. ADB: Manila.
                                                                                                                   13


required for the Water Supply, Urban Development and Housing Division in the Agriculture and
Social Sectors Department (East) to finalize the document, which was sent for information to the
Board on 19 August 1999. More than 30 years after its founding, ADB produced its first strategy
statement on the urban sector.

34.      The USS legitimized ADB's long-time involvement in a disparate set of investments for
which no policy statement had been issued until that time. The document had an important
public relations function at a time when many of the routine operations of multilateral
development banks were being questioned. The USS gave a degree of coherence to many
activities that ADB had been doing or supporting in urban areas in practice, which dealt directly
or indirectly with urban public health, public space, urban governance, and urban poverty. The
document gave ADB more legitimate access to explicitly urban forums such as that of the World
Bank, UN-HABITAT, and the Cities Alliance. At a more practical level, the USS provided a
common vocabulary for ADB's work in the urban sector; a set of subsectors commonly agreed
to be part of the urban sector (although very wide); and a set of modalities, including integrated
urban development projects (IUDP). The IUDP is indicated in this report as urban multisector
project, in line with ADB's new classification system.

35.     The USS was not designed to guide staff in identifying or developing specific projects.
The USS codified and systematized practices already adopted. The report had excellent
sections on urbanization challenges, and elaborated good practices regarding assistance to
urban areas. Its recommendations were inclusive, rather than selective. As such, the USS was
uncontroversial, did not suggest new directions to staff, and seemed not to require dramatic
shifts in ADB's focus or ways of doing business in the urban sector. ADB staff interviewed
suggested that the strategy was used primarily as a means to inform new staff, consultants, and
external stakeholders unfamiliar with ADB's work in the sector. Staff viewed related documents,
such as urban sector profiles and country urban strategies as being more relevant in giving
direct guidance on identifying, designing, or implementing urban sector projects. At least 11 of
these profiles and country strategy documents had been prepared before the 1999 USS. Those
prepared afterward generally did not refer much to the USS.

36.    The USS did not get much attention within ADB subsequent to its issuance. Apart from
not benefiting from a Board discussion, there was no reference to the USS in the section on
urban development in ADB's 1999 Annual Report, as attention had turned to poverty reduction
as ADB's new overarching goal, the adoption of a health policy, and a review of the private
sector strategy. Even subsequently, key ADB-wide publications did not give much attention to
the urban sector strategy. Urbanization was seen as one of the eight main development
challenges32 in ADB's March 2001 Long-Term Strategic Framework (2001­2015)33 and
experience with urban governance was regarded as one of ADB's particular strengths.34
However, there was no special attention to the urban sector in ADB's Medium-Term Strategic
Framework (2001­2005) of October 2001.35 The only reference is the statement that

32
   The others were (i) poverty reduction, growth, and sustainability; (ii) social development; (iii) environment;
   (iv) demographic shifts; (v) information and communications; (vi) regional ties; and (vii) private sector resources.
33
    ADB. 2001. Moving the Poverty Reduction Agenda Forward in Asia and the Pacific: The Long-Term Strategic
   Framework of the Asian Development Bank (2001­2005). Manila.
34
   See para. 43 of the Long-Term Strategic Framework: "One important area where ADB has developed considerable
   expertise is the governance of the region's rapidly growing cities and municipalities. With continuing population
   pressures on urban areas, the development and administration of the necessary urban physical and social
   infrastructure are essential to maintain an acceptable quality of life, maintain social harmony, and address the
   needs of the rapidly growing numbers of urban poor. The expertise ADB has developed in dealing with governance
   issues for urban development will be broadened and applied to addressing problems in all sectors."
35
   ADB. 2005. Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2001­2005). Manila.
14


investments in several key areas "include priority physical infrastructure necessary to promote
growth and productivity in both rural and urban areas, and essential social infrastructure and
services for human development to support pro-poor growth."

37.      In retrospect, the USS shared the same limitations as most ADB sector strategies. It was
oriented more towards an external than an internal audience. In the absence of clear guidance
from ADB-wide strategy documents or other pertinent Board decisions, the USS could not
provide strategic choices or set priorities. It took such a wide view of the urban sector that it
included all that was needed for more efficient and effective development. It thereby exceeded
the scope of activities generally engaged in by ADB's urban sector divisions at the time. The
USS included a comprehensive set of urban development goals and objectives, and strategic
policy areas, but did not provide strategic options and a rationale for priority setting and focus;
nor did it set time-bound quantitative targets for cities or countries, staff deployment, or loan or
TA amounts. As such, it implied but did not specify a significant increase in loan funds for the
urban sector. Since a significantly different allocation of staff resources and loan funds would
have had consequences for other sectors, negotiation across ADB and with DMCs would have
been necessary to achieve this objective. This broader consultation did not take place. The USS
did not exclude any urban subsector. It defined functional sectors, but it could not decree that
specific urban sector divisions or departments would need to be expanded to meet the
expectations set out in the USS. It did not state that more staff time would be devoted to identify
and administer more urban sector projects. It did not estimate the demand for urban sector
projects from ADB's main borrowers. There was criticism from some quarters that IUDPs, like
integrated rural development projects, were less efficient. However, the USS stressed that such
projects would be the mainstay of the strategy. Given its rationale, the USS could not do
otherwise--the theoretical interrelatedness of investments in public health and public space
appeared to make such types of projects unavoidable. If uncollected solid waste clogged storm
water drains, then the project needed to address not only drainage but also waste management.
If public health and public space oriented subsectors were not by their nature interrelated, then
urban chapters in different sector strategies would have sufficed. Thus, the USS stressed the
interrelations between sectors as an argument in favor of the need for holistic assessments of
the urban sector and multisector or multicomponent projects.

38.    The USS did not anticipate the changes that were coming its way, such as ADB's
reorganization and changes in business processes beginning 2002.

B.         Organizational and Other Changes in ADB

39.     The Operations Evaluation Mission (OEM) believes that the USS was a long overdue
product of some major contributions that ADB had made to the urbanization debate in the
1990s. When the USS was issued, it turned out to be the closing session of this debate within
ADB, rather than a new dawn of activity. No further major urban conferences were held. Within
ADB, attention shifted to the related water policy, approved by the Board on 16 January 2001,36
which led to an expanded program of research, TA, and international forums in that area. The
international development discourse had moved on to different topics, such as poverty
reduction, governance, and later the MDGs, Management for Development Results agenda,
and anticorruption. Some measure of the urbanization discussion returned with some
presentations at ADB's 2005 Annual Meeting. The ongoing discussion of the role of
infrastructure in Asia's development, and ADB's role in it, may have contributed to this.


36
     ADB. 2005. Water for All: The Water Policy of the Asian Development Bank. Manila.
                                                                                                                  15


40.     A significant unforeseen organizational change was the abolition of the
two Water Supply, Urban Development and Housing Divisions in ADB (East and West) during
ADB's 1 January 2002 reorganization and the establishment of the four social sector divisions,
one in each of the four new regional departments. The result of this reorganization was a
scattering of urban sector expertise and a reduction of the beneficial effects from their
consolidated management and daily interaction. WSS projects and integrated urban
development projects were isolated from urban environmental projects and urban housing
finance projects. These henceforth came under the responsibility of four agriculture,
environment and natural resources divisions, and a Pacific operations division; and four
governance, finance and trade divisions. In the social sector divisions, urban water supply and
urban development were grouped with other sectors such as education and health. As a result
of this reorganization, the specific urban focus that existed in the two previous divisions was
diluted. The revised business processes taking effect in 2002 gave more weight to country
strategy and program (CSP) preparation processes. The agriculture, natural resources and
social sectors division of RSDD, which had one specialist with an urban designation, was
disbanded; and a new transport, energy and water division was created in August 2005.
Consequently, the USS no longer has strong technical divisions as its natural home nor a
central custodian in ADB.

41.     In July 2004, ADB revised its sector and theme classification systems for projects,
eliminating the macro-sector of social infrastructure and, with it, the urban development and
housing sector. Integrated urban development projects were henceforth to be classified as
multisector, and mixed with other categories of unrelated multisector projects, including rural
projects.37 Within the new list of seven ADB thematic clusters, there is no "urban development"
cluster, such as the World Bank has (among the 11 themes that it pursues). Instead, there is an
urban development theme under the sustainable economic growth theme cluster, and an urban
environment theme under the environmental sustainability theme cluster. Under the theme of
governance, municipal governance or urban governance was not identified as a subtheme.
Rules to distinguish between water supply, sanitation, and waste management (WSSWM) and
multisector projects are absent. The new classification, with 27 sometimes competing themes,
and allowing 3 per project, makes tracking ADB's urban sector work more difficult, and has led
to inconsistent results.38

42.     In spite of the above developments, the number of professional staff officially designated
as urban specialists increased after 1999--10 in October 2000, 13 in May 2003, and 16 in
April 2005.39 All urban specialists were posted in the Social Sector Divisions of the regional
departments.40 While there has been a growth in the number of urban specialists, there has
been considerable staff turnover. Of the 10 urban specialists in 2000, 4 had left ADB by August
2005; of the remaining 6, none continued to hold an urban designation. The principal urban
37
   Housing finance projects were classified under the finance sector, housing construction projects under the industry
   and trade sector. Water supply and sanitation was joined with waste management (WSSWM) as a new sector, with
   three subsectors: (i) water supply and sanitation, (ii) waste management, and (iii) integrated.
38
   For instance, the Mindanao Urban Services Sector Project (ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the
   President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the Mindanao Urban
   Services Sector Project. Manila), is currently classified under the human development theme.
39
   In April 2005, there was one principal urban specialist (in the India Resident Mission), three senior urban
   development specialists, one senior housing and urban development specialist, one senior water supply and
   sanitation specialist, six urban development specialists, two urban economists, one housing and urban
   development specialist, and one urban development and planning specialist.
40
   Not all projects in the urban sector are administered by specialists with an "urban" designation. Many projects are
   implemented by staff with a more general designation, such as project engineer. ADB does not have, in the
   operational divisions, a designation water supply specialist or sanitation specialist. In 2005, ADB had six water
   resources specialists, but these are in the agriculture, environment, and natural resources divisions.
16


specialist assigned to RSDD in 2002 retired in 2005 and has not been replaced, since RSDD's
focus is on the water sector rather than the urban sector. The number of urban specialist staff in
ADB is not large. By comparison, the World Bank has 48 urban specialists for Asia alone and
has various urban theme groups.

43.    The number of resident missions (RMs) in DMCs increased from 11 in 199941 to 26 by
August 2005.42 This, in turn, led to a substantial increase in the number of national officers
involved in the administration of urban sector projects (although without a specific urban
designation). Some RMs use TA funds to fund semipermanent consultants in the RMs to
supplement their resources, such as the India RM, where the urban portfolio has expanded
substantially over the period of the USS.

44.     In November 2004, an independent panel to assess the effectiveness of ADB's
reorganization concluded that ADB had lost critical mass of technical specialists.43 It
recommended increasing the number of technical specialists; and establishing communities of
interest (guilds, committees, and/or panels) to help manage sector knowledge, promote
innovation, and maintain professional standards. The advice to create new committees has
been adopted, although with little benefit to the urban sector. In September 2005, at the time of
drafting this SES, ADB Management approved the establishment of 10 "Communities of
Practice", to replace the 10 sector and 9 thematic committees instituted along with ADB's
reorganization in 2002. An urban sector "Community of Practice" was not among these; the
sector committee on urban development, municipal services, and housing was disbanded.
However, a voluntary urban "Community of Practice" has been created. ADB has started a
study of the adequacy of its technical expertise in 2005.

45.     Assessment. The view of most urban sector specialists interviewed for this evaluation is
that ADB has been unable to maintain or improve an overall focus on the urban sector. The
designation of one urban specialist in RSDD after the reorganization was not sufficient to ensure
the needed overall perspective. Combining urban sectors with education, health, and some
other subsectors in the social sectors divisions has contributed to reducing ADB's urban focus.
Directors of such divisions would not necessarily have a background in the urban sector. The
creation of an urban sector committee and a network in 2002 was not effective in sharing best
practices and stimulating professional debate and feedback among urban specialists. Generally,
urban sector profiles and strategies were not updated, although a few reviews continued to be
conducted and urban "road maps" are now routinely being produced as part of the CSP
process. For the urban sector, ADB's new organization did not develop natural synergies with
government structures in DMCs, many of which have urban or housing ministries, departments,
or agencies (Supplementary Appendix C).

46.     This experience is not unique to ADB. World Bank experience is particularly instructive
in helping ADB to identify a way forward for its urban sector work. The World Bank's Urban and
Local Government Sector Strategy44 states the following:

41
   Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Nepal, Pakistan, South Pacific Regional, Sri Lanka,
   Uzbekistan, and Viet Nam.
42
    Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao People's
   Republic, Mongolia, Nepal, PRC, Pacific Liaison and Coordination, Pacific Subregional, Pakistan, Papua New
   Guinea, Philippines, South Pacific Regional, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tajikistan, Thailand, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
   and some extended missions and other offices (Gujarat and Sumatra).
43
   ADB. 2004. Independent Assessment of the Effectiveness of the Reorganization of the Asian Development Bank.
   Manila.
44
   Infrastructure Group Urban Development. 2000. Cities in Transition. The World Bank Urban and Local Government
   Strategy. Washington DC: World Bank.
                                                                                                    17


           In the first two decades of urban development lending (1972­92) the (urban)
           portfolio was rated among the best in the Bank. But the Bank's reorganization in
           1987 dispersed the central urban projects staff and left many of their projects in
           the charge of managers who lacked knowledge of urban issues. The strong body
           of urban sector work, policy studies, and research received inadequate
           operational follow-up and was poorly reflected in country assistance strategies.
           Little new analytical work was initiated after the early 1990s. The result of all
           these factors was a sharp dip in the performance ratings of completed projects
           around fiscal 1995....

47.      The MTS II, issued March 2006, groups sectors into three categories: (i) sectors where
ADB will focus its operations and for which it will build up a critical mass of expertise; (ii) sectors
which are not core but which are nevertheless important in enabling ADB to meet the diversity
of needs across different countries, and to ensure country focus in ADB operations; and
(iii) sectors in which operations should be gradually wound up. Partly as a result of OED
feedback from the present study, the urban sector was classified in the first group.45 If ADB
expects to increase its activities in the urban sector, the results of this evaluation suggest that
organizational changes will be required to be in harmony with this strategic objective. In
deciding on the organizational context for MTS II, the study identified the following options, a
combination of which would likely be required:

           (i)       The reformation of the operational urban sector divisions, to lead ADB's work in
                     the urban sector, including in WSSWM, multisector, urban transport, governance,
                     and housing finance sectors, which are currently diluted or dispersed.
           (ii)      A matrix organization with macro sector divisions in operations departments and
                     theme divisions in RSDD, one of which is devoted to the urban sector or
                     alternatively local government, and is made custodian of USS.
           (iii)     The institution of a critical mass of specialists in RSDD pursuing an urban
                     development or local government theme (this implies the re-designation of some
                     of the current more dispersed specialists or drawing in new specialists or long
                     term consultants).
           (iv)      For countries with a large urban portfolio, establishing urban units in RMs such
                     as presently the case in the India RM, mainly consisting of national staff, and to
                     be concerned with both preparation and implementation of urban sector projects.
           (v)       The creation of an ADB thematic cluster on urban development (or urban and
                     local government), and the reinstitution of an interdepartmental theme group, to
                     improve sharing of information and informal coordination within ADB.

                            IV.       ADB ASSISTANCE TO THE URBAN SECTOR

48.      ADB's assistance takes the form of (i) loan products and associated administration,
(ii) grant funded TA products and associated administration, and (iii) knowledge products
produced by ADB staff. This chapter considers each component individually, sketches relevant
trends and links these to the USS' prognosis and targets.




45
     Next to road transport, energy, rural infrastructure, education and the financial sector.
18


A.      Lending Program in Numbers and Volume

49.     ADB has been active in the urban sector since the late 1960s. The first loan in the sector
was the fourth loan that ADB approved: the Penang Water Supply Project46 for Malaysia in
1968. The first loan for a sewage treatment project was in Hong Kong, China, approved 7 years
later. The first complex "urban development" loan was approved soon after, in August 1976, for
the Bandung Urban Development and Sanitation Project47 in Indonesia. Lending for housing
started in the following year, for the Sha Tin Urban Development (Housing) Project48 in Hong
Kong, China. After its approval in 1980, the sector lending modality quickly became an
important feature of ADB's urban operations, and the first sector loan was for the Small Towns
Water Supply Sector Project49 in Indonesia, approved in December 1980. Housing finance loans
were processed mostly in the second half of the 1990s, mainly for India. ADB's involvement in
urban transport has been limited and sporadic. ADB has approved five such projects (Shanghai
Nanpu Bridge Project50 in 1991, Shanghai Yangpu Bridge Project51 in 1992, Bangkok Urban
Transport Project52 in 1992, Sukkur Bridge53 in 1994, and the Xi'An Urban Transport Project54 in
2003). However, road improvement constituted a sizeable portion of many integrated urban
development projects. In general, ADB did not succeed in developing large numbers of public-
private partnerships or in catalyzing large private sector investments in urban infrastructure.
ADB's work with the private sector to provide urban infrastructure remained sporadic--confined
to some housing finance and a few infrastructure investments in city expressways (Bangkok
Second Stage Expressway in 1990 and 1994 and the Manila North Tollway and water supply
(Chengdu Water Supply Project and Lyonnaise Viet Nam Water Company).

50.     Lending Trends. The overall trend in annual urban sector lending is shown in Figures 2
and 3. Similar to the World Bank, around 10% of ADB's lending was for urban sector projects,
both in amount and number of loans. As of the end of June 2005, total lending was
$10,215 million, under 201 loans for 173 projects. Lending was mainly for investment projects
and sector projects, with three quarters of the aggregate loan amount originating from ordinary
capital resources (OCR).55 Although there have been wide annual variations, there has been an


46
   ADB. 1968. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to
   Malaysia for the Penang Water Supply Project. Manila.
47
   ADB. 1976. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Technical
   Assistance Loan and Grant for the Bandung Urban Development and Sanitation Project and a Proposed Technical
   Assistance Loan for the South East Sulawesi Transmigration Area Development Project in Indonesia. Manila.
48
   ADB. 1977. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Government of Hong Kong for the Sha Tin Urban Development (Housing) Project. Manila.
49
   ADB. 1980. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Republic of Indonesia for the Small Towns Water Supply Sector Project. Manila.
50
   ADB. 1991. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance Grants to the People's Republic of China for the Shanghai Nanpu Bridge Project. Manila.
51
   ADB. 1992. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance Grants to the People's Republic of China for the Shanghai Yangpu Bridge Project. Manila.
52
   ADB. 1992. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance to the Kingdom of Thailand for the Bangkok Urban Transport Project. Manila.
53
   ADB. 1994. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance Grant to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Sukkur Bridge Project. Manila.
54
   ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   People's Republic of China for the Xi'An Urban Transport Project. Manila.
55
   It is a challenge to estimate total ADB lending for the urban sector because of the lack of an urban category in
   ADB's loan classification system. Lending for the urban sector may be larger than this amount because there are
   other multisector projects which cover water supply and sanitation (WSS) or urban environment components.
   Some rural WSS projects also cover small towns. Irrigation projects may also cover elements of drinking water
   supply.
                                                                                                           19


increasing trend in urban lending over the past 35 years. However, urban lending has remained
constant as a share of total annual lending at about 10%.

                            Figure 2: Lending for the Urban Sector in Constant 2005 Prices

              1,200

              1,000
               800
 $ million




               600

               400

               200

                    0
                     1968 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003
                                                           Year of Approval
     Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.



                                  Figure 3: Public Sector Lending for the Urban Sector as
                                          Proportion of Total Lending, 1968­2004
               25

              20
 Percentage




              15

              10

               5

               0
                                                                                             2001
                                             1984
                                    1977




                                                                                            2004
                                                                                            1999
                                                                                            2000
                                            1980




                                                                   1990
                                                                   1987
                                    1975
                      1968




                                                                   1988




                                                                               1994
                                            1978
                                    1976




                                            1986




                                                                                            2003
                                            1983




                                                                   1989




                                                                                            2002
                                                                                            1998
                                                                               1992
                                                                   1991




                                                                               1995
                                                                               1996
                      1973




                                            1981
                      1974
                      1971




                                                                               1993
                                            1979
                      1970




                                                                                            1997
                                            1985
                                            1982
                      1972




                                                           Year of Approval

      Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.


51.    Multisector projects accounted for 44% of the total loans for urban sector projects,
followed by WSSWM projects at 43% of total lending. The trends in lending by urban subsectors
are shown in Figure 4.
20



                         Figure 4: Shares of Different Categories in Urban Sector Lending
                                                    (1968­2004)
                  100

                  80
     Percentage




                  60

                  40

                  20

                   0




                         1991
                         1988
                         1982



                        1986
                        1987
                        1979




                        1983

                        1985
                        1977




                        1993




                                                                                          2000
                                                                                          2001
                        1980



                        1984
                        1981




                        1990

                        1992

                        1994

                                                                                          1996
                        1989
                        1976

                        1978




                                                                                          1998




                                                                                          2002
                        1975
                        1970
                        1971


                        1974




                        1995




                                                                                          1999



                                                                                          2003
                        1972
                        1973




                                                                                          1997
                        1968




                                                                                          2004
                                                      Year of Approval
                        WSSWM         Multisector         Housing             Transport         MS+Housing

        MS+Housing = multisector combined with housing; WSSWM = water supply, sanitation, and waste
        management.
        Source: Asian Development Bank internal databases.


52.     Trends by DMC. Thirty-one of 43 DMCs have borrowed for urban sector projects, but
most of the lending has gone to only a few countries (e.g., Bangladesh, PRC, India, Indonesia,
Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Viet Nam) (Appendix 5). The PRC and India together
accounted for 47.6% of lending to the urban sector between 1993 and 2004. The PRC started
borrowing for the urban sector in 1991 and India began in 1995. Bangladesh, Indonesia, and
Philippines borrowed for the urban sector from the 1970s onwards, but the volume declined
after the 1990s as did total ADB lending to those countries. The forward pipeline for Indonesia
includes three urban loans for $210 million; for the Philippines, two loans for $100 million; and
for Bangladesh, two loans for $120 million. Pakistan's pipeline is growing; by mid-2005, 6 loans
for $400 million were identified. Future urban sector lending for other countries is much smaller,
although the significance of modest levels of lending could still be high, given the smaller
population of many of these countries.

53.     Before and After the USS. When comparing the periods before and after the USS, this
study concluded that the USS' objective to significantly increase urban sector lending has not
been achieved. Urban lending increased only marginally from $3,306 million in the 6 years
before the USS to $3,500 million in the 6 years after the USS--a rise of 5.9% in nominal terms.
Average annual urban sector lending was $550 million before the USS and $582 million
afterward. From mid-1993 to mid-1999, urban sector lending accounted for 9.0% of total
lending; afterward, until mid-2005, this proportion increased marginally to 11.5%. The increase
is, however, somewhat misleading, as it is influenced by a surge in lending in 1997­1998
related to the Asian financial crisis. If the large policy loans provided to Indonesia, Korea, and
Thailand, totaling $6.2 billion, are excluded, urban sector lending was around 11% in the period
1993­1999, about the same level as post-USS. The greatest expansion in urban sector lending
volume was achieved in multisector projects (22.6%), principally in India.56 The other sectors,
such as housing and environment, increased by 19%. WSSWM lending, however, fell by


56
     This excludes the Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation Project (ADB. 2001. Report and Recommendation of the
     President to Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to India for the Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation Project.
     Manila), which includes a sizeable urban sector rehabilitation component.
                                                                                                              21


12.6%.57 The growth in housing finance loans may not be sustainable. ADB rates in the 1990s
and early 2000s were seen as advantageous by financial intermediaries. Now, however, the
margins are insufficient for such loans to be profitable for financial intermediaries in OCR
countries.

54.     The volume of urban sector lending may be about to change (Figure 5). The forward
pipeline includes 40 new projects and indicates a growth potential. It is expected that aggregate
urban lending will be in the order of $3.4 billion in the next 3 years or over $1 billion per year,
almost double previous urban lending. If this pipeline materializes, it indicates that, consistent
with the USS, there is a growing appetite for urban lending in DMCs. However, some caution is
needed in assessing the forward pipeline. Several urban sector specialists recalled that, after
the USS, the pipeline portfolio looked good but that it did not materialize as anticipated.


       Figure 5: Urban Lending Before and After the Urban Sector Strategy, and Pipeline,
                                      by Main Category



                       3,500                                   810                   470
                                             681
                       3,000                                                         743
           $ million




                       2,500                                   1,308
                                             1,496
                       2,000
                       1,500                                                        2,174
                       1,000                 1,129            1,382
                         500
                           0
                                 July 1993­June 1998   July 1999­June 2005   Pipeline 2005­2007

                               Multisector                WSSWM                  Other urban

     WSSWM = water supply, sanitation, and waste management; Other urban = mainly housing and urban
                             a
     environmental projects.
     Note: Standby pipeline loans have been excluded.
     a
       This study reclassified three projects: Loan 2026-SAM, from multisector to WSSWM, Loan 1663/65-PHI from
       multisector to "other urban", and Loan 1560-MON from WSSWM to multisector.
     Source: Asian Development Bank internal databases.


55.     The pattern of past and expected future urban lending for all countries that borrowed
more than $100 million from mid-1993 to mid-2005 is shown in Figure 6. Loans to two of ADB's
largest clients, India and the PRC, dominate urban lending. Urban lending to both countries
increased substantially after 1999 and there are strong pipelines for continued urban lending.
ADB is engaged in addressing major urban challenges, especially in the larger cities in the
two most populous countries in the world. The future urban pipeline in Pakistan is growing.
Pakistan's urban lending pipeline may be larger than that indicated in Figure 6, as a result of
recent project identifications in Karachi, a megacity. Although ADB's urban operations were
significant in Indonesia and the Philippines between 1993 and 1999, lending fell thereafter and
the future urban pipeline remains modest. Both countries substantially reduced their total

57
     Loans for the other sectors would have been higher had it not been for two housing loans to India which were
     approved by the Board but cancelled before signing (ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to
     the Board of Directors on Four Proposed Loans to the Housing and Urban Development Corporation, National
     Housing Bank, Housing Development Finance Corporation and ICICI for the Housing Finance II Project in India.
     Manila.
22


borrowing from ADB after 1999, experienced some political uncertainty, and pursued a
decentralization strategy.


     Figure 6: Patterns of Urban Sector Lending in Selected Developing Member Countries


  $ million


1,400
 1,200
  1,000
     800
      600
      400
       200
          0 IND                                                                            2005­2007
                  PRC   PHI
                              INO   VIE                                                   July 1999­July 2005
                                          THA
                                                PAK    SRI
                                                             BAN                          July 1993­June 1999
                                                                   NEP
                                                                         LAO
                                                                               Other
                                                                                 Others
                                                                               s
         July 1993­June 1999                          July 1999­July 2005                      2005­2007

 BAN = Bangladesh, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Leo People's Democratic Republic, NEP = Nepal,
 PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand.
 Note: Projection 2005­2007 as of March 2005.
 Sources: Operations Evaluation Department data and Asian Development Bank Project Preparation Information
           System.


56.     Two conclusions stand out. (i) Lending for the urban sector has increased over the
past 35 years in real terms, but enormous funding gaps remain. Lending increased by a
marginal 6% during 1999­2005, compared to the preceding period. This increase is modest
compared to 15% growth in Asia's urban population over the same period. (ii) USS' qualitative
lending target to significantly increase urban lending was not achieved. The larger future
pipeline could indicate that there is a growing appetite for urban sector lending, particularly in
the PRC, India, and Pakistan, if ADB can respond effectively and efficiently.

B.       Project Developments After the Urban Sector Strategy of 1999

57.     The USS proposed not only to increase the volume of lending, but also to expand (i) the
range of subsectors to be addressed, (ii) interrelationships of project components, (iii) number of
policy-based loans, (iv) cofinancing opportunities, (v) support for private sector investments,
(vi) ADB's role in institutional development and capacity development, (vii) cooperation with civil
society organizations, (viii) community participation, and (ix) gender development activities.
To assess actual developments against these expectations, pre- and post-USS patterns were
analyzed, without a rigid focus on attribution. In the 6 years before the USS, 45 urban projects
were approved, and 43 were approved in the 6 years after the USS. All figures below are drawn
from statistical analysis of the reports and recommendations of the President (RRPs) approved
from July 1993 to the end of June 2005 (Supplementary Appendix D).
                                                                                                                    23


      58.     Shift to More Multisector Projects and "Other" Urban Projects? There is little
      evidence of any significant change in the urban portfolio attributable to the USS. Figures 4 and 5
      suggest a de facto move in urban lending away from WSSWM projects and towards larger
      lending volume for integrated urban development/multisector projects. The project designs often
      incorporated WSSWM combined with other related investments (e.g., storm drainage or urban
      roads). In terms of quantities of ADB-supported projects, however, these trends are less
      marked. The number of multisector projects fell from 17 before the USS to 16 afterward;
      WSSWM projects declined from 24 to 21. The number of "other" urban projects increased from
      4 to 6. A number of housing loans and urban environmental loans were included in this
      category. The USS target to expand urban transport operations was not achieved: there was
      only one urban transport project post-USS. The average number of urban transport components
      in projects declined. In the area of land management, there was only one small cadastral survey
      and land registration project in Mongolia.58

      59.     When analyzing components within urban sector projects, there was a decline in the
      number of projects with water supply components after the USS and an increase in the number
      of projects with sewerage components (Figure 7). The number of components related to urban
      shelter (slum upgrading, housing, and land development), land management and regulation,
      and urban finance increased after the USS.

                           Figure 7: Percentage of Projects with Urban Sector Components,
                                      Before and After the Urban Sector Strategy
                      Urban renewal
                    Slaughterhouses
                         Street lights
                       Bus terminals
                Air pollution control
               Market development
     Land admin/tenure/regulation
                     Public housing
                    Housing finance
                Slum development
          Other WSS/environment
                 Municipal taxation
                     Urban finance
                       Toilet/latrines
               Policy development
               Training, workshops
                   Urban transport
      Environmental management
      Tariff and user charges work
        Solid waste management
     Public awareness campaigns
             Drainage/flood control
                         Sewerage
                       Water supply
Institutional/capacity development

                  1993­1999         1999­2005
                                       0        10   20     30       40        50        60        70          80        90
                                                                     % of projects
 Source: Review of 88 reports and recommendations of the President approved between July 1993 and June 2005.




      58
           ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to
           Mongolia for the Cadastral Survey and Land Registration Project. Manila.
24


60.      More Projects with Interrelated Subcomponents? The USS implied that the number
of different subcomponents included in the projects would increase. This has not happened and
urban projects have generally become less complex when measured by the number of
components. The number of components went down by 12%, from an average of 12.4 before
the USS to 10.9 after. The pattern held for multisector projects (from 17.4 to 14.1) and "other"
urban projects (from 5.0 to 4.2). WSSWM remained similar in terms of complexity, with
10.1 subcomponents before the USS and 10.4 afterward. WSSWM was often found to include
storm drainage components but generally do not include roadworks, market development, bus
terminals, and municipal tax advice.

61.     The proportion of urban sector projects with water supply components (covering new,
extended, and rehabilitated networks and water treatment plants) fell from 71% before the USS
to 54% after. The share of urban sector projects with one or more sewerage and sewage
treatment components rose from 42% to 49% (most water supply projects now include
sewerage components). The share of projects with components supporting construction of
public toilets and private toilets and/or latrines fell from 31% before the USS to 19% after.

62.     The proportion of projects with urban transport subcomponents declined from 40%
before the USS to 26% after while the proportion with drainage subcomponents remained
constant at 49% of projects. Urban road subcomponents are usually successful. The
procurement process and the extra supervision that ADB support induces often make their
quality better than other urban roadworks. The wisdom of reducing road subcomponents could
be questioned. However, this study has not fully evaluated this issue and the reasons for the
decline in the number of urban road components.

63.     The prevalence of housing finance components doubled from 7% to 14% of projects.
Two loans to India helped set up an urban finance facility. However, overall, the housing finance
outcome was lower than the USS intended. Urban sector projects supported by ADB seldom
included components to support bond market development, microcredit, land tenure, land
development, crime prevention, and safety. Overall, there is no evidence that the
interrelationships of project components have grown post-USS. However, there seems to be an
appropriate trend of more focus within projects on either public health or public space as a
nucleus, and a modest shift away from the "Christmas tree" approach of multiple
subcomponents in different sectors outside the context of public health.

64.     Overall, the evaluation concludes that the trend toward fewer components was
appropriate. Lessons have been learned that trying to do too much and including too many
disparate components in the design often results in projects that are not always rated
satisfactory after project completion.

65.     Loan consulting services and attached TA components for institutional development and
capacity development were included in most projects before the USS (82%) and continued to be
so afterward (84%). Some of this assistance was designed to strengthen project implementation
units (PIUs)59 and part was focused on broader policy/institutional issues. From cost estimates
available, the size of the components remained similar. This suggests that the objective of
increasing ADB's focus on strengthening institutional capacity was not achieved.

66.   More Work on Policy Reforms such as Tariffs, User Chargers, and Municipal
Taxes? The analysis of the RRPs approved over the period shows that ADB planned more

59
     ADB. 2005. Special Evaluation Study on the Role of Project Implementation Units. Manila.
                                                                                                               25


work on water or sewerage tariffs and collection efficiency after the USS. The percentage of
WSSWM projects with clearly identified work on tariffs/user charges almost doubled from 29%
before the USS to 57% after. There was not a significant corresponding increase in such a
component in integrated urban projects. The proportion of projects, including work on municipal
taxes such as municipal property tax and road tax, fell from 20% of projects before the USS to
14% afterward. In many DMCs, preparatory work on legislation on property tax and municipal
taxes has now been completed and new systems are being implemented.

67.      Greater Variety in Lending Modalities? The USS called for the use of a greater variety
of lending modalities for the urban sector, including program and sector lending modalities.
Policy-based lending has remained limited in the urban sector. There was only one such loan
before the USS (Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement Program)60 and two after (Kathmandu
Valley Water Services Sector Development Program61 and Pasig River Environmental
Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program62). The number of sector projects
doubled, from 5 before the USS to 10 after, but the associated loan volumes declined from
$510 million to $352 million. The number of project loans fell from 36 to 27, but loan volumes
increased from $2,197 million to $2,604 million. The number of urban development finance
institution projects remained limited. While there was a modest increase in the variety of lending
modalities, the objective of increased urban policy-based lending, and by extension greater ADB
impact on urban policy reform, was not achieved. The reasons may be various. The two largest
urban borrowers, the PRC and India, have shown little interest in program lending. Also,
experiences with the three programs in the urban sector have been mixed.

68.    More Projects Cofinanced with Other External Agencies? Progress was made in
increasing cofinancing in the urban sector. The number of projects cofinanced by external
agencies increased slightly from 8 (19%) to 11 (25%) between the two periods. The amount of
cofinancing rose more significantly, however, from $50.6 million to $330.7 million.

69.       Greater Involvement of Other Financing Sources? The USS aimed to mobilize more
funds other than ADB and government sources. The evaluation assessed progress in achieving
this objective by determining whether the share of ADB loans in total project financing fell. The
financing of projects before and after the USS is shown in Figure 8. The share of project costs
financed by ADB remained constant--51% before USS, 52% after, despite some more
cofinancing with external agencies--which implies that the objective was not achieved.
However, there was a change in the mix of financing sources. The proportion of central
government financing declined from 18% to 13%. Local government financing increased from
9% to 15%, state-owned banks from 1% to 7%, commercial banks from 1% to 3%, and other
external agencies from 2% to 5%. However, the proportion of financing provided by water
utilities, financing corporations, and direct beneficiaries of projects declined in importance from
23% of the total project finance before 1999 to 7% after. These changes in financing patterns
may reflect increasing decentralization in many countries, including decisions to make local
governments responsible for financing urban development. While this increases accountability
and transparency, the fiscal position of many municipalities is weak. Financing urban sector
investments is a major challenge in most DMCs.
60
   ADB. 1998. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Loans and a
   Technical Assistance Grant to the Republic of the Philippines and the Land Bank of the Philippines for the Metro
   Manila Air Quality Improvement Sector Development Program. Manila.
61
   ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Loans to the
   Kingdom of Nepal for the Kathmandu Valley Water Services Sector Development Program. Manila.
62
   ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Loans and a
   Technical Assistance Grant to the Republic of the Philippines for the Pasig River Environmental Management and
   Rehabilitation Sector Development Program. Manila.
26



                   Figure 8: Financing of Projects Before and After the Urban Sector Strategy

                                      3,500
                 4,000
                 3,000
     $ million




                                                849      1,048
                 2,000                                               447
                         3,306                                                213         80       226
                 1,000
                    0                            552        94        23                  106
                         ADB loan     1,187                                     0
                                           Local government      Commercial banks IFIs    Bilateral agencies
                            Central government      State owned banks


                         Mid-1993 to Mid-1999                      Mid-1999 to Mid-2005

  ADB = Asian Development Bank, IFIs = international financial corporations.
  Source: Review of 88 reports and recommendations of the President approved between July 1993 and June 2005.


70.     More Private Sector Operations? The USS called for more support for private sector
urban development projects using loans without government guarantee and/or equity
investments. Inadequate progress has been made in this area. Only 5 loans were for private
sector urban projects (2 for housing or home mortgage finance, 2 for water companies, and
1 for an urban expressway company). In addition, some other operations, such as assistance
for the local government unit (LGU) guarantee corporation in the Philippines and an equity
investment in the China Environment Fund, should have an overall beneficial impact on private
participation in the urban sector. An example of a public-private sector partnership is the
Chengdu Water Supply Project in the PRC (Box 2).

                                  Box 2: Example of a Public Private Partnership

The Chengdu Water Supply Project is a build-operate-transfer (BOT) scheme to address the need for
treated water by Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province. The project entails the construction of a
treatment plant and the laying of a 27-kilometer transmission pipeline to deliver water to the city's homes
and industries. With a population of more than 10 million, Chengdu is one of the important industrial and
scientific research bases in the southwest People's Republic of China (PRC). The Asian Development
Bank (ADB) extended a loan of $26.5 million and helped in structuring finance for the $107.6 million
project. Through complementary financing, ADB also made possible commercial debt funding of
$21.5 million. Traditionally funded by the government on a grant basis, water supply projects were
opened up to private investment because of the large investments needed. As the first BOT water supply
project in the PRC, the project demonstrated that the BOT scheme can be successfully implemented at
the municipal level and externally funded without any central government guarantee. ADB's involvement
ensured that transparent competitive bidding was observed, the lowest possible tariff was obtained, and
project fundamentals were in place. The project won three international awards in recognition of its
innovative financing structure, which enabled international lenders to take long-term municipal risk in the
PRC for the first time.

Source: Adapted from ADB's website. Available at http://www.adb.org/PrivateSector/Finance/chengdu.pdf

71.     Growth in urban private sector operations has been modest, during a time when ADB's
private sector operations overall have expanded considerably. There has been no lending to
municipalities without government guarantees. ADB is currently considering how sub-sovereign
and non-sovereign lending to the many semi-government agencies is to be handled. Overall,
                                                                                                      27


the public and private sector parts of ADB have not worked together to promote private sector
investment in urban infrastructure. Given the objectives of the USS, the OEM expected to find
more evidence of public private partnerships, and the public side of ADB undertaking more
policy dialogue to create an enabling environment for the private sector. Given the difficult state
of municipal finances in many countries, increased private sector participation holds the
potential to strengthen urban infrastructure and provide urban services when the public sector
cannot. There have also been a number of cases where private sector investments in urban
infrastructure have experienced difficulty and some contracts have not been honored. This
suggests that there are opportunities to use ADB's credit enhancement and risk mitigation tools,
which have not been fully exploited.

72.      More EAs at the Subnational Level? As foreseen by the USS, a shift occurred post-
USS to reduce the predominance of national government ministries and departments in urban
projects. Prior to the USS, two-thirds of urban projects involved national governments or
national authorities. The proportion fell to half after 1999 (Table 1). The shift to greater
involvement of local agencies versus national governments implies a greater opportunity for
creating more sustainable results, as national government projects usually involve project
management units (PMUs) and PIUs that are dissolved upon project completion. This is less
likely to be the case when local governments and their authorities and corporations run the
project. Even if there are PIUs in such cases, these will generally be composed of staff that later
operate and maintain the assets created. The expansion of the urban sector programs in India
(predominantly with state governments and delegated agencies) and the PRC (local agencies
created for the project) contributed to this shift.

                Table 1: Executing Agencies of Projects Approved Before and
                                 After Urban Sector Strategy
                                        (% of projects)

                                                               1993­1999       1999­2005
           National Government                                   62.2            41.9
           National Agency                                        4.4             9.3
           Provincial Government                                  6.7            16.3
           Provincial Agency                                      6.7             0.0
           Local Government                                       2.2            14.0
           Local Agency                                          15.6             7.0
           Development Finance Institution                        2.2            11.6
          Source: Review of 88 reports and recommendations of the President approved between
                  July 1993 and June 2005.

73.     Shift in Type of Urban Area Addressed? The USS did not address the issue of the
size of municipalities to be covered by ADB's urban operations. There are four types of urban
projects: (i) multiple towns or cities; (ii) single cities with populations above 1 million; (iii) single
cities with population below 1 million; and (iv) beneficiaries of whom the location cannot be
easily specified (e.g., housing finance). Over the period reviewed, 49 of the 88 projects covered
multiple towns, 10 projects were for single cities with a population below 1 million, 24 projects
were for cities with populations above 1 million, and 5 were finance projects. Figure 9
demonstrates that little changes occurred in the type of urban areas addressed. About
180 million people live in municipalities involved in ADB-funded urban projects (44 multi-town
projects covered 57 million people, 9 small cities covered 1.7 million, 19 projects for large cities
covered 120 million, and 2 finance projects covered 1.4 million).
28



               Figure 9: Type of Urban Area Addressed Before and After Urban Sector Strategy
                                                 ($ million)

             2,000

                     1,464   1,538                                               1,501
             1,500                                                      1,439
 $ million




             1,000


              500                                                                                 300   365
                                              103      95
                0
                       Multi-town            Single city < 1 million    Single city > 1 million    Finance



                       July 1993­June 1998                             July 1999­June 2005


 Source: Review of 88 reports and recommendations of the President approved between July 1993 and June 2005.


74.     Larger Populations being Targeted, and More Poor Households? The USS had no
objective related to the size of municipality to be targeted or the incidence of poverty. Post-USS
projects did not indicate that larger population centers were being supported. Before the USS,
45 projects covered cities with an aggregate urban population of 102 million. The 43 post-USS
projects covered an urban population of 63 million. These figures indicate the reach of ADB
support. The total Asian urban population was about 1.35 billion in 2000. This means that about
12% of Asia's urban population lives in cities that have benefited from an ADB financed urban
project. For 27 projects approved before the USS, on average, a 33% poverty incidence was
estimated; the corresponding figure for 35 post-USS projects was 25%. It is difficult to draw firm
conclusions about the apparent decline of coverage of poor households. It may be due to
increased urban sector projects in the PRC where the incidence of poverty is relatively low, and
growing incomes over a 6-year period.

75.     Longer Relationships with Cities? There is little evidence that the USS objective of
building long-term relationships with selected cities was achieved. ADB has ended its urban
sector relationships with cities such as Shanghai and Beijing because the PRC country strategy
placed priority on supporting projects in poorer interior provinces rather than wealthier cities
along the east coast. In India, when an urban project is finished, the next project may be in the
same state, but in a different city or town. However, this is partly a consequence of government
decisions.

76.    More Community and Civil Society Participation? In line with the USS, there were
more attempts after 1999 to involve communities, NGOs, and community-based organizations
(CBOs) in projects in a participatory manner. Half of the projects foresaw the participation of
NGOs, CBOs, and other elements of civil society in project activities; before the USS, the
corresponding figure was 30%. Multisector projects tended to have more NGO and CBO
involvement.
                                                                                                     29


77.     More Attention for Resettlement and Land Issues? Given the intended increasing
orientation towards environmental issues, poverty reduction, and comprehensive urban sector
projects outlined in the USS, the number of RRPs identifying resettlement issues and
formulating resettlement plans (RPs) was expected to rise after mid-1999. As a matter of ADB
policy, the preparation of RPs became mandatory after 1995 in all cases where resettlement
was anticipated. After the USS, in 31 RRPs, one or more RPs were prepared (72% of projects),
although only 24 RRPs raised a resettlement issue in their main text; before the USS, the
number was 13 (29%). Land and right-of-way issues became more prevalent, perhaps
indicating the increasingly critical nature of such issues as urbanization grew. Before the USS,
almost no private land had to be acquired for ADB-supported projects; after the USS, in 19% of
urban sector projects, more than 100 hectares had to be acquired. The increased focus on
resettlement after the USS reflects both the increasing attention given to ADB safeguard
policies and the changing design of urban projects.

78.    More Attention for Gender Issues? Before the USS, 51% of RRPs included a
discussion of gender considerations in project design; afterward, the proportion rose to 77%--
surely related to the approval of the gender and development policy in June 1998. In many
cases, the nature of the considerations remained at the level of identification of project effects
on gender issues. However, a targeted approach was increasingly adopted in project design.
Gender action plans identified special measures to ensure women's participation in the project.
Before the USS, such plans were elaborated in 24% of RRPs; this rose to 52% post-USS.

79.      Attention for Corruption in RRPs? The USS stated that specific anticorruption
measures should be put in place and enforced to promote transparency and accountability.
After the USS, 30% of urban sector RRPs reflected that ADB had discussed its anticorruption
policy with local officials; 24% highlighted specific anticorruption measures or capacity building.
In response to more attention to the negative effects of corruption measures, a mandatory
paragraph on anticorruption policy was added to the RRP in late 2005. It remains to be seen
whether this becomes largely a format issue or actually results in the inclusion of measures to
support anticorruption initiatives or measures to mitigate the risk that ADB-funded urban
development projects will be infected by corruption. Corruption is widely acknowledged to be a
major threat to the efficiency of both projects and service provision the urban sector in Asia, as
shown by the material in Boxes 3 and 4. The challenge going forward is for ADB to more
explicitly identify potential corruption risks in urban projects and then to include mitigation
measures in the project design and monitor the effectiveness of these measures during
implementation.

     Box 3: Corruption and Irregularities in Projects in the Urban Water Supply Sector

Many examples of corruption and irregularities are elaborated in a book published by ADB: Asian Water
Supplies: Reaching the Urban Poor:a

Collusion among bidders. Contractors work together or with politicians to win projects with their local
service providers on favorable terms. In some cases, contractors take turns to `win' bids by agreeing on
an amount which has already been padded to incorporate the cost of bribes to other bidders.

Favoritism in appointing contractors. This can include favoritism in pre-qualifying contractors and
consultants using inappropriate techniques when appointing technical evaluation committees and
releasing of documents and estimates to contractors prior to bidding.
30


Kickbacks to executing agencies. Asian Water Supplies (footnote a) estimates the amount in kickbacks
in the sector at 10%­15% of the contract price in the procurement of goods, 25% for civil works,
20% for engineering design, and 12%­15% for technical assistance. It was, however, not clear which
countries were being referred to.b Other forms of kickbacks can include: sponsoring foreign tours;
covering the costs of educating children in developed countries; purchasing luxury homes and vehicles;
entertainment costs for government officials during study tours and inspection visits. Payments are
usually made out of the mobilization or advance payment received from the development agency.

Collusion with contractors. This includes extending contracts for unnecessary work, protecting unfit
contractors, complicity of agency staff in the use of substandard materials; approvals of falsified materials
invoices, use of construction shortcuts in the field, drawing up specifications to favor certain suppliers.

Extorting funds from contractors by executing agencies. Harassing contractors to receive bribes by
delaying approvals; direct negotiation with contractors over claims; delaying payment on contractor
invoices until bribes are paid and terminating and suspending contracts to exact revenge.
a
    McIntosh, Arthur C. 2003. Asian Water Supplies: Reaching the Urban Poor. Asian Development Bank and
    International Water Association. Manila.
b
    See also: Davis, Jennifer. 2003. Corruption in Public Service Delivery: Experience from South Asia's Water and
    Sanitation Sector. World Development. Vol. 32, No. 1.


                  Box 4: Corruption and Theft in Water Supply Service Provision

Bribery needed to obtain a water supply connection. A recent survey in Indiaa found that 12% of the
customers of a water utility had made payments to expedite new water or sanitation connections in the
previous six months. Studies in the Philippines corroborated in 1996 that illegal connections can be
obtained from the water supply concessionaire at about ten times the price of a legal connection.b The
Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism (footnote b) reported several cases of bribery in the sector.
Employees of the former Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System have been reported to accept
bribes to install or accept illegal connections or to settle arrears. Regarded as common knowledge is the
"alaga system" where water thieves give corrupt officials and employees regular bribe money to ignore
their offenses. Executing agency personnel laying pipes that pass through depressed communities would
offer to install illegal connections, at high prices.c An article in World Development reports that the same
scenarios apply in India.d

Water sellers defrauding customers. According to the Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism
(PCIJ) (footnote b), some water sellers in the Philippines turn off water valves resulting in no-water
situations in some areas, in order to force ordinary consumers to buy water for as high as thirteen times
the amount charged by the two main concessionaires (i.e., Maynilad and Manila Water) in Metro Manila.

Theft/illegal connections by water users. IIlegal connections are widespread in many Asian cities. For
instance, PCIJ reported that in 1997, Manila Water discovered 11,000 illegal connections in its service
area and that in 1999, Maynilad disconnected 700 large and small illegal connections. Several big
companies were found to have illegal water supply connections.

Collusion executing agency staff and customers. The survey in India (footnote a) found that 41% of
the customers had paid small bribes in the previous six months to falsify meter readings and thereby
lower bills. Thirty percent had paid bribes to expedite repair work.

Unaccounted for Sale of Water by Executing Agencies to Water Vendors. ADB's Asian Water Supply
publicatione ventured that there may be a link between low piped water coverage in some areas and high
levels of non-revenue water (NRW), especially since the latter is often attributed to illegal connections
and leakage/technical problems. The book deems it possible that those with vested interests allow the
illegal sale of utility water to small scale water providers at high prices (low volumes). The illegal sale is
part of the NRW. The total revenue obtained from this may amount to the same earnings from official sale
                                                                                                                  31


of water by utilities. It is possible that the high revenue generated from the illegal sales to SSWPs is the
reason for the long-standing status quo (the urban poor not receiving service).
a
     Corruption Hinders Potable Water Supply. 2006. ABC News Online. Available: http://www.abc.net.au/news/
     newsitems/200603/s1589048.htm
b
     Rimban, Luz. 2000. Big Companies Steal Water. Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism (PCIJ). Manila.
     Available: http://www.pcij.org/stories/2000/water.html
c
     PCIJ. 2000. Water Thieves Operate with Impunity. Manila. Available: http://www.pcij. org/stories/2000/water2.html
d
     See also: Davis, Jennifer. 2003. Corruption in Public Service Delivery: Experience from South Asia's Water and
     Sanitation Sector. World Development. Vol. 32, No. 1.
e
     McIntosh, Arthur C. 2003. Asian Water Supplies: Reaching the Urban Poor. Asian Development Bank and
     International Water Association. Manila.

C.         Capacity Development in Urban Sector Projects

80.     ADB approves many infrastructure loan proposals on the strength of their added value in
terms of policy reform initiatives and capacity development impacts. While this study did not
concentrate on measuring actual impacts on the ground, the SES used a number of input
indicators as proxies for institutional and capacity development. A questionnaire survey of
projects provided perceptions of clients on capacity development. This section poses the
question: were more institutional and capacity development activities included in project design
since the USS? This section also investigates the use of (i) foreign and domestic project
management consultants, (ii) design and supervision engineering consultants, and (iii) use of
externally driven and temporary PIUs.63

81.     Were more Advisory TAs Approved for Project-Related Capacity Development
since the USS? The 45 projects approved in the 6 years before the USS had 17 attached
TAs.64 In the 6 years after the USS was adopted, the 43 approved projects had 11 attached
TAs, although some stand-alone TAs also addressed project-related capacity. The average size
of the attached TA approved was $0.8 million both before and after the USS. The use of
domestic consultants in TAs increased after the USS from an average of 18 to 44 person-
months. The number of person-months of international consultants declined slightly from 21 to
18 person-months. Contributing factors may include an increasing recognition of the capacity of
domestic consultants, the desire of EAs to work more closely with local consultants, limited TA
budgets, and a perception that expensive international consultants do not always deliver value
for money.

82.     Were Greater Amounts of Consulting Services included under Loans? There is no
evidence to indicate that more of the loan proceeds are being allocated to consulting. This is in
spite of the fact that international consulting fees have gone up significantly over the years.
Judging from the cost estimates in RRPs, the proportion allocated to consulting services
declined slightly from 3.2% to 2.4%. Similarly, loan proportions for institutional strengthening or
capacity building fell from 3% to 1%. However, the varying definitions of line item costs in RRPs
introduce some uncertainty into these estimates. In addition, cofinancing by bilateral and
multilateral agencies increased, partly for capacity development.

83.    Were More Consultants Used in Urban Sector Projects? The evidence indicates that
almost all projects involved consultants in varying degrees. The average number of person-
months per million dollars of ADB lending remained constant before and after the USS across
project types, fourteen person-months for integrated urban development projects and 8 to

63
     The base tables for this analysis are in Supplementary Appendix D.
64
     Approved concurrent with the related loan.
32


9 person-months for WSSWM. Multisector projects were most consultant-intensive per million
dollars of ADB loan.

84.     Were the Consultants Providing More Operational or Advisory Services?
Operational support accounted for two-thirds of consultant time, and advisory and training
services made up one-third. In multisector projects, person-months for advisory services rose
significantly from 2 to 5 person-months per million dollars of loan, whereas the ratio for
operational consultants decreased from 12 to 9. This is in line with USS and with more recent
ADB targets in capacity development, which call for more effort to reduce the reliance on
operational consultants in favor of more involvement of the agencies' own staff, on the
assumption that learning-by-doing will engender more effective capacity development, and will
reduce capacity erosion through substitution of agency staff.

85.     Were More Domestic Consultants Used under Loan Financing? The number of
domestic consultant person-months financed under the loans rose by a quarter after the USS,
from 785 to 982 person-months per project, while the input of international consultants remained
stable at around 95 person-months per project.

86.    Were More Consultants Involved in Capacity Development? Figure 10 reflects the
types and average number of consulting person-months used per project before and after USS.
The use of consultants for training and community programs remained more or less the same;
consultant use for other services, mainly advisory, increased. Prior to the USS, half of the urban
sector projects had capacity development and community development components; this
proportion rose slightly, to 55%, after the USS.


           Figure 10: Use of Consulting Services in Urban Sector Projects
                     Before and After the Urban Sector Strategy
                Person-months per project




                                                                    406
                                            450
                                            400
                                            350            288
                                                                         250
                                            300
                                            250
                                            200     106                           94     92          103
                                            150                                               44
                                            100
                                             50
                                              0
                                              Project Management         Training/Community Program
                                                            Design and Supervision Engineer    Other consultancies

                                                                Types of Services

                   Mid-1993 to Mid-1999               Mid-1999 to Mid-2005
      Source: Review of 88 reports and recommendations of the President approved between
              July 1993 and June 2005.



87.    Conclusion. The findings do not all point in the same direction, indicating mixed results.
The predominance of design and supervision engineers fell. Project management consultants
have become more prevalent, indicating both greater availability of domestic expertise and
increasing complexity of ADB-supported projects. The use of consultants to support projects is
                                                                                                                   33


still widespread, partly because ADB has not been successful in developing long-term
partnerships with city clients. Thus, capacity needs to be built for every project.

D.              Technical Assistance Program

88.     Comparing TA amounts provided before and after the USS, the downward trend in
ADB's grant-funded TA program in the urban sector is marked: the TA amount approved after
the USS ($37.2 million) is 37% lower than the amount approved before ($59.2 million). This
compares with 29% growth in the amount of TA for other sectors over the same period. The
number of urban sector TAs almost halved from 112 to 65, whereas the number of TAs in all
other sectors increased by 12% from 1,235 to 1,386. The amount of urban TA is shown in
Figure 11. The amount of urban TA for both the Philippines and the PRC fell, as it did for many
other countries. In contrast to the general pattern, the amount of urban TA increased for India.
This is consistent with the large expansion of the urban lending program in that country. Since
much of ADB's policy dialogue and capacity building is financed by TA, the declining trend in
declining TAs implies that, despite the intentions outlined in the USS, ADB has been less active
in these strategic areas than before the USS.


              Figure 11: Amount of Technical Assistance Approved for Urban Sector, 6 Years
                              Before and After the Urban Sector Strategy

                                        10.5          5.1    4.2         17.4


              Jul 1999--Jul 2005
     Period




                                       6.0        11.1        5.9                       36.2


              Jul 1993--Jun 1999


                                               10.0         20.0          30.0          40.0   50.0         60.0
                                                                   Amount ($ million)

                                   India TAs                PRC TAs                PHI TAs            Other TAs

     PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, TA = technical assistance.
     Source: Asian Development Bank internal databases.


89.     The downward trend in TA funds assigned to the urban sector affected both project
preparatory TA (PPTA) and advisory TA (ADTA), but particularly PPTA, which fell by 45%
(Figure 12). ADTAs also declined significantly, by 27%. From this perspective, it is surprising
that project and program lending expanded modestly after 1999, despite the sharp fall in PPTA.
However, there may be a delayed impact: some of the post-USS lending was in fact prepared
by PPTA that was approved before the USS.65 If there is no adverse impact on project quality,
65
     Before the USS, 58 PPTAs at a value of $31.65 million were used to prepare 42 projects financed by 46 loans
     totaling $2.8 billion (1.3 PPTAs per loan and $11,000 in PPTA per million dollars of loan). In the last 6 years,
     30 PPTAs at a value of $19.04 million were used to prepare 46 projects financed by 54 loans totaling $4.5 billion
     (0.65 PPTAs per loan and $4,200 in PPTA per million dollars of loan). The projects approved after 1999 are still
     under implementation, so it is too early to draw conclusions on whether the cutback in PPTA will have an impact on
     project quality.
34


these figures would suggest that ADB's urban sector processing became more efficient and less
resource-intensive after the USS. Given the concerns raised by many MICs about ADB's
transaction costs and cumbersome procedures, such a finding would be unexpected. More
PPTA funds might have enabled preparation of more projects over the period.


               Figure 12: Amounts for Technical Assistance, Before and After the
                                    Urban Sector Strategy


                          July 1999-- June 2005                         18.8
                                                                        18.4
                 Period




                          July 1993-- June 1999                                             34.2
                                                                                25.1

                                                       10. 0        20.0          30.0           40.0
                                                                Amount ($ million)
                                                   Urban ADTA                        Urban PPTA

        ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
        Source: Asian Development Bank internal databases.


90.     Urban PPTAs accounted for 15% of all PPTAs in the 6 years prior to the USS compared
with only 6% in the last 6 years. Urban-related ADTAs fell from 6% to 4% of total ADTAs, in
terms of numbers of ADTAs. Similar patterns emerge when financial allocations are
considered.66 One more positive development has been ADB's continuing membership of the
Cities Alliance, which allows ADB to access TA funds from alternative sources (Box 5).

                                    Box 5: ADB's Membership of the Cities Alliance

The Cities Alliance is a coalition of cities and their development partners committed to scaling up
successful approaches to poverty reduction, and brings cities together in direct dialogue with donor
agencies. A main function of the partnership is to promote coherence of effort among donors, bringing
them around shared strategy that defines a vision for the city and its economic growth, while highlighting
clear priorities for actions and investment. ADB was the second international financing institution to join
this growing partnership, which to date has provided $60 million in grants for City Development Strategies
and Cities without Slums activities. The Cities Alliance has leveraged some $6 billion in urban sector
investment globally. ADB has so far developed two regional technical assistance projects to support
Cities Alliance initiatives in India, Philippines, and Viet Nam. Several stand-alone Cities Alliance
proposals are currently being pursued.

ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

91.    Urban Sector Strategy Studies. The amount of ADTA resources devoted to updating
urban sector profiles, urban country strategies, and urban country reviews declined in the last
6 years. This is contrary to the intentions of the USS. Of the 84 urban-related ADTAs approved
since 1993, 15 funded urban sector or subsector studies, profiles, or strategies. Since ADB's
2002 reorganization, only a few such studies have been prepared. While 10 such documents
were produced between 1999 and 2001, only 3 have been prepared in the 4 years since.

66
     Urban PPTAs fell from 17.3% of the total amount of PPTAs to 7.3%. Urban ADTAs fell from 5.3% of the total
     amount of ADTAs to 3.3%.
                                                                                                 35


92.     Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction. Since 2000, the Japan Fund for Poverty
Reduction (JFPR) has supported ADB-administered projects targeting poverty reduction. JFPR
funded 65 projects up to the end of September 2005, an average of $2.5 million in grant funds
per project. Eleven JFPR projects were in the urban sector, involving $17.5 million or 10% of
total JFPR commitments (Appendix 3, Table A3.4). There are 3 urban sector JFPR projects in
the 2005 and 2006 pipeline.

E.     ADB's Knowledge Management in the Urban Sector

93.     In addition to project lending and grant funding of TA, ADB staff produce and
disseminate research documents and publications (e.g., books, handbooks, reports, working
papers, articles for periodicals) to explore and contribute to a better understanding of critical
development issues, and help guide ADB and its DMC clients. Over the past 12 years, there
have been 83 ADB and ADB Institute (ADBI) publications, which fall into a broad definition of
urban sector-related (Supplementary Appendix E). The publications cover a wide range of
topics--from fiscal transfers and local government finance, through urban and subsector
country-level strategies, to subsector information sources. The majority of these publications are
on the subject of urban development and housing (56%), followed by WSS (10%), and urban
poverty (7%).

94.     Analysis of the list shows that the range and number of urban sector documents
published by ADB (and ADBI) increased from an average of about 5 per year to about 9 per
year around the time of the USS publication in 1999. During the 6 years prior to the launching of
the USS, 94 public documents were issued (web-based directory), of which 31 were ADB
publications (paper directory). In the 6 years after the USS, 134 public documents were issued,
of which 52 were in print. However, increasing numbers of these publications are ADB review
articles and CD-ROM reviews. Thus, part of the increase in urban-related knowledge products
may owe more to the growing success of ADB's dissemination efforts than a resurgence of
interest within ADB in the urban sector.

95.      The USS called for research on the following themes: (i) the urbanization process,
(ii) urban poverty reduction, (iii) decentralization and urban governance, (iv) community
participation in urban development, (v) private sector involvement in urban infrastructure,
(vi) informal settlements, (vii) urban environmental management, and (viii) local government
capacity building and finance. An analysis of the research-oriented publications published since
the USS was issued shows that all of these themes were, to variable degrees, addressed:
(i) 6 papers were written on urbanization issues--of which 4 were country-specific urban sector
strategies; (ii) 5 on poverty reduction--of which 1 was a specific country poverty assessment;
(iii) 3 on decentralization and urban governance--1 country-specific, (iv) 2 on community
participation (participatory decision making); (v) 2 on the potential for private sector involvement
(in roads and water supply); (vi) 1 on extending services to the poor, 1 on housing for the poor,
and 1 on water for the poor; (vii) 2 on environmental strategies for cities, and 1 on solid waste
management; and (viii) 11 on municipal management and finance--with an emphasis on
financial management and revenues. Other documents addressed specific infrastructure
studies, reports and proceeding of conference seminars and workshops, the urban indicators
data book, and work on gender and malnutrition.

96.     Although each of the key themes identified in the USS was addressed, the list of
publications is highly diverse and lacks focus, depth, and continuous ADB involvement with the
topic. More focus should be placed on areas to provide deeper insight. An example would be
the cluster of issues related to the increased autonomy of urban areas under the
36


decentralization process, and mechanisms for mainstreaming the benefits of development to the
urban poor. The former is an issue that has had implications, sometimes adverse implications,
for the urban portfolio in some countries that used to borrow significant amounts for urban
development. The latter is directly related to ADB's overarching objective.

97.     More fundamental is the issue of the use of documents and knowledge within ADB. Staff
turnover in ADB has often led to ADB staff moving out of the urban sector relatively quickly.
Because of weaknesses in ADB's knowledge management system, it is not clear how much of
the information in these publications is put to optimal use for a better urban sector program. This
problem of knowledge management extends well beyond the urban sector. However, the lack of
an effective knowledge network among urban specialists and limited knowledge sharing across
the relevant divisions in the regional departments compounds the problem in the urban sector.
ADB has recognized that steps need to be taken at the institutional level to improve knowledge
management. A vice-president of knowledge management was created in 2002. A knowledge
management framework was approved in 2004 and a knowledge management center was
created at the same time.

            V.        ADB ASSESSMENTS OF COMPLETED URBAN SECTOR PROJECTS

98.    This chapter begins by summarizing assessments of processes, outputs, and outcomes
of urban sector projects made by PCRs, project performance audit reports (PPARs), TA
completion reports (TCRs), and TA performance audit reports. This is followed by a section
which presents assessment made of ongoing urban sector projects by their project directors, as
based on a questionnaire survey. Many of the answers are instructive to gauge demand for
ADB loans and the benefits and the transaction costs perceived by ADB's main clients.

A.          Assessment of Urban Sector Projects by Operations Departments

99.     Ratings. For the past 8 years, ADB's methodology for rating projects in PCRs has been
similar to that of PPARs, and is based on assessments of relevance, efficacy, efficiency,
sustainability, and other impacts.67 Figure 13 is derived from a database maintained by OED
since 1995, when PCRs started rating projects more systematically. During the past 10 years,
according to PCR ratings, urban sector projects have a higher probability of being rated
successful than other projects in ADB's portfolio. Integrated urban development projects tend to
perform better, on average, than WSSWM projects. Although all other urban projects were rated
successful, the number of projects in this category was small.




67
     This is done on a scale of 4 (e.g. highly relevant, with a value of 3, relevant [2], less than relevant [1] and irrelevant
     [0]), and weighing these assessments at 20%, 25%, 20%, 20% and 15% of the total respectively, to calculate an
     overall project success rating between 0 and 3. As a last step, ADB rates the projects with values >0 and <0.6 as
     unsuccessful, those with values >0.6 and <1.6 as partly successful, those with values >1.6 and <2.5 as successful,
     and those with values >2.5 as highly successful. These values can be expressed as a proportion of a maximum
     score of 100%.
                                                                                                                                                 37



                                              Figure 13: Percentage of Projects Rated Successful or Higher in PCRs,
                                                          for Urban and Nonurban Projects (1995­2005)
             Percent of Projects Successful

                                                                                  100.0
                                              100      81.3
                                                                    66.7                                   76.1                      67.3
                                              75
                                              50
                                              25
                                               0
                                                    Multisector   WSSWM        Other Urban               Total Urban              Other
                                                       (48)         (36)           (4)                      (88)                 Projects
                                                                                                                                  (459)
                                                                              Category of Urban Sector Projects


        PCR = project completion report; WSSWM = water supply, sanitation, and waste management.
        Note: Number of PCRs in parenthesis.
        Source: Operations Evaluation Department's Post-Evaluation Information System for all PCRs issued
                from January 1995 to July 2005.


  100. The SES assessed the scores on the individual rating criteria for all 51 PCRs completed
  between mid-1998 and mid-2005 (Table 2). Fifty were approved before the USS, and
  implemented during the time that the USS was in effect. On average, the sample is somewhat
  younger than that discussed in para. 99.

                               Table 2: Average PCR Scores (% of Maximum) on Five Evaluation Criteria,
                                          by Subsector of Urban Sector Projects (1998­2005)

 Urban                                                                                                                       Average        Percent of
 Subsector                                                                                                         Other    Composite        Projects
 (Projects)                                         Relevance      Efficacy     Efficiency    Sustainability      Impacts     Rating        Successful
 Multisector (23)                                      78.3          60.9          59.4           47.8             49.3       59.2             82.6
 WSSWM (22)                                            83.3          60.6          53.0           50.0             53.0       59.8             77.3
 Other (6)                                             83.3          72.2          66.7           55.6             61.1       67.7             83.3
   Total (51)            81.0       62.1         57.5              49.7         52.3                                          60.5             80.4
PCR = project completion report; WSSWM = water supply, sanitation, and waste management.
Source: Fifty-one PCRs issued between mid-1998 and mid-2005.

  101. A comparison of Tables 1 and 2 confirms the perception that the quality of ADB's
  projects has improved over time. The more recent sample of PCRs reflected in Table 2 also
  confirms that multisector projects are slightly more likely to be successful than WSSWM
  projects. WSSWM projects are assessed as somewhat less efficient, although sustainability of
  project outcome is more of an issue with multisector projects.

  102. Capacity and Institution Building. The SES assessed statements made in PCRs
  regarding the project's success in capacity and institution building. All projects reviewed had
  such components. Thirty-five TA grants were attached to the projects and most projects
  included loan financed consulting services in their design. The PCRs rated 65% of the capacity
  building efforts as successful and 50% of the institutional development initiatives as successful.
  In 11 of the 51 PCRs, critical statements were made about capacity and institutional
38


development. The best performance occurred in the PRC and worst in the Philippines. The
subsequent departure of trained staff from the agency, sometimes to the private sector,
continued to result in disappointing capacity and institutional development results in the
Philippines.

103. Much of the capacity building was designed to improve project management and
implementation. Institutional development was generated by implementing TA
recommendations (e.g., incorporation of planning standards into urban development plans and
building codes, water tariff revisions, revisions of master plans, improvement in billing and
collection from computerization, organizational changes, increased collection of taxes, private
sector participation in projects, and management information systems). Loan financed
consulting services helped with the transformation from public utilities to more autonomous
enterprises, corporatization, adoption of commercial accounting systems, improved garbage
collection systems following solid waste management training, and improved revenue collection.
Many PCRs indicated that there were further needs in capacity development, such as in
financial management, operations and maintenance, project performance and management
systems, and urban economic development planning.

104. Irregularities. Irregularities in urban sector projects were reported in a few PCRs for
Indonesia. These were eventually dealt with by the Government of Indonesia and ADB in close
collaboration. The Sumatra Urban Development (Sector) Project is an example (Box 6).68 The
Samut Prakarn Wastewater Management Pollution Control Project in Thailand69 is another
example of irregularities, where lack of community consultation and alleged irregularities in land
acquisition led to the Government of Thailand's suspension of project implementation by
February 2003, and an ADB inspection.70 Given the apparent pervasive nature of corruption in
the urban sector in Asia (para. 80 and Boxes 3 and 4) as in other sectors, it is important that
ADB and governments pay more attention to preventing corruption in the urban sector, through
training of staff, incentives and better systems.

                 Box 6: Irregularities in Sumatra Urban Development (Sector) Project

In April 2000, the Government of Indonesia transferred the supervision of many projects to local
governments. To accommodate the decentralization process, the Government produced its own set of
procurement regulations. Unfortunately, procurement problems--irregularities and more basic
administrative issues--increased significantly. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) began requesting
more bid and contract documentation for review. Some local governments were not fully aware of ADB
procurement guidelines, while others sought to equivocate on compliance. Still more found it
incomprehensible that government regulations could be superseded by ADB guidelines and were afraid
of the consequences from state auditors if they contravened the presidential decree.

In June 2002, ADB suspended withdrawals from the loan account, citing many procurement irregularities,
declaring that the executing agency (EA) lacked adequate internal controls, and concluding that the EA
was in breach of the Loan Agreement. The move followed several meetings to discuss procurement
irregularities. The EA accepted the existence of irregularities, but noted difficulties of managing a project
with so many participating local governments and associated contracts, as well as its lack of authority



68
   ADB. 2005. Project Completion Report on the Sumatra Urban Development (Sector) Project in Indonesia. Manila.
69
   The project was supported by Loan 1410-THA (ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the
   Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Kingdom of Thailand for the Samut Prakarn Wastewater
   Management Project. Manila).
70
   Inspection Request (28 Feb 2002); Sixth Semiannual Report on Implementation of the Recommendations of the
   Board Inspection Committee (24 June 2005).
                                                                                                             39


 to control procurement in the newly decentralized environment. The EA offered to work closely with ADB
 to resolve these problems and enable project implementation to resume. In October 2002, the EA agreed
 to an external assessment of its internal management controls and oversight systems, the establishment
 of local government procurement committees with independent members, a joint procurement review
 team in the Ministry of Public Works, and consolidation of all remaining equipment to be procured under
 the Project into two international competitive bidding packages. Shortly afterward, ADB removed the
 suspension of withdrawals.

 Source: Adapted from ADB. 2005. Project Completion Report on the Sumatra Urban Development (Sector) Project in
         Indonesia. Manila.

 105.    Other findings from the study of 51 PCRs are summarized in Appendix 6.

 B.      Assessment of Completed Urban Sector Projects by the OED

 106. PPARs prepared by OED71 provide ratings based on the situation encountered, usually
 2 years after the PCR is prepared. These may take a more independent look at the project; the
 further elapsed time may also play a role in arriving at ratings that are different from those of the
 PCRs. Table 3 shows that, contrary to ratings given by operational departments through PCRs,
 OED's ratings for the urban sector are on average somewhat below the ratings for projects in
 many other sectors, especially urban WSSWM projects. One reason may be that urban sector
 projects are usually operated by weaker local governments and utilities and are more likely to
 have long-term sustainability issues, which may not have been as evident at the stage of the
 PCR mission.

      Table 3: Comparison of Project Performance Audit Report Ratings for Urban Sector
                          Projects and Other Projects, 2000­2005
                                                                                                 Other     Composite
 Item                                  Relevance    Efficacy     Efficiency    Sustainability Impacts       Rating
 % of maximum rating urban                75.6        62.2          55.6            46.7          44.4       57.8
 sector projects (N=15)
 of which % of maximum rating             73.3        63.3          60.0            46.7          36.7       56.6
 urban WSS projects (N=6)
 % of maximum rating other urban          80.0        60.0          46.7            46.7          60.0       60.0
 projects (N=9)
 % of maximum rating of other             75.1        60.9          56.3            58.6          55.2       62.1
 sectors (N=88)
 % difference between urban                0.6          2.1         (1.4)          (20.4)        (19.4)      (7.0)
 sector and other sectors
WSS = water supply and sanitation, N = sample size.
Note: Sixty percent of urban sector projects were rated successful (of which 50% were WSS projects, and 66.7% were
      multisector projects); 71.6% of nonurban sector projects were rated successful over the same period.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department project performance audit report databases.

 107. Lower PPAR ratings stem mainly from the lower degree of (i) project sustainability, and
 (ii) other impacts that urban sector projects have on institutions and the environment. OED's
 1997 SES on urban development and housing72 corroborates the lower long-term sustainability
 of urban sector projects. That study of 12 urban multisector projects led to the conclusion that
 such projects generally succeeded in improving living conditions, but that local capacities to
 operate and maintain project facilities were not always in place, and that more projects covered
 in that study had not given much support to developing such capacities. From this perspective, it
 71
    By end 2005, the format of the PPAR was changed, and the new OED project evaluation report was called the
    project (or program) performance evaluation report (PPER).
 72
    ADB. 1997. Impact Evaluation Study of Bank Assistance to the Urban Development and Housing Sector. Manila.
40


is a matter of concern that the level of capacity development support has not increased since
the USS.

108. Ratings of the multisector projects are sometimes influenced positively by minor
components in financial terms, such as urban road resurfacing, slum improvement, self-help
groups, and community development. Although requiring relatively less funds, such components
can deliver substantial benefits to the target beneficiaries and create goodwill and appreciation
by addressing some of the more intractable issues related to poor quality of life.

109. Water supply projects have sometimes suffered from the lack of data on groundwater
resources; resistance to increase water user fees; and insufficient, well qualified human
resources needed to ensure the technical sustainability of the project outputs. There now seems
to be an increasing recognition in many DMCs of the need to charge for adequate water
consumption and wastewater treatment to ensure that the required financing is available for
operations, maintenance, and capital expansion. It is likely that the sustainability of these
projects will improve in the future.

110. Single City versus Multicity Projects. Both PCRs and PPARs concluded that projects
located in one city, usually a large city and/or a capital, are more likely to be successful than
multicity projects (Figure 14 and Supplementary Appendix F). However, multicity projects can
also be successful. Investment projects prepared in detail before project approval have been
slightly more successful than sector projects, which usually have only a few city subprojects
prepared at the time of project approval. PPARs, prepared a few years after the PCRs, rate
many more single city projects as successful than multicity projects. All of this implies that
multicity projects, whether sector projects or not, need better preparation and more support.
These findings may also suggest that projects that have relatively simple institutional
arrangements are more likely to succeed than projects with complex institutional arrangements.
These findings suggest that ADB should explicitly identify institutional arrangements as a
potential risk and put more effort into designing risk mitigation measures. If suitable risk
mitigation measures cannot be developed, particularly in countries with weaker institutions, the
complexity of the project design should be reduced to increase the probability of project
success.
                                                                                                          41


       Figure 14: Rating of Single City versus Multicity Projects in PCRs (1995­2005)
                                  and PPARs (2000­2005)

                                                                     71
                                                      67
       Rating (scale 0 to 100)



                                 75                                                       60
                                 70
                                 65
                                 60                                                                 48
                                 55
                                 50
                                 45
                                 40
                                         Single City Projects (23)        Multicity Projects (26)


                                               PCR rating                  PPAR rating

 PCR = project completion report, PPAR = project performance audit report.
 Source: Forty-nine PCRs completed between 1998 and mid-2005, and 15 PPARs completed between 2000 and
          2005 (8 single city and 7 multicity).


111. Box 7 summarizes urban sector findings in Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic
Republic and Pakistan as reported by recent OED country and sector assistance program
evaluations.

                                 Box 7: Urban Sector Findings from Recent OED Country Evaluations

Indonesia. The Operations Evaluation Department's (OED's) Country Assistance Program Evaluation
(CAPE)a rated Asian Development Bank's (ADB) large urban sector program, completed within the period
1990­2004, as broadly successful. The overall performance in all sectors was noted to have gone down
after 1999, when Indonesia's decentralization process began. Local level project management capacities
proved a bottleneck. In the uncertain operating environment of the transition years (2001­2004), ADB
was slow to channel adequate resources, delegate authority, and develop new modalities to suit the
changed nature of the client. This is now improving. The evaluation paid special attention to urban water
quality and sanitation. The water quality was deteriorating in Indonesia due to lack of sewerage treatment,
dumping of untreated liquid waste, and sedimentation caused by a lack of upper watershed management.
ADB's activities in water pollution control were integrated as subcomponents under selected urban
development initiatives but these had not all been successful. Although Indonesia was in need of more
wastewater treatment facilities, the enabling environment remained weak. Enforcement was lacking, and
the tariff structure remained ineffective. The evaluation provided the following lessons for consideration in
designing and implementing future projects: (i) emphasize a package of services, not just infrastructure,
(ii) avoid funding water supply projects which are not based on strong household demand, (iii) water
supply enterprises need to be privatized, but only after the adoption of a comprehensive water supply
policy; and (iv) ADB needs to give greater attention to waste management.

Lao People's Republic. OED's CAPEb assessed the urban development sector program which
consisted of four projects, two of which were completed, and two ongoing at the time of evaluation. The
overall performance was rated as successful. A major outcome achieved was the Urban Development
Administration Authorities' ability to raise their own funds for Operation and Maintenance of urban
infrastructure. Another outcome was the institutionalization of the Authorities, through the passage of the
Law on Local Administration, which was formulated under an ADB TA. Other outcomes registered
included (i) access to improved urban environment increasing to 33% of total urban population,
(ii) reduced damage and destruction due to flooding, and (iii) increased number of businesses in the
downtown urban areas. ADB was judged to have made a significant contribution to access of the
42


urban population to improved sanitation, which increased from 11% to 61% (1990­2002). In the water
supply and sanitation sector, in which there were also four projects, the effectiveness was lower, ADB's
contribution to long term impacts was seen as modest, and the overall performance was rated as partly
successful.

Pakistan. OED's Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for the Social Sectors in Pakistanc included a
review of the water supply and urban development projects. Overall, the performance of the social
sectors over the period 1985­2002 was assessed as poor: achieving the Millennium Development Goals
would require a turnaround from negative progress in the 1990s or much faster progress than what was
achieved in the past. ADB's focus on investing directly in public provision of infrastructure and facilities
including in urban areas had generally led to disappointing results. The evaluation judged that no water
supply, sanitation or urban development projects had been successful; five projects were rated as partly
successful and 4 as unsuccessful.
a
    ADB. 2005. Country Assistance Program Evaluation: Indonesia. Manila.
b
    ADB. 2006. Country Assistance Program Evaluation: Lao People's Democratic Republic. Manila.
c
    ADB. 2005. Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for the Social Sectors in Pakistan. Manila.

C.        Assessment of Completed TA Grants by Operations Departments and OED

112. Aggregating all TAs classified as urban development or WSSWM, ADB's TCRs rate
these sectors as having performed similar to other sectors overall. Whereas 84% of all urban
sector TAs completed since 1995 (until the end of 2004) have generously obtained a
"successful" or "highly successful" rating through self-assessment by operations departments,
82% of all other TAs have obtained such rating. The remaining portions in all categories were
rated "partly successful" or "unsuccessful".

113. Between 1995 and 2004, OED evaluated 18 TAs in urban development or WSS in 5 TA
performance audit reports. Only 13 had been rated by the operational departments earlier. The
TCRs rated 92% of these urban development and WSS TAs successful. In comparison, OED
rated 78% of these TAs successful. Although OED's ratings are lower than those recorded in
TCRs, OED's success rating for urban TAs (78%) exceeded the 57% for the TA portfolio as a
whole.

114. Assessment of ADB's Strategy Studies. The SES made a special assessment of
ADB's strategic studies funded by TA grants over the past 10 years: country urban sector
profiles, country urban sector strategies, and country urban sector reviews (Supplementary
Appendix G). The evaluation confirms that they provide sector data, information, and analysis
for the formulation and preparation of sector TA and lending programs. The sector profiles
frequently set out elements of a sector strategy for the Government, ADB, or both. However,
neither the profile nor strategy documents (i) set out clear strategic choices; (ii) identify sector
targets or monitoring and evaluation mechanisms; or (iii) assess the constraints to, and risks of,
the strategy or the potential for ADB intervention.

115. Most of the strategy and profile publications are based on sector work carried out by
consultants under ADTAs or staff consultancies; there is less direct involvement of ADB staff. In
many cases, the usefulness of the document is compromised by the time elapsed between the
implementation and completion of the TA, and the publication of the profile or strategy
document. For those studies for which information was available, this elapsed time was
between 9 and 18 months.

116. Fifteen TAs over the past 12 years have financed the preparation of urban sector profiles
or strategies. Operations department issued TCRs for 7 of these, of which 6 were rated
                                                                                                                        43


satisfactory and 1 partly satisfactory. Based on the findings in the TCRs, the main issues
affecting the quality and utility of these documents relate to (i) the difficulty of finding the right
institutional home for the study in the DMC; and (ii) developing a suitable methodology which
can accommodate, within the short time span usually available to ADTAs, adequate stakeholder
involvement in the preparation process.

D.         Assessments of Benefits and Problems of Ongoing Projects by Project Managers

117. This section focuses on the ongoing urban sector portfolio, and the value added and
transaction costs of ADB involvement. PMs of all urban sector projects in the DMCs were
requested to provide their views through a multiple choice questionnaire. Table 4 summarizes
answers of (i) PMs in the main offices, and (ii) respondents from both main and subsidiary
offices. The questionnaire is in Supplementary Appendix H, including a tabulation of all the
responses.

          Table 4: Main Advantages of Asian Development Bank Involvement in Project
                          (Rating by DMC respondents on scale of 0­100)

       Advantage Suggested                                                                   Main Office        Total
       More certain and/or steady supply of funds                                                85              82
       Good and transparent procurement processes                                                75              79
       Better design of the project                                                              66              70
       Access to advice or operational support by loan-funded consultants                        66              69
       External quality control and/or monitoring by ADB project officers                        63              66
       Intellectual or technical leadership, good practice, and/or policy dialogue               58              66
       Large investment project has catalytic effect                                             56              61
       ADB can persuade government decision makers                                               51              57
       ADB can leverage additional resources (access to cofinancing)                             50              55
       Project administration or project salaries funded through loan                            31              39
       Other advantages                                                                           7               6
     ADB = Asian Development Bank.
     Note: 44 responses from project directors (85% of all projects in the survey) and 44 from others (generally from
           project implementation unit managers). The special evaluation study (SES) rated the three response
           categories provided as follows: major 100, minor = 50, none = 0.
     Source: SES questionnaire survey of 52 ongoing urban sector projects.

118. Benefits Connected with ADB Involvement. The relatively high positive responses on
the advantages of ADB involvement (Table 4), as compared to those on a question on
drawbacks (Table 5), demonstrate that many PMs believe that there are advantages of ADB
involvement in projects. This was in spite of reservations, which were also regularly voiced, and
which point to room for future improvement. The most highly rated benefit of ADB involvement
was the more certain and steady supply of funds for the Project. This response is significant as
it revealed how difficult access is to secure project financing in many DMCs.

119. A second most important benefit was the use of good and transparent procurement
processes resulting from ADB involvement (notably the two envelope system). This suggests
that ADB's rigorous procurement process helps to reduce fraud and corruption. This positive
feedback was given despite concurrent complaints about the ADB system leading to
procurement delays. ADB is working to streamline and simplify its procurement procedures.73

73
     In India, several states have adopted ADB's tendering procedures for larger locally financed projects. Similarly, the
     quality control testing, monitoring, and reporting is considered a major improvement over locally financed projects
     where suppliers and contractors regularly "cheat" on specifications and installation quality. Under ADB financing,
44


A variety of other benefits from ADB involvement included improved project design, the TAs
attached to loans and the consultant support funded by it, the quality control exerted by ADB
project officers, and ADB's good practices in general.

120. Perceived Drawbacks to ADB's Involvement. Table 5 identifies relative problems with
the involvement of ADB as perceived by the survey respondents. DMC project staff rated the
enforcement of the ADB agenda as the biggest drawback of ADB's involvement, followed by
delays as a result of ADB involvement, and the extra paperwork involved. However, the severity
of these problems was lower; they were usually viewed as minor. A number of respondents
mentioned problems associated with consultants. Delays in ADB disbursements, problems of
continuity of ADB staff, and a lack of suitable ADB staff were mentioned by 10% to 15% of
respondents.

                      Table 5: Categorization of Main Problems in Project
                         (Rating by DMC respondents on scale of 0­100)
                                                                                          Main
 Problems                                                                                 Office      Total
 Associated with ADB involvement:
 Difficult ADB forms and procedures and excessive paperwork                                 42          39
 Enforcement of ADB agenda (e.g., resettlement, environment, participation, etc.)           39          35
 Delays in ADB responses, decisions, and/or approvals                                       35          34
 Improper staffing by consultants recruited for the project                                 42          33
 Delays in ADB disbursements                                                                14          15
 Lack of staff continuity in ADB                                                            12          12
 Lack of suitability of ADB project officers for task at hand                               11          12
 Associated with Government involvement:
 Delays in government responses, decisions, and/or approvals                                60          49
 Lack of effective coordination, or opposition from other agencies                          44          35
 Government policies or decisions obstruct and/or delay project activities                  47          33
 Insufficient government budget made available to project (or late release)                 31          33
 Difficult and/or unwieldy government systems and procedures                                40          32
 Lack of (qualified and capable) staff to implement the project                             38          28
 Involvement of politicians in the administrative domain                                    30          23
 Problematic division of responsibilities between project officers and other
 agencies                                                                                   31          22
 Lack of effective zoning/building regulations                                              21          17
 Associated with deficient design/preparation:
 High and rising cost of land or other issues with acquisition of land and/or right-
 of-way                                                                                     35          31
 Project has too many components and implementing agencies                                  28          25
 Project has lack of effective monitoring system and/or lack of data                        18          18
 Project has more donors than ADB and this demands time                                     12          14
 Opposition to project activities from civil society or private sector parties              15          13
 Lack of demand for project (components) from intended beneficiaries                        12          13
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country.
Source: Special evaluation study questionnaire survey 2005.

121. Problems with Government Involvement. Problems traceable to the nature of
government involvement in the projects were seen as more prevalent than the problems
traceable to ADB involvement. The most common problem was delayed decision making by the

 the EAs are able to use ADB's monitoring as a reason to implement third-party inspection of contractors works,
 leading to much better finished product.
                                                                                                        45


Government, which adversely affected project progress. This was followed by a lack of
coordination between agencies involved, and government policies obstructing project activities.
Cumbersome government systems were also mentioned. Almost half of project directors
mentioned a lack of qualified and capable staff to implement the project. About 30% stated that
involvement of politicians in administrative decisions already taken was a problem--despite the
fact that many directors also stated that one of the advantages of ADB involvement was that this
curbed political decisions overtaking technical and administrative decisions.

122. In total, only 17% of the respondents did not mark any of the problems listed in the
questionnaire. At the other end of the spectrum, 15% registered all or almost all of the problems
mentioned. The average number of problem categories marked was 2.3.

123. Perceived ADB Value Additions. Table 6 summarizes the results of the questionnaire
survey regarding perceptions about issues related to project design and preparation. Except in
the PRC, these areas are often dominated by ADB staff.

 Table 6: Project Preparation Related Statements as Confirmed by Survey Respondents
                                 (% of DMC respondents)

                                                                                           Main
 Item                                                                                      Office   Total
 There is no resistance from intended beneficiaries                                         61       63
 There were no complaints from other stakeholders about project set-up                      52       58
 There was enough input from our agency into project design                                 56       56
 Loan covenants are helping and/or have helped significantly to achieve reforms             55       57
 There is no resistance from non-beneficiaries                                              51       49
 Project is completely uncontroversial in the city and is universally seen as beneficial    58       51
 This project is better able to guard against corruption than nationally funded projects    39       41
 All stakeholders perceive this project as driven by EA agenda, not by ADB agenda           26       29
 Project is confronted with more attempts at corruption than nationally funded projects       5       6
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EA = executing agency.
Source: Questionnaire survey of 44 project directors and 44 other respondents (project implementation unit
        managers).

124. The responses are generally positive but it should be borne in mind that project staff
may be favorably inclined towards their project. A response rated below 60 on a scale of 0 to
100 may well be indicative of problems. If the positive inclination is "discounted", then it
becomes clear that respondents were ambivalent about the effect of the input from their agency
in project design and the beneficial nature of the loan covenants, and more skeptical about the
ability to guard against corruption and especially the prominence in the project of the ADB
agenda.

125. How Project Clients Viewed Capacity Development. The questionnaire survey
elicited views from PMs and subsidiary PIU managers on capacity development. PMs saw lack
of qualified and capable government staff to implement the project as an important problem.
They also frequently noted incidences of improper staffing by consultants. Underpayment of
staff and resulting underperformance was seen as a main staff capacity problem by 46% of
PMs; lack of staff in the agency (either positions or filled positions) by 25%; demoralization due
to political decision making, corruption, and lack of incentive to move to field by 18%; and short
tenure of senior staff by 14%. On the positive side, over half (56%) of PMs saw improved
capacity of agencies involved in the ADB project as a major benefit of the project.
46


                           VI.   ADB'S ADDED VALUE:
           VIEWS FROM PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, INDIA AND PHILIPPINES

126. This chapter starts with a brief assessment of operations and views expressed by
stakeholders in three of ADB's four largest borrowers in the urban sector: PRC, India, and
Philippines.74 The section is a summary of a more extensive digest of the findings of the
three country case studies (Appendix 7). The case studies were intended to bring out the
influence of different country contexts and the need for country specific urban sector strategies.
They focused on (i) urbanization, (ii) the capital investment requirement, (iii) other programs in
the sector, (iv) results from past ADB involvement, (v) an assessment of current ADB
operations, (vi) feedback on perceived value added and transaction costs of ADB involvement,
and (vii) perceptions by the OED team. The chapter concludes with an assessment of the
relevance of some recent ADB reform initiatives to the urban sector.

A.       People's Republic of China

127. A senior official at the Ministry of Finance stated to the study team that the Government
of the People's Republic of China did not regard itself as dependent on ADB financing for the
urban sector; sufficient project finance was currently available from state-owned banks and
commercial banks in the country. The ministry and municipal borrowers were looking to ADB to
provide significant added value in support of knowledge generation and transfer to address the
PRC's formidable urbanization challenges. The official stated that ADB's added value currently
left much to be desired in terms of bringing best international practice and knowledge transfer.
ADB needs to perform better in this area to justify the transaction costs that the Government
incurs when dealing with ADB loans. Although the study registered a more positive view of
ADB's added value by other stakeholders, unless satisfactorily addressed, this perception may
limit the potential for expansion of ADB's urban sector lending. The urban sector has
nevertheless been one of the four sectors for which the PRC borrows--evolving from early
focuses on mitigating severe environmental pollution in cities and addressing pressing problems
(such as restoring city or district heating systems), into more water supply and sewerage
systems. Currently, ADB's urban portfolio in the PRC includes 9 loans at $994 million; 11 loans
are under preparation with indicative loan amounts totaling $1,221 million.

128. Success of ADB's Lending. PCRs of operating departments as well as OED reports
have invariably rated projects as successful or highly successful (an overall success rating of
100%). The PRC's overall good loan portfolio performance extends to the urban sector. In the
cities where the projects took place, ADB has contributed to significant results, and the scores
given for the sustainability of the investments have been higher than in many other DMCs.
However, not everything has gone perfectly. For instance, some sewage treatment plants are
underutilized in the first years due to a lagging development of sewage networks. Considerable
transaction costs are incurred both by ADB and the PRC. Loan cancellations for the five
completed projects have been extraordinarily high, amounting to $263 million, or 25% of the
loan amounts. This is at least 5% higher than the ADB average for loan cancellations.75
Contingent factors may have played a role, such as the fall in equipment prices and heavy
competition for civil works contracts in the late 1990s. But PIUs also reported that they did not
like seeking the reallocation of savings because the process required approval by ADB
headquarters in Manila, and was tied to pre-set reimbursement ceilings that seemed difficult to

74
   The other large borrower for the urban sector is Indonesia. It was not included as a country study for this evaluation
   as Indonesia, including the urban sector, was being covered in another OED product: the Country Assistance
   Program Evaluation (para. 112).
75
   ADB. 2004. Special Evaluation Study on Project Cost Estimates. Manila.
                                                                                              47


change. The more flexible financing from domestic sources, although not financially competitive
with ADB loans, required far less administration costs and could finance expenditures directly,
rather than reimburse, such as was the case with some of ADB's financing. It was easier to get
replacement financing from local banks. The dropping of components from the project design,
while occasionally unavoidable, suggests that the preparation of such components may have
been rushed.

129. The ongoing ADB urban sector project portfolio in the PRC is widely acknowledged as
performing well. It is almost exclusively in the WSSWM sector; the straightforward nature of the
project design may be one reason for success, although more important factors include the EAs'
strong project ownership, technical strength, and good planning and preparation. There is
growing demand from cities for multisector projects, in order to deal with complex and pressing
issues. Demand from smaller cities has led to the preparation of the first sector loan. The new
demands find growing support for more sector loans and multisector projects within the Ministry
of Finance and the National Development and Reform Commission. The trend is towards
greater complexity but also greater responsiveness to city needs, and larger potential impact on
poverty reduction and capacity building.

130.   ADB's Added Value. The OEM registered the following client perceptions:

       (i)     The good reputation of ADB helps the EAs to raise additional loan financing from
               domestic commercial banks at lower costs.
       (ii)    ADB projects often receive more support from local government for land
               acquisition, resettlement, staffing, and tariff adjustment; and counterpart funds
               are more easily secured.
       (iii)   ADB helps EAs develop capacity; projects are mainly implemented through
               internally staffed PIUs and specially created companies that later operate and
               maintain the project outputs.
       (iv)    There are fewer influences from local government during implementation
               regarding issues that have been decided (requests to change the schedules or
               the project scope, etc.).
       (v)     Contractors in the PRC are more interested in bidding for ADB project contracts
               due to ADB's good reputation with respect to transparent procedures and secure
               payment. Contractors put in lower bids as the risks are perceived as lower.
       (vi)    ADB's interest rates are competitive, and long-term loans on similar conditions
               cannot be obtained from PRC banks.
       (vii)   ADB's environmental safeguards have generally been appreciated and are
               acknowledged to have improved the quality of the projects.

131. Recommendations. The OEM noted the following made by ADB's project clients in the
PRC:

       (i)     ADB mission leaders should be given more responsibility, accountability, and
               authority to improve efficiency and effectiveness, particularly at the preparation
               stage, and to minimize approval procedures in ADB headquarters.
       (ii)    Responsibilities for procurement and payment control should be transferred to
               the ADB's RM in Beijing, and ideally to Chinese speaking officers and/or staff.
               Problems due to language barriers and the need for translation should be
               minimized.
       (iii)   ADB's support in the form of capacity building TA, and policy and strategy
               studies for local governments, is highly appreciated and should be strengthened
48


                 further. This could then be followed by loans targeting the priorities and
                 challenges identified.
        (iv)     The strict reimbursement mechanism should be replaced by a more flexible
                 mechanism that would allow the reallocation of loan funds among major
                 expenditure categories (civil works, equipment, training, etc.) so that any loan
                 savings are easily utilized.
        (v)      The size and performance of imprest accounts should be increased to minimize
                 the need for seeking bridging loans from local banks.
        (vi)     Project preparation procedures should be simplified and shortened.
        (vii)    It should be possible to make more use of retroactive financing in ADB projects.
        (viii)   ADB should accept the PRC's own resettlement policy. This provides for
                 negotiation and payment to village and town governments. ADB's resettlement
                 policy was criticized because negotiating compensation directly with households
                 was seen as unworkable in the PRC where land is collectively owned.
        (ix)     ADB needs better "branding" and promotion of its urban capacity.

132. ADB's TA Program in the PRC. ADB's support of institutional and capacity
development was substantial (section IVD) but has declined after the USS. The same has been
the case for ADB's PPTA resources. Loan consulting services for similar objectives has been at
around 1.8% of the loans for the PRC before the USS; this was below the ADB average, and
declined to 0.8% after the USS. These ratios for consulting assistance cannot be compared to
other countries because most of the local consulting services are financed by the EA rather than
by the ADB loan. Much of the loan financed consultant services was directed towards
management improvement of the PIUs. The World Bank, while not having devoted similar
resources to grant-based TA, has often succeeded in securing bilateral grant funds for loan
preparation, while its loan consulting services have been between 3% and 5%, and directed
more at local policy reforms. ADB's ADTA program shows that TAs have performed important
reform-oriented functions at the national level, and often kick-started the capacity building of and
institutions at the local level. TAs on water tariff policy, urban heating tariff reforms, and town-
based urban development are examples of this. ADB's role in the creation of a body of
knowledge on urban poverty and social security issues is well respected and considered useful
by the Government.

B.      India

133. ADB lending for the urban sector in India began in 1995 with the approval of two loans of
$85 million and $20 million respectively, for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
Project (KUIDP).76 ADB regarded this as a breakthrough, as the urban sector was part of the
social infrastructure sector, for which India had chosen not to borrow OCR funds before. Fifteen
loan approvals for the urban sector followed for another eight projects, for a total of
$1,850 million. Two approved housing finance loans were not signed and eventually were
cancelled.77 Two projects have been completed so far. ADB has a considerable pipeline of new
urban sector projects that is to lead to loans totaling $1,250 million in 2005 and 2006 (section
IVB). Between 1993 and 2004, ADB approved 31 urban TAs, for $17 million: 52% were for
urban sector profile studies and project preparation activities, 22% for institutional strengthening

76
   ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Two Proposed Loans and
   Technical Assistance to the Republic of India and the Housing Development Finance Corporation Limited for the
   Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila.
77
   ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Four Proposed Loans to the
   Housing and Urban Development Corporation, National Housing Bank, Housing Development Finance
   Corporation, and ICICI for the Housing Finance II Project in India. Manila.
                                                                                                                    49


of urban local bodies and housing finance institutions, 16% for capacity building of project
implementation agencies, and 10% for poverty reduction and community development
objectives.

134. Multisector Projects. ADB's urban sector project interventions in India, starting with the
KUIDP in 1995, have been generally in line with the multisector integrated urban development
framework used in urban development planning in India. Except for the housing and urban
finance credit lines, all ADB's loans for the urban sector have been for multisector projects. A
consequence of the government's policy to assign focal states for external assistance was that
state governments viewed the externally aided project as a one-time opportunity, demanding a
wide range of investments in many sectors all at once. This increased project complexity,
especially for the initial urban projects. PPTA consultants were often required to incorporate
many components in the project design (e.g., urban water supply, drainage and sanitation,
roads, traffic management, low-income housing, slum improvements, residential and industrial
sites and services, truck and bus terminals, microcredit mechanisms, and community
development). The approach delivered sometimes impressive results in high profile activities
such as water supply, slum improvement, and self-help groups. However, there were also
incidences when large sewage treatment plants remained insufficiently utilized due to lack of
connections with households. It is too early to assess the extent to which the multisector project
modality works as compared to the single sector modality: KUIDP is the only completed project
so far. It was rated successful by ADB's PCR, and OED's draft PPAR has confirmed this rating,
mainly because it has generated significant positive externalities within Karnataka State, and
contributing to the national debate on urban development. It was the first major "integrated"
multicity urban investment project in India in many years. As such, it generated substantial
experience with the modality, and led to further statewide and India-wide policy initiatives. It also
helped establish a professional urban investment center. After the start of KUIDP, the World
Bank developed similar multisector projects, and other agencies followed with similar types of
projects for the urban sector. ADB's urban sector project in Rajasthan is likely successful as
well, and expectations are even higher with respect to an added component which will construct
a 2.3 meter diameter pipeline over 72 km to a reservoir which will save Jaipur's water supply.78
Projects in Madhya Pradesh, coastal Karnataka, and Kolkata appear to be well designed to
address major problem areas, but are at relatively early stages and are facing implementation
delays.

135. Credit Lines for Urban Sector Projects. Housing finance loans, targeted at low-income
households, were an important component of ADB's urban sector programs during the late
1990s. The results varied significantly, from highly successful to unsuccessful projects and
loans that were cancelled. Determination of the eligibility of low-income households for loans
was one of the main difficulties experienced. With the exception of the Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation of India (ICICI) component of the second housing finance loan, the
performance of the ongoing housing and urban infrastructure finance loans is less than
satisfactory. Difficulties in determining low-income households, monitoring the end use of funds,
the relatively high cost of ADB funds, and the Reserve Bank of India's guidelines on priority
lending are some of the reasons for the current lack of demand for ADB housing loans.

136. Added Value and Transaction Costs. A senior official of the Ministry of Finance noted
the Government of India's unhappiness with ADB's commitment charges, which are not

78
     The Bisalpur component. Rajasthan State had unsuccessfully tried for 10 years to finance this water supply system
     through various modalities: local financing, build-operate-transfer, and public-private partnerships. Through ADB's
     initiative, the state was finally able to proceed with these essential works.
50


structured to reflect planned implementation schedules. Rather, a standard structure is used for
all projects. Secondly, the high transaction costs associated with ADB safeguards has reduced
the ministry's enthusiasm to borrow from ADB.

137. Interviews held with senior project staff identified the following main reasons for the
generally slow absorption of ADB urban sector loans: (i) poor local capacity to design and
implement projects; (ii) institutional complexity involved in designing and implementing
integrated urban projects; (iii) inadequate local government ownership--in many cases projects
were driven by central Government and state governments; (iv) weak "eligibility criteria" for the
inclusion of urban local bodies in the project; (v) lack of market discipline by local governments
in formulating revenue-generating subprojects; (vi) lack of advance actions to sustain
investments such as institutional reforms, particularly those related to cost recovery, acquisition
of land, and procurement of technical expertise; (vii) inadequate community participation; and
(viii) weak communication and media relation strategy of projects.

138. In spite of the drawbacks discussed, the performance of ADB-supported projects may
not be worse than that of projects exclusively supported by the Government of India. Two such
centrally supported schemes are discussed in Supplementary Appendix I.

139. As in the PRC, the argument often brought forward was the need for clear added value
provided by ADB to complement the provision of loans. Project financing by commercial banks
and semi-government financing organizations has recently become much more competitive; the
difference between ADB and commercial and semi-government financing organizations is
sometimes summarized as 7% real interest rate (including swap) for OCR loans, and 7.5% to
9% for other project financiers. State governments, in particular, are sensitive to this
comparison. Although PPTA and bridging TA is appreciated, they are often seen as too short.
The insistence on the use of foreign consultants is seen as inappropriate, as is the rigid
application of social and environmental safeguards within sector projects, regarded as prone to
delays and extra costs. Supplementary Appendix J lists further views from various stakeholders
on value created and value lost as a result of ADB involvement.

140. ADB's strategy for urban multisector projects in India is evolving. ADB and the
Government of India are experimenting with a variety of project modalities and implementation
structures: the first project in Karnataka was decentralized, the second centralized. The project
in Rajasthan is centralized as well. Projects in Kolkata and Madhya Pradesh are driven by
PMUs and PIUs, which are based in local bodies. The Northern Karnataka Urban Infrastructure
Development Project, which is under preparation, will have much more involvement from the
private sector. Some of the lessons learned include reliance of projects on (i) involvement of
finance corporations to identify and manage urban sector investments; (ii) e-procurement and
open tenders for contracts rather than on prequalification, which can be manipulated by
contractor coteries; (iii) bridging TA consultants to initiate advance actions; and (iv) preparation
of management action plans for urban local bodies during and after the projects.

C.     Philippines

141. ADB in the Sector. The Philippines is ADB's fourth largest borrower in the urban sector
and ADB's lending program has historically been concentrated on water supply. The first urban
sector project in the Philippines was approved in 1976. Consequently, the urban portfolio in the
Philippines is much older than the urban portfolios in India and the PRC. ADB's involvement
consisted of 2 water supply projects in the second half of the 1970s, 4 in the 1980s (and a first
                                                                                                                51


sewerage project), and 6 more water supply projects in the period 1990­1995. OED evaluations
of projects approved before the 1990s found that 4 were successful and 2 unsuccessful.

142. In the last 10 years, the program has diversified. ADB's first multisector project was
approved in 1995: the Regional Municipal Project.79 Since then, 4 more water supply projects
were started, 3 multisector projects, 2 environmental management projects, 1 project for shelter
and poverty reduction, and 1 project for private sector finance. Since 1992, ADB's program has
had to adjust to an uneven and uncertain process of decentralization of tasks from central
Government to local governments.

143. Overall, ADB has approved $1,159 million urban sector loans in the Philippines from
1975 to 2003. From 1993 to 2002, ADB provided the Philippines with 18 TAs, 7 of which were
ADTAs and 11 PPTAs.

144. Past Experience. Over the past 6 years, ADB has issued PCRs for five projects started
in the 1990s: (i) Metropolitan Cebu Water Supply Project;80 (ii) Municipal Water Supply Project;81
(iii) Manila South Water Distribution Project;82 (iv) Angat Water Supply Optimization Project;83
and (v) one multisector project, the Subic Bay Area Municipal Development Project.84 The
projects were completed between 1999 and 2003. The PCRs rated the Municipal Water Supply
Project successful while the projects in Angat and Cebu were rated partly successful. The
projects in Manila and Subic Bay were rated unsuccessful. Taking the performance of the
projects completed earlier into account, the proportion of unsuccessful urban projects is much
larger in the Philippines than elsewhere. As the description of ADB's portfolio in Appendix 7
indicates, the progress of ongoing projects is generally disappointing except for two projects
which have started only recently.

145. Client Views on Added Value and Costs of ADB Involvement. Discussions with
officials and staff of the EAs and implementing agencies (IAs) of these six projects provided
mixed feedback regarding ADB's involvement in their projects. This coincided with responses to
the EA questionnaire survey--PMs in the Philippines indicated generally double the number of
problems compared to managers in India and the PRC.

146. PMs indicated advantages of involvement with ADB. Five of the six EAs saw ADB's
primary contribution as support for financing urban infrastructure. ADB had a competitive
advantage in this area because it could package TA with the loans. Three EAs saw ADB
projects as generally better designed than locally prepared projects, although they were
sometimes too optimistic about project inputs and outcomes. Interviewees also acknowledged
that ADB could provide good pressure on supra-local decision makers.

79
   ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Republic of the Philippines for the Regional Municipal Development Project. Manila.
80
   ADB. 1990. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Proposed Loans to the
   Republic of the Philippines for the Metropolitan Cebu Water Supply Project. Manila.
81
   ADB. 1993. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
   Technical Assistance Grant to the Local Water Utilities Administration in the Republic of the Philippines for the
   Municipal Water Supply Project. Manila.
82
   ADB. 1991. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System in the Republic of the Philippines for the Manila South Water
   Distribution Project. Manila.
83
   ADB. 1989. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System and a Technical Assistance Grant to the Republic of the
   Philippines for the Angat Water Supply Optimization Project. Manila.
84
   ADB. 1997. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Republic of the Philippines for the Subic Bay Area Municipal Development Project. Manila.
52


147.    PMs, however, indicated the following problems with ADB involvement:

        (i)      ADB is prone to overestimating the government's capacity to apply a new,
                 innovative approach.
        (ii)     ADB has a propensity to make institutional arrangements complex.
        (iii)    ADB has not been sufficiently careful in choosing or inviting financial
                 intermediaries.
        (iv)     ADB approval processes are too lengthy, have too stringent safeguard policies,
                 and voluminous documentation requirements.
        (v)      ADB presence at project sites and at the local level is not sufficient.
        (vi)     ADB has high commitment charges on OCR loans (local government projects
                 often move slowly and are therefore prone to incur these charges).
        (vii)    ADB's involvement in the selection of consultants funded from local sources is
                 not understood, and the quality of the consultants and their sensitivity to local
                 culture is often insufficient.

148. A project official of an LGU project observed that LGUs are a difficult market for ADB for
the following reasons: (i) short term of office of mayors (3 years), (ii) lack of continuity of
priorities and agreements from one local administration to another, (iii) weak capacity of staff
which necessitates lengthy and costly capacity building and TA support, (iv) aversion of many
small LGUs to borrowing because of the perceived political backlash it can cause, and
(v) limited financial resources of most LGUs.

149.    Some encouraging JFPR initiatives in the Philippines are summarized in Box 8.

 Box 8: New Urban Initiatives in the Philippines: A Fresh Approach to Poverty Reduction

ADB is pilot testing new approaches for on-site urban upgrading and off-site relocation of informal settlers
under the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (JFPR). Two innovative $1 million grant-financed initiatives
are underway. The first is in Payatas, Quezon City, site of the tragic garbage slide in 1999, where
525 families are undertaking a community-led urban upgrading program assisted by the Vincentian
Missionaries for Social Development. The second is in Muntinlupa, along the Philippine National Railroad
right-of-way where there are many squatters. About 567 families are working with the Muntinlupa
Development Foundation to voluntarily relocate to a safer, off-site location. Both efforts involve
sustainable revolving funds, and will be replicated in surrounding communities over time. A third JFPR
project aims to develop strategic private sector partnerships for urban poverty reduction in Metro Manila.
It will leverage $6.9 million in assistance from JFPR and leading Philippine corporations for slum
communities throughout the city, to include capacity building and the provision of revolving funds for
financing home improvements, urban services and micro-enterprise development.

Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

D.      Conclusions from the Country Case Studies

150. There appears to be a potentially strong demand from cities for ADB financing in India
and the PRC. However, total borrowing from ADB must be consistent with overall
macroeconomic and public debt considerations. The transaction costs associated with doing
business with ADB and ADB's perceived limited value added in terms of knowledge and best
international practice sometimes limits the demand for loans for urban projects. In the PRC,
projects are mostly prepared by the EAs. PPTA is mainly used to check the quality of the local
feasibility study and compliance with ADB's policies, particularly safeguard policies. In India, the
central Government selects the states and cities eligible for borrowing, often without bankable
                                                                                                   53


project proposals being available. ADB's PPTA plays an important role in bringing the project to
a bankable level. PPTAs are often viewed as too limited for this important task, especially for
complex multisector projects. In the Philippines, the national Government determines the
borrowing capacity of cities. Within this framework, the projects are prepared by PPTA, usually
address only a subset of urban sector problems, and are viewed as ADB-driven. The findings of
the country case studies are reinforced by the questionnaire returns received from project
directors and PIU managers in these three countries. They are elaborated in Appendix 8.

E.     Potential Effect of ADB Policy Initiatives

151. For most projects, ADB's involvement was regarded as having many advantages. The
long-term financing of needed infrastructure that ADB can offer is a scarce good in many DMCs,
especially for the type of investments cities make. ADB offers long grace and amortization
periods, longer than are available in the local market. ADB also has a concessional lending
window, and recently offers grant-based ADF funding for some low-income countries in the
WSS sector. Many respondents felt that the provision of reliable, long-term financing was the
key advantage of working with ADB. This is a somewhat different view than the one commonly
held within ADB--that ADB's contributions to knowledge transfer and policy reforms are at least
as important as financial transfers. There was a greater appetite for ADB to introduce best
practice and innovation in ADB's larger DMCs, which have some significant institutional
strengths of their own (e.g., the PRC and India).

152. The country case studies illustrated that some of the problems related to urban sector
lending are systemic to ADB rather than to country contexts. Such problems are not specific to
the urban sector, but are present to varying degrees in all sectors and across all DMCs.
Examples include long project preparation and approval periods, inflexible commitment charges,
complicated procedures, and insufficient project administration by ADB. With the growing
availability of project finance in some DMCs, the added value of ADB involvement in projects
has come under more scrutiny and criticism in some DMCs.

153. Because of feedback from clients and the lack of growth of the ADB loan portfolio during
the past decade, ADB is seeking solutions to become more responsive and relevant. In 2005,
some ADB-wide initiatives to change its systems and processes were adopted that will have a
major effect on ADB activities in the urban sector (footnote 6 [i]). Some recently approved policy
changes are (i) for OCR countries, an increase in the maximum threshold for international
competitive bidding from $3 million to $10 million on a case by case basis; (ii) poverty targeting
at the CSP level instead of the project level; (iii) more flexible determination of cost sharing
limits; (iv) expanding the list of items eligible for ADB financing to include land acquisition, taxes
and duties, and (limited) recurrent costs; (v) allowing retroactive financing up to 20% of the
project amount; and (vi) allowing greater flexibility for the size of imprest accounts.

154. Innovative lending modalities were approved in 2005 on a pilot basis for a period of
3 years (footnote 6 [ii]). These concern multitranche financing facilities, subsovereign and
nonsovereign public sector financing, local currency financing, and refinancing. Local currency
financing by ADB should be an interesting option for local governments, as such costs are
usually considerable in urban sector projects, and have increased as a proportion over time.
Before the USS, local costs accounted for, on average, 51% of the total project costs. Post­
USS, this proportion has risen to 58%. Local currency financing for urban projects would also be
attractive because municipalities are generally not skilled in mitigating foreign exchange risk
exposure. Subsovereign lending has the potential to be an important lending modality for the
urban sector. However, ADB would need to considerably strengthen its credit risk assessment,
54


risk mitigation techniques, and ability to critically assess the financial position of municipalities
before substantially increasing subsovereign lending. This would also require a better
partnership between the public and private sides of ADB. A significant revision of ADB's policy
on supplementary financing was approved November 2005, which will allow for more
streamlined financing of additions to financing plans and even investment plans.85 The new
guidelines for procurement will give more flexibility and authority to Borrowers. Bidding periods
will be shorter. On a case-to-case basis, depending on Borrower capacity, ADB may carry out
post-review of procurement procedures. Also approved are new guidelines for the use of
consultants. A review of ADB's system of commitment charges for OCR loans is ongoing.

155. ADB's further reform agenda is expected to cover a wider range of actions that have the
potential to change operations in the urban sector as well as other sectors: (i) updating the
sector lending, investment lending, and program lending modalities; (ii) introducing a regional
cooperation facility, an emergency response facility, and a cluster TA facility; (iv) increasing the
20% cap on the proportion of total lending for programs;86 (v) reviewing the graduation policy;
and (vi) streamlining sector policies and strategies to transfer all mandatory elements to the
ADB safeguard policies.

156. These initiatives are elaborated in Appendix 9, with their anticipated benefits for the
urban sector and risks to DMCs and EAs. If the inevitable initial uncertainties regarding the
implications and opportunities of the new business model can be overcome within ADB, the
benefits have the potential to be substantial for the urban sector projects as well as other
sectors. These measures, taken as a whole, would mean a radical departure from previous
practices and may help to create new opportunities for increased and more effective lending in
the urban sector. These may address some clients' complaints, which have, when viewed from
the perspective of DMCs, made ADB operations more restrictive--such as the increased
attention on fiduciary, resettlement, environmental, and indigenous people safeguards. With
these new opportunities, ADB will then need to concern itself more with the possibility of ADB
crowding out the involvement of local banks in the urban sector.

157. Even when all the changes are fully internalized, the challenge will remain to (i) find a
good opportunity for development; (ii) create a consensus around it; (iii) expeditiously design
good projects taking safeguards into account; (iv) find good EA staff, ADB staff, contractors, and
consultants; (v) adopt an implementation model that is efficient and effective; and (vi) create
sustainable results that address the MDGs, and that promote capacity and institutional
development. Some of the substantive lessons learned from completed projects and TA of
importance to the design of new projects, are summarized in Appendix 10. Appendix 11
summarizes some further lessons from PCRs.

                            VII.     EVALUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

158. This chapter draws together the findings of the study, and attempts to answer some key
questions: (i) Does ADB need to address the issues raised by urbanization--and if so, what is
so special about them that ADB would need an urban sector strategy? (ii) What would be a
sensible delimitation of the urban sector? and (iii) Why is ADB's urban sector program not much
larger than it is today? This is followed by a rating of USS and urban sector operations, some
suggestions for a new ADB USS, and a set of recommendations.


85
     ADB. 2005. A Review of the Policy on Supplementary Financing. Manila.
86
     This rule has not been rigidly enforced over the years.
                                                                                                        55


A.     Key Questions

159. Does ADB Need to Worry about Urbanization? Urbanization is one of the mega-
trends that is having a profound impact on the Asia and Pacific region. By 2020, the region will
look very different than it does today. As described in Chapter 2, the region is in the midst of a
major transition from a rural, agriculture dominated society to an urban, industrial/service sector
society. Urbanization is progressing at a rapid rate in most DMCs. Urbanization has many
positive features. Cities are the centers of economic growth and most of the jobs that are
needed to win the war on poverty will be created in cities. However, urbanization presents many
challenges that are evident in most of Asia's burgeoning cities, particularly megacities. For
example, there are a set of interrelated environmental problems including water scarcity, water
pollution, air pollution, and solid waste. The rapidly growing urban populations are placing
increasing pressure on overextended infrastructure. This is exacerbated by lack of public and
private investment, insufficient municipal finance options, deficient urban management, and
corruption. If not managed well, urbanization can breed vast slums with grinding urban poverty,
increased crime, and major social inequities. There is an interrelation between public health and
public space problems. Water supply and its use produces wastewater, and dense human
settlement produces special problems of drainage and solid waste management, which often
need to be tackled jointly. Poorly managed solid waste often obstructs drainage and pipe
networks, causing flooding and disruption and damaged infrastructure. Public health and public
space are affected by squatters and growing slums. Because of the close interrelationship of
urban issues, ADB should address the problems from an urban sector perspective rather than a
sector-by-sector basis. Addressing urban problems requires a holistic perspective, although
effective implementation of solutions simultaneously needs an approach that is as unbundled as
possible, since complex, multicomponent projects are difficult to manage and can overburden
the institutional and project management capacity of individual agencies.

160. What Could be a Meaningful Domain of the "Urban Sector"? Although the urban
sector is not a typical sector in any functional classification system, it can be made to fit if it
refers to the set of interrelated investments that are needed when populations are growing
rapidly, and conglomeration results in deteriorating standards in public health, use of public
space, and environmental quality of life. The investments would then cover one or more of the
following subsectors: (i) water supply; (ii) sanitation (including public and private toilets,
sewerage networks, sewage treatment systems, and solid waste management systems);
(iii) storm water drainage and floodwater control; (iv) roads and transport and transit related
systems; (v) environmentally oriented investments such as increased public space, green
environment, and clean air; (vi) municipal facilities occupying key space such as markets,
municipal offices, and bus or truck terminals; (vii) slum improvement; (viii) residential and
industrial site and service development; (ix) public housing provision and private housing
finance; (x) urban renewal, heritage, cultural, and tourism investments; (xi) land management;
(xii) public environmental awareness; and (xiii) urban institutional or capacity development.

161. Why is ADB's Urban Sector Program Not Much Larger than it is Today? The
answer needs to distinguish issues that are ADB-wide and issues which are specific to the
urban sector. ADB-wide issues are summarized in Box 9:

               Box 9: ADB-Wide Issues Affecting Urban Sector Performance

(i)    Many DMCs do not wish to significantly expand their external borrowings, given their debt
       management policies and their fiscal position. As a result, total ADB lending, not that just for the
       urban sector, has remained constant for a decade.
56


(ii)     Unlike at the time ADB was established, many DMCs now have access to the international capital
         markets and do not need to borrow foreign exchange from ADB. The availability of alternative
         sources of project finance and foreign currency has grown for some of ADB's major clients (e.g.,
         India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, and PRC). If ADB's clients feel that the transaction costs
         of working with ADB are too high, they will seek funds from other sources, even if the associated
         costs are higher than the financial cost of borrowing from ADB.
(iii)    Some DMCs do not want to increase their borrowings from ADB as they do not believe that ADB
         offers a suitable range of products or are not convinced of the value added of ADB's involvement.
(iv)     ADB has traditionally been more focused on rural than urban development. Since the bulk of
         Asia's poor live in rural areas, ADB's overarching objective of poverty reduction may result in
         focusing ADB's operations on rural areas rather than in the richer cities, even when there is a
         major investment gap in urban areas and there are growing urban problems.
(v)      ADB does not have enough resources to take the time needed to identify a large program or to
         develop leadership in the complex urban sector field.
(vi)     ADB finds it difficult to manage and mitigate the potential risk to its balance sheet of lending
         without a sovereign guarantee for the urban sector (e.g., subsovereign loans to municipalities or
         private sector lending).
(vii)    ADB's organizational set-up does not have a clear urban focus, as there are no longer dedicated
         urban divisions, urban committees, or urban sector classifications. The professional urban sector
         staff, 16 in all, is scattered across six departments.
(viii)   There has been a turnover of urban specialists and there is limited urban sector expertise located
         in the resident missions.
(ix)     ADB's project preparation model is not conducive to preparing the type of small projects that
         individual cities may need.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

162.     Issues specific to the urban sector are summarized in Box 10:

                 Box 10: Issues Specific to the Urban Sector Affecting Performance

(i)      Some developing member countries have embarked on decentralization programs. In this
         context, some governments do not wish to incur national debt for problems specific to local
         governments; in a decentralized system, urban problems should be solved and paid for by local
         governments themselves.
(ii)     Many national governments have relatively weak urban strategies.
(iii)    Some of the main components of the urban sector (e.g., wastewater collection, urban roads, and
         solid waste collection) have traditionally been provided for free or at a subsidized cost to urban
         populations. Changing attitudes to support cost recovery is a major challenge. If the cost recovery
         issue cannot be addressed, the likelihood of major ADB lending is limited. Problems of full cost
         recovery also apply to water supply, although lifeline tariffs and the use of water meters should
         allow appropriate user cost systems to be developed.
(iv)     Some urban sector projects, especially water supply and sewage/waste management, require
         significant technical expertise in operation and maintenance. Problems may occur if there is
         insufficient technical expertise at the local level.
(v)      Urban sector projects are often in need of special environmental and involuntary resettlement
         safeguard activities, which make the preparation and implementation process more challenging.
(vi)     Many urban sector projects use a multisector approach and include components in several
         subsectors. The resulting project complexity creates challenges for both the executing agencies
         and ADB, which are not always successfully overcome, resulting in less than optimal project
         outcomes.
(vii)    Urban sector projects, especially those covering many cities, are scattered geographically, are
         sometimes affected by local politics, tend to have hundreds of contracts, and require a greater
         than usual input from ADB in terms of their preparation and implementation.
                                                                                                          57


(viii)   Many executing and implementing agencies in the urban sector report to both national bodies and
         locally elected politicians. This can lead to delays and a greater than normal need for coordination
         and consensus building.

ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

163. In spite of these issues, which have affected the portfolio growth in the urban sector that
was expected in the USS, this study assesses that there is good potential to substantially
increase ADB's involvement in the medium and long term with proactive urban sector planning,
supported by a revised USS, changes in ADB's business model and products, and some
organizational adjustments. The challenge is for ADB to successfully grasp this opportunity. In
the MTS II, the urban sector is rated as a high priority sector in which ADB's operations are
expected to grow.

B.       Rating of the Urban Sector Strategy and Urban Sector Operations

164. This section assesses the USS primarily in terms of its relevance and efficiency, and
urban sector operations in terms of their effectiveness and sustainability.

165. Relevance of the USS. The USS was highly relevant in terms of highlighting
urbanization in Asia as one of the mega-trends, and in identifying the need for ADB to focus on
a response to the phenomenon as such, through a strategy on its own. All of the trends and
issues identified by the USS are still relevant in 2005, although some could be prioritized and a
few new issues could be added. The strategy appropriately anticipated ADB's increasing focus
on poverty reduction. USS 1999 was consistent with ADB's subsequent 2001 Long-Term
Strategic Framework (2001­2015), which reflected urbanization as a major challenge for ADB,
and one which ADB was particularly suited to address. However, the USS had little effect on the
2001 Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2001­2005), which hardly mentioned the USS or
urban sector priorities. The USS's objective of increasing lending to urban areas was highly
relevant, given ADB's comparative strengths as an organization promoting infrastructure and
capacity development. The strategy could have been more relevant as a guide to current
operations if it had made more distinction between regions and countries within Asia in terms of
urbanization, needs, and approaches; and if it had been more specific as to harmonization with
those of other major funding agencies and development partners. Overall, the USS is assessed
as relevant.

166. Efficiency of the USS in Directing Urban Operations. The number of goals and
targets make the USS hard to pursue in practical terms and hard to evaluate. After ADB's
reorganization, the USS was even harder to pursue; urban sector staff was scattered and the
new RSDD, as a custodian of USS, was not staffed with sufficient specialists to play a leading
role and to coordinate effectively. The USS was not successful in providing a statement that
focused ADB as an institution on the urban sector. ADB's subsequent water policy captured
some of the attention, but this had a much wider coverage than the urban sector, and the
relation of the water policy with the urban sector was not fully addressed. Individual country
urban sector profiles and strategies have generally not resulted in a clear urban focus in CSPs.
ADB's TA for the urban sector diminished. ADB's 2002 reorganization and the accompanying
new business processes led to much greater attention on country planning rather than sector
planning. ADB's leadership and institutional focus on the urban sector, widely acknowledged in
the 1990s, was due to the pre-2002 division-centered organization. Two divisions were explicitly
focused on urban development. After the 2002 reorganization, ADB focus on the urban sector
58


dissipated. The urban sector does not perform more efficiently in terms of the preparation and
implementing urban projects than before the USS; there are as many delays and loan
cancellations as before, or as in many other projects. Borrowers perceive ADB's transaction
costs as high, although many executing agencies believe that there is significant added value.
Since ADB no longer has specialized urban divisions and has few urban sections in RMs, there
is a lack of focal point for urban clients. This has led to a lack of lobby to promote ADB
involvement in the urban sector. Overall, the USS is assessed as having been less efficient in
directing a program of urban operations.

167. Effectiveness of Urban Sector Operations. Urban sector lending operations increased
but not significantly. Intended expansions of operations into public private sector partnerships,
urban (mass) transit, and land management were not achieved, although there was some
expansion in the housing sector. The number of program loans and sector loans did not grow as
planned. TA resources went down. Economic and sector work declined. No more large urban
forums were organized by ADB. However, PCRs have generally rated urban sector projects
higher than the average of the other projects in ADB, especially integrated urban development
(multisector) projects. OED ratings of completed urban sector projects have been in the middle
range. Some sectors have performed better (e.g., transport and energy) and some have
performed worse (e.g., agriculture and lines of credit to government-owned financial
institutions). Given a reduced TA program in the last years, and no growth in loan consulting
services and loan components for institutional development or training, it is unlikely that the
policy dialogue or capacity impact of current operations is higher than before the USS.
Increased cofinancing sources may have partly offset this trend. The USS did not specify
outcomes across Asia and these are hard to quantify. To give an indication of the coverage of
ADB's lending operations: areas with ADB-supported urban sector projects in the last 12 years
covered 12% of the DMCs' urban population. Overall, ADB's operations in the post-USS period
are assessed as effective.

168. Sustainability of Urban Sector Operations. The sustainability of the urban sector
program varies with the subsector and country, in line with country contexts. OED evaluations
have given lower ratings than PCRs to the sustainability of urban sector projects and impact on
institutions. Some progress has been registered over the years with appropriate tariff setting
and cost recovery in water supply and sewage systems, but practically all systems constructed
still need government subsidies, and are therefore less sustainable. The housing finance
subsector program, relying on financial intermediaries which generally significantly increase the
cost of housing loans to final borrowers, does not seem to be sustainable given the increasing
availability of competing private sector sources and lower commercial interest rates. The
sustainability of the urban sector within ADB is low, given its incompatibility with the present
organizational structure. As ADB no longer has urban divisions, there is a lack of a custodian for
the strategy. Expansion in lending, TA, and knowledge products would normally need to be
accompanied by appropriate levels of staffing. Given that ADB currently has a cap on increased
levels of staffing, this would mean a redeployment of existing positions. From the side of ADB's
clients, demand for urban sector projects continues, but an exponential rise is not foreseen,
partly because of external debt considerations for many DMCs. ADB has yet to decide on a
strategy for significantly increasing subsovereign lending. Overall, urban sector operations are
assessed as less sustainable.

169. Overall, ADB has failed to seize the opportunity to significantly increase the size and
quality of its urban portfolio. Although ADB operations are rated as broadly successful, the USS
is rated as partly successful.
                                                                                                   59


C.     Suggestions for a New Urban Sector Strategy

170. Nature of the New Strategy. The new urban sector strategy will be more effective if it
(i) is consistent with ADB's long-term or medium-term strategic frameworks; (ii) sets clear,
monitorable targets by regional department that are consistent with reasonable assumptions
about human resources and lending and TA volumes; (iii) has an overall custodian department
to guide the process; (iv) is more integrated with (other) sectoral strategies, such as ADB's
water policy; (v) identifies focal issues and opportunities for policy dialogue and capacity
development; (vi) guides decision making on the type of projects to be pursued proactively;
(vii) identifies the intended strategic partnerships with national and international agencies; and
(viii) is reviewed every 5 years. If the new strategy is not consistent with ADB's strategic
frameworks, does not have a custodian division, and does not set clear targets, monitorable for
this division, then it is unlikely to be operationally useful within ADB. Its main use would likely be
as a public relations document, much like the USS of 1999. Given that the MTS II identified
urban sector operations as a priority, the challenge will be to align ADB's human and budgetary
resources so that this vision is realized.

171. Substance of the New Strategy. In terms of its substance, many of the tenets of USS
1999 remain valid in OED's view, such as increased focus on urban transport, urban finance,
and housing. The new strategy should identify ways to facilitate a significant growth in urban
financing, given that there is in principle a vast financing gap in the urban sector in Asia, and
that the MTS II identified the urban sector as a sector in which ADB's operations should grow.
The strategy should specifically address new opportunities offered as a result of the new
changed lending rules, modalities, and business processes. The new USS should identify ways
to mobilize private sector investment and develop public private partnerships, and develop
strong risk mitigation measures for subsovereign loans. The new urban sector strategy should
address recent international concerns about the harmonization of the programs, policies, and
procedures of various external agencies; government ownership of the projects; anticorruption
measures; and capacity depletion as a result of substitution of regular functions of agencies by
project staff. The new strategy may also need to pay more attention to disaster prevention and
mitigation safeguards (e.g., earthquakes and flooding).

172. Need for Alignment of the TA Program with the Lending Operations. ADB has
multiple objectives and areas of focus. Human resources and TA grant funds are limited.
A previous OED recommendation, that the TA program should be aligned as much as possible
with the ongoing and pipeline loan program, remains valid. The TA program should be focused
on policy dialogue; demand surveys for project identification; project preparation; and, within the
context of ongoing lending operations, on capacity development and policy reform. Optimal use
should be made of urban research conducted by other organizations. RSDD and ADBI could
play a lead role in channeling relevant research findings to operational divisions.

173. Urban Sector Projects Need to Respond to Demand. An integrated multisector
approach should not be ruled out but, given the administrative challenges of complex projects,
urban interventions may need to start small, develop city development strategies focusing on
investment plans and pricing policies, and gradually expand in investments over the years. The
urban multisector projects are good candidates for the new modality of the multitranche
financing facility.

174. Single City or Multicity Projects. Policy dialogue with the DMCs should determine
whether ADB should focus on megacities and city regions rather than the more scattered
secondary cities in a particular country. Analysis of urbanization patterns should inform such
60


dialogue, and later be reflected in the country strategies. Multicity projects often require more
transaction costs, both for ADB and for the cities themselves. The cities usually have to rely on
a central borrower, which relends against more unfavorable conditions than when ADB directly
lends to a large city or utility. PCRs and PPARs point to higher success rates for single city
projects, whether multisector or not. Multicity projects, especially those with a sector modality
and for smaller cities, have often been products of convenience given ADB's project preparation
procedures. Now that the procedures have changed, more can be prepared under the
multitranche financing facility. This should improve the quality of subproject appraisal and
reduce transaction costs and commitment fees.

175. Need for Complementary Country-Specific Urban Sector Strategies. Now that ADB
has chosen to focus on the urban sector, regularly updated country strategies based on policy
dialogue and demand surveys will be needed. The urban sector operations should reflect
country specific and localized social, institutional, and economic conditions. From ADB's
perspective, the urban sector is labor intensive because investments are dispersed either
across many components in few cities or few components in many cities. In such
circumstances, it is usually efficient to delegate project administration to RMs.

D.     Recommendations for ADB

176.   In light of the findings, the following recommendations are made for ADB consideration.

     Recommendation                                                               Responsibility
 1. ADB Should Formulate an Urban Sector Strategy II. A greater focus on          RSDD; with
    Asia's urban sector is appropriate, given the trends in urbanization in the   inputs from
    region, the size and complexity of the sector's needs, its potential for      operations
    significant investment, and ADB's role as a premier development               departments;
    institution funding physical infrastructure and providing needed technical    Human
    expertise and capacity development. The MTS II identified the urban           Resources
    infrastructure as one of ADB's core operational sectors in which operations   Division (BPHR)
    are expected to grow and ADB will build up a critical mass of expertise to    for internal
    act as a leading provider of assistance, both financial and expertise.        organization
    Preparation of the Urban Sector Strategy II, now deferred to the fourth
    quarter of 2007, should be accelerated.

 2. The Urban Sector Strategy II Should Include a Road Map or Business            RSDD to
    Plan for Implementation to Translate the Broad Goals and Objectives           coordinate with
    of the Strategy into Reality, Given Various Constraints. This should set      inputs of
    out the assumptions about the resources (staffing; TA and expected urban      operations
    lending levels), the role of RSDD, sector divisions and resident missions,    departments,
    and plans to address the organizational and staffing impediments that are     including
    restricting the significant growth of ADB's urban portfolio.                  BPMSD

 3. The Urban Sector Strategy II Should Also Include a Results-Based              RSDD, with
    Framework with Clear, Monitorable Indicators that is consistent with          inputs from
    assumptions made about resources, so that Management can monitor              operations
    progress on its implementation and take corrective action as may be           departments;
    required. Such frameworks have been absent from past ADB strategies.          SPD for
    ADB's sector and thematic classifications should be reviewed with respect     classification
    to their coverage of the urban sector.                                        issue
                                                                                                      61


    Recommendation                                                                     Responsibility
 4. The New Strategy Needs to be Grounded in a Custodian Division in                   RSDD to
    RSDD, to Coordinate Across Departments, Monitor Targets and                        coordinate;
    Elaborate Common Themes. The custodian division needs to promote                   Operations
    learning across regional departments and prioritize the use of TA funds to         Departments to
    address strategic issues that are common across a number of regions. It            consider;
    may need to be assisted by some in-house consultants for a defined                 Human
    period of time. In those regional departments with significant urban sector        Resources
    operations, the strategy should be guided by CSP priorities and                    Division (BPHR)
    implemented by divisions that are geared more to the urban sector than             for internal
    currently is the case, with the exception of the newly created water and           organization
    urban development division in the South Asia Regional Department. Given
    that ADB has a cap on increased levels of staffing, an expansion of staff in
    the urban sector would have to come from gradual redeployment of
    existing positions in MTS II's low priority sectors. Focal points should be
    established in RMs in those countries with a promising urban portfolio.
    More local staff needs to be employed in RMs for DMCs where the CSP
    indicates a significant portfolio, as urban sector projects are demanding in
    terms of processing and administration. The current organizational
    structure and resource commitment do not seem appropriate for the
    sector, given its classification in MTS II.

5. ADB Needs to Provide Some Guidance to Staff on How to Engage in RSDD and the
   Anticorruption Initiatives in the Urban Sector. Although some Integrity Division
   corruption risks are common across sectors (e.g., procurement), other
   types of corruption vary by sector. ADB should develop a standard check
   list of types of corruption that may occur at the various stages in the
   project cycle for urban projects, together with possible risk mitigation
   measures and entry points to raise and address the issue during policy
   dialogue, project processing, and project implementation.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, BPMSD = Budget, Personnel, and Management Systems Department, CSP =
country strategy and program, DMC = developing member country, MTS = Medium-Term Strategy, RSDD = Regional
and Sustainable Development Department, SPD = Strategy and Policy Department, TA = technical assistance.
62      Appendix 1



                     METHODOLOGY OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY OF
                          ONGOING URBAN SECTOR PROJECTS

1.      In May 2005, a list of all 54 approved loans pertaining to urban sector projects supported
by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) loans was compiled. Project officers from ADB
headquarters and resident missions were informed of the survey and were requested to provide
their contact information. As some project officers believed that their respective projects had
been very recently established, the total number of urban projects included was reduced to 51.
Later on, one more project from India (Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation and Reconstruction
Project) was included in the survey as it had a very sizeable urban sector component in it,
leading to a total of 52 projects, from which a response was requested.

2.     The questionnaire consisted of 19 questions divided into three parts: multiple choice
questions on the project, its project office, and capacity development. The answers to most
questions were suggested for consistency, and they could be ticked in boxes (multiple choice
format).

3.      Between June and July 2005, the questionnaires were sent by e-mail and fax, together
with a brief explanatory letter about the survey background and objectives, including a request
for the project directors to forward copies of the questionnaire to other project offices and/or
project implementation units involved in the project. In some cases, questionnaires were
compiled by the main project office before they were returned to the survey team. Follow-up
calls and e-mails were made to project offices that did not respond. The total number of projects
that responded with at least one questionnaire return was 44 (85%) while the total number of
project offices responding was 88 (75%) out of a total of 117 questionnaires circulated to known
project offices by either the study team or the main project office of their own accord. Details on
the origin of the responses are shown in Table A1.1. A complete list of the projects surveyed is
in Table A1.2.

     Table A1.1: Projects Ongoing in June 2005, and Response to Questionnaire Survey

                                                                                     Total
 Country                     No. of Projects      Projects with Response          Respondents
 Azerbaijan                         1                        1                         1
 Bangladesh                         1                        1                         1
 Bhutan                             1                        1                         1
 Cambodia                           2                        2                         3
 Cook Islands                       1                        0                         0
 Fiji Islands                       1                        1                         1
 India                              7                        7                        10
 Indonesia                          2                        2                         2
 Kiribati                           1                        1                         1
 Kyrgyz Republic                    1                        0                         0
 Lao People's Dem. Rep.             4                        3                        17
 Mongolia                           3                        3                         3
 Nepal                              4                        3                         3
 Pakistan                           2                        1                         1
 Papua New Guinea                   1                        1                         1
 Philippines                        6                        6                        13
 PRC                                5                        5                        12
 Samoa                              1                        0                         0
 Sri Lanka                          3                        2                         5
                                                                                  Appendix 1    63


                                                                                     Total
 Country                         No. of Projects         Projects with Response   Respondents
 Uzbekistan                             1                           0                  0
 Viet Nam                               4                           4                 13
    Total                              52                          44                 88
PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

4.      Of the 21 countries covered by the survey, the highest number of responses came from
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, where one project submitted 14 questionnaires from its
project implementation units and other project offices. The good response rate from India,
People's Republic of China, and Philippines was in part due to the follow-up and interviews by
the study teams for the country case studies. Some projects and/or respondents had difficulty
communicating with the survey team during distribution of the questionnaires. In the case of
Viet Nam projects, questionnaires were coursed through the resident mission office for
translation and facilitation of responses. Communication problems were also evident in the
answers provided by some respondents. Some questions had to be left blank and some
answers needed to be validated with information from the projects' reports and
recommendations of the President. This led to variable numbers of valid responses, which has
been taken into account in the statistical analysis (averages are drawn only from valid
responses). Aside from the language barrier, lack of internet access in the project offices
prevented some of the respondents from answering completely as some questions from faxed
questionnaires were no longer readable.

5.      The analysis of the response was done in two ways: (i) by main offices, i.e., by project
directors in the main executing agencies (44); and (ii) by all respondents, including main and
subsidiary offices (88). The choice of the type of respondent depended on the question, but all
questions reflecting perceptions were analyzed from the perspective of the replies by all
respondents. Given the limited number of questionnaires, simple cross-tabulations and tables
with means were used as the main sources for the statistical analysis.
64    Appendix 1



                             Table A1.2: List of Projects Surveyed

                                                                                        Questionnaires
Country/Loan No./Project Title                                                            Returned
Azerbaijan
1.       2119/20   Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                  1
Bangladesh
2.       1947      Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement Project                    1
Bhutan
3.       1625      Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project                                   1
Cambodia
4.       1725/2013 Provincial Towns Improvement Project                                       2
5.       1969      GMS: Mekong Tourism Development Project                                    1
Cook Islands
6.       1832      Waste Management Project                                                   0
Fiji Islands
7.       2055      Suva Nausori Water Supply & Sewerage Project                               1
India
8.       1647      Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project                         3
9.       1704      Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Management                         2
10.      1720      Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility                            1
11.      1759/61   Housing Finance II Project                                                 1
12.      1813      Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project                                 1
13.      1826a     Gujarat Earthquake Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project               1
14.      2046      Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement in Madhya Pradesh         1
Indonesia
15.      1587      Metropolitan Medan Urban Development Project                               1
16.      2072/73   Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector Project                          1
Kiribati
17.      1648      Sanitation, Public Health, and Environmental Improvement Project           1
Kyrgyz Republic
18.      1742      Community-Based Infrastructure Services Sector Project                     0
Lao People's Democratic Republic
19.      1525      Secondary Towns Urban Development                                         1
20.      1710      Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project                                14
21.      1834      Vientiane Urban Infrastructure Services Project                           0
22.      1994      Small Towns Development Project                                           2
Mongolia
23.      1736      Cadastral Survey and Land Registration Project                             1
24.      1847      Housing Finance (Sector) Project                                           1
25.      1907      Integrated Development of Basic Urban Services in Provincial Towns         1
Nepal
26.      1755      Small Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project                     0
27.      1820      Melamchi Water Supply Project                                              1
28.      1966      Urban and Environmental Improvement Project                                1
29.      2058/59   Integrated Development of Basic Urban Services in Provincial Towns         1
Pakistan
30.      1854      North-West Frontier Province Urban Development Sector Project              1
31.      2060/61   Southern Punjab Basic Urban Services Project                               0
Papua New Guinea
32.      1812      Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project                       1
Philippines
33.      1658      Clark Area Municipal Development Project                                   5
34.      1665      Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement Project                               3



64
                                                                                                Appendix 1        65


                                                                                                      Questionnaires
  Country/ Loan No./ Project Title                                                                       Filled Out
  34.    1746       Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector                             1
                    Development Program
  35.    1843       Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector Project                                               2
  36.    2012       MWSS New Water Source Development Project                                                  1
  37.    2063       Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project                                       1
  PRC
  39.    1692       Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation Project                                                        1
  40.    1797       Tianjin Wastewater Treatment and Water Resources Project                                   3
  41.    1985       Hebei Province Wastewater Management Project                                               6
  42.    1995       Harbin Water Supply Project                                                                1
  43.    1996       Wuhan Wastewater Management Project                                                        1
  Samoa
  44.    2026       Sanitation and Drainage Project                                                            0
  Sri Lanka
  45.    1575       Third Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                                 1
  46.    1632       Urban Development and Low Income Housing Sector Project                                    0
  47.    1993       Secondary Towns and Rural Community-based Water Supply and Sanitation                      4
                    Project
  Uzbekistan
  48.    1842       Urban Water Supply Project                                                                 0
  Viet Nam
  49.    1514       Second Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                1
  50.    1880       Third Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                 1
  51.    1702       Ho Chi Minh City Environmental Improvement Project                                         1
  52.    2034       Central Region Urban Environmental Improvement Project                                    10
        Total                                                                                                 88
GMS = Greater Mekong Subregion, MWSS = Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, PRC = People's Republic
of China.
Note: Loan 1990-VIE credit facility has not yet commenced; Loan 2117-BAN is in the process of setting up project offices.
a
   Loan 1826-IND was previously not included in the list of ongoing urban sector loans.
Source: Questionnaire survey of all urban sector projects ongoing by June 2005, for this study.
                                                                                                                                                     66
                      URBAN SECTOR PROJECTS APPROVED FROM JULY 1993 TO JUNE 2005
           REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PRESIDENT FOR URBAN SECTOR PROJECTS BETWEEN
                                        MID-1993 AND MID-2005




                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 2
                                                                                                           Project Cost
           Loan                                                                                              Estimate        Loan          Date
 No.      Number     Country                                     Project Title                              ($ million)    ($ million)   Approved
Pre-USS (July 1993 to June 1999)
Water Supply, Sanitation, and Solid Waste Management
     1.    1250         RMI        Majuro Water Supply Project                                                  0.80          0.70       09-Sep-93
     2.    1260        PAK         Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                  95.80         72.00        04-Nov-93
     3.    1264        BAN         Second Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                 43.00         31.00        16-Nov-93
     4.    1267        LAO         Northern Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project              16.30         13.00        18-Nov-93
     5.    1269         PHI        Municipal Water Supply                                                     72.00         43.20        25-Nov-93
     6.    1273         VIE        Ho Chi Minh City Water Supply and Sanitation Rehabilitation Project        81.00         65.00        29-Nov-93
     7.    1313        PRC         Dalian Water Supply Project                                               379.70        160.00        20-Sep-94
     8.    1326        THA         Chonburi Water Supply Project                                              65.00         38.50        18-Oct-94
     9.    1361         VIE        Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project                       82.50         66.00        17-Aug-95
 10.       1389         RMI        Majuro Water Supply and Sanitation Project                                 11.60           9.20       29-Sep-95
 11.       1459        FSM         Water Supply Sanitation Project                                            13.30         10.60        19-Sep-96
 12.       1468        CAM         Phnom Penh Water Supply and Drainage Project                               35.80         20.00        26-Sep-96
 13.       1472         PHI        Small Towns Water Supply Sector Project                                    83.00         50.00        30-Sep-96
 14.      1490/91      PRC         Anhui Municipal Wastewater Treatment Project                              336.00        140.00        26-Nov-96
 15.       1514         VIE        Second Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project                92.00         69.00        27-Feb-97
 16.       1527         INO        Capacity Building of Water Supply Enterprise for Water Loss Reduction     119.40         66.00        17-Jul-97
 17.       1528        THA         Nong Khai-Udon Thani Water Supply Project                                  85.50         50.00        21-Aug-97
 18.       1539        PAK         Korangi Wastewater Management Project                                     101.00         70.00        18-Sep-97
 19.       1544        PRC         Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply Project (Phase I)                            518.00        100.00        24-Sep-97
 20.       1560        MON         Provincial Towns Basic Urban Services Project                               8.50           6.80       30-Sep-97
 21.       1575         SRI        Third Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project                          121.00         75.00        06-Nov-97
 22.       1636        PRC         Fuzhou Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment Project                      192.20        102.00        30-Sep-98
 23.       1640        NEP         Melamchi Water Supply (Engineering) Project                                 6.75           5.00       10-Nov-98
 24.      1648          KIR        Sanitation, Public Health, and Environment Improvement                     12.80         10.24        08-Dec-98
 Subtotal                                                                                                  2,572.95       1,273.24



66
                                                                                                    Project Cost
                                                                                                      Estimate       Loan          Date
No.    Loan Number    Country                               Project Title                            ($ million)   ($ million)   Approved
Multisector
 25.        1240       NEP      Kathmandu Urban Development Project                                         0        12.00       29-Jun-93
 26.        1292        INO     Eastern Islands Urban Development Sector Project                      142.00         85.00       21-Dec-93
 27.        1362        LAO     Vientiane Integrated Urban Development Project                          27.70        20.00       17-Aug-95
 28.        1367        PHI     Regional Municipal Development Project                                  64.20        30.00       30-Aug-95
 29.        1376       BAN      Secondary Towns Infrastructure Development Project II                   82.90        65.00       19-Sep-95
 30.      1383/84       INO     Sumatra and West Java Urban Development Sector Project                334.00         200.00      26-Sep-95
                                                                                                            a
 31.        1410        THA     Samut Prakarn Wastewater Management Project                           687.00        230.00b      7-Dec-95
 32.      1415/16       IND     Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project                    132.00         105.00      14-Dec-95
 33.        1448       VAN      Urban Infrastructure Project                                            12.80         10.00      27-Jun-96
                                Metropolitan Bogor, Tangerang & Bekasi Urban Development (Sector)
 34.        1511       INO      Project                                                               228.00         80.00       19-Dec-96
 35.        1525       LAO      Secondary Towns Urban Development Project                              38.50         27.00       26-Jun-97
 36.        1587        INO     Metropolitan Medan Urban Development Project                          198.20        116.00       08-Dec-97
 37.        1599        PHI     Subic Bay Area Municipal Development Project                            37.00        22.00       19-Dec-97
 38.        1625       BHU      Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project                                 8.20         5.70       30-Jul-98
 39.        1632        SRI     Urban Development and Low Income Housing (Section) Project            100.00         70.00       24-Sep-98
 40.        1647        IND     Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project                    362.00        250.00       03-Dec-98
 41.        1658        PHI     Clark Area Municipal Development Project                                41.80        24.30       15-Dec-98
 Subtotal                                                                                            1,809.30      1,352.00
Others
 42.        1323        PAK     Sukkur Bridge                                                                        45.00       29-Sep-94
 43.     1549/1550/     IND     Housing Finance Project (NHB/HUDCO/IDFC)                             1,150.00       300.00       25-Sep-97
            1551
 44.        1663        PHI     Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement                                                200.00       03-Dec-98




                                                                                                                                             Appendix 2
            1664        PHI     Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement                                                 22.87
            1665        PHI     Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement                                                 71.00
 45.        1572        INO     Capacity Building in Urban Infrastructure Management Project           70.00         42.00       04-Nov-97
 Subtotal                                                                                           1,220.00         680.87
    Total for all Sectors Pre-USS                                                                   5,602.25       3,306.11




                                                                                                                                             67
                                                                                                                                              68
                                                                                                     Project Cost
         Loan                                                                                          Estimate       Loan          Date
No.     Number       Country                                 Project Title                            ($ million)   ($ million)   Approved
Post-USS (July 1999 to June 2005)




                                                                                                                                              Appendix 2
Water Supply, Sanitation, and Solid Waste Management
 1.         1692       PRC      Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation Project                                    876.00        300.00       29-Jun-99
 2.         1710       LAO      Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project                               25.00        20.00       16-Nov-99
 3.         1725       CAM      Provincial Towns Improvement Project                                    26.30         20.00       17-Dec-99
 4.         1755       NEP      Small Towns Water Supply Sanitation Sector Project                      53.90         35.00       12-Sep-00
 5.         1812       PNG      Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project                    23.30         15.34       14-Dec-00
 6.         1820       NEP      Melamchi Water Supply Project                                          464.00        120.00       21-Dec-00
 7.         1832       COO      Waste Management Project                                                 3.10          2.20       17-Jul-01
 8.         1842       UZB      Urban Water Supply Project                                              65.50         36.00       27-Sep-01
 9.         1880       VIE      Third Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project              98.00         60.00       13-Dec-01
10.         1907       MON      Integrated Development of Basic Urban Services In Provincial Terms      26.50         20.10       06-Aug-02
                                Project
11.         1985       PRC      Hebei Province Wastewater Management Project                           165.34         82.36       19-Dec-02
12.         1993       SRI      Secondary Towns & Rural Community Based Water Supply and               100.00         60.29       16-Jan-03
                                Sanitation
13.         1995       PRC      Harbin Water Supply                                                    399.50        100.00       11-Mar-03
14.         1996       PRC      Wuhan Wastewater Management Project                                    193.60         83.00       25-Apr-03
15.         2012        PHI     MWSS New Water Source Development Project                                4.97          3.26       14-Oct-03
16.         2013       CAM      Provincial Towns Improvement Project Supply                                            6.26       28-Oct-03
17.         2034        VIE     Central Region Urban Environmental Improvement Project                  96.00         44.00       08-Dec-03
18.         2046       IND      Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement in Madhya Pradesh     303.50        200.00       12-Dec-03
19.         2055        FIJ     Suva-Nausori Water Supply and Sewerage Project                          72.40         47.00       18-Dec-03
20.      2058/59       NEP      Kathmandu Valley Water Services Sector Development Program/Project      15.00         15.00       18-Dec-03
21.      2119/20       AZE      Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project                               39.90         30.00       07-Dec-04
 Subtotal                                                                                            3,051.81       1,299.82
Multisector
22.         1702        VIE     Ho Chi Minh City Environmental Improvement Project                    100.000         70.00       07-Oct-99
23.      1704          IND      Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental Management      251.400        175.00       26-Oct-99
24.    1719/1720/               Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project                              200.00       17-Dec-99
         1721          IND      (HUDCO/ICICI/IDFC)
                                                                                                                    Project Cost
                                                                                                                      Estimate            Loan           Date
        Loan Number      Country                                    Project Title                                    ($ million)        ($ million)    Approved
  25.        1742          KGZ       Community-Based Infrastructure Services Sector Project                             45.00             36.00        08-Jun-00
  26.        1797          PRC       Tianjin Wastewater Treatment and Water Resources Protection Project               340.70            130.00        11-Dec-00
  27.        1813           IND      Calcutta Environmental Improvement Project                                        360.00            250.00        19-Dec-00
  28.        1834           LAO      Vientiane Urban Infrastructure and Services Project                                37.00             25.00        23-Aug-01
  29.        1843           PHI      Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector                                               60.00              30.00       27-Sep-01
  30.        1854           PAK      North-West Frontier Province Urban Development Sector Project                      30.00              20.80       08-Nov-01
  31.        1947           BAN      Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement (Sector) Project                   87.00              60.00       28-Nov-02
  32.        1966           NEP      Urban and Environmental Improvement Project                                        37.50              30.00       10-Dec-02
  33.       1994           LAO       Small Towns Development Sector Project                                             20.00              16.00       28-Jan-03
  34.       2026           SAM       Sanitation and Drainage Project                                                    10.00               8.00       27-Nov-03
  35.     2060/61          PAK       Southern Punjab Basic Urban Services Project                                      128.60              90.00       18-Dec-03
  36.       2063           PHI       Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project                               48.80              30.50       18-Dec-03
  37.     2072/73          INO       Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector Project                                 126.50              88.60       19-Dec-03
  38.       2117           BAN       Secondary Towns Integrated Flood Protection Project ­ Phase 2                     128.88              80.00       02-Dec-04
  39.       2151           IND       Multisector Project for Infrastructure Rehabilitation in Jammu and Kashmir        358.00             250.00       21-Dec-04
   Subtotal                                                                                                          2,169.38           1,589.90
 Others
 40.    1745/1746           PHI      Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector                    150.00            175.000        20-Jul-00
                                     Development Program
   41.      1759/61            IND      Housing Finance II Project                                                       517.00            120.00        21-Sep-00
   42.       1847             MON       Housing Finance Sector Loan                                                       24.00             15.00        18-Oct-01
   43.       1990              VIE      Housing Finance Project                                                           51.80             30.00        20-Dec-02
   44.       2024             PRC       Xi'an Urban Transport                                                            762.00            270.00        27-Nov-03
  Subtotal                                                                                                            1,504.80             610.00
     Total for all Sectors Post-USS                                                                                   6,725.99          3,499.72
        Total for all Sectors in the Study Period                                                                    12,328.24          6,805.83
AZE = Azerbaijan, BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, CAM = Cambodia, COO = Cook Islands, FIJ = Fiji Islands, FSM = Federated States of Micronesia,
HUDCO = Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, ICICI = ICICI Limited, IDFC = Infrastructure Development Finance Company Limited,




                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
IND = India, INO = Indonesia, KGZ = Kyrgyz Republic, KIR = Kiribati, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, MON = Mongolia, MWSS = Metropolitan
Waterworks and Sewerage System, NEP = Nepal, NHB = National Housing Bank, No. = number, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PNG = Papua New Guinea,
PRC = People's Republic of China, RMI = Republic of the Marshall Islands, SAM = Samoa, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand, USS = Urban Sector Strategy,
UZB = Uzbekistan, VAN = Vanuatu, VIE = Viet Nam.
a
   At appraisal, total project cost was estimated at $507.00 million. At the time of the approval of the supplementary loan, estimated project cost had increased to
   $687.00 million).
b
   Includes a supplementary loan (Loan 1646-THA) amounting to $80.00 million, approved 3 December 1998.
Note: The actual period periods compared are from 28 June 1993 to 27 June 1999 (pre-USS) and 28 June 1999 to 27 June 2005 (post-USS).




                                                                                                                                                                       69
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.
  70     Appendix 3



         LIST OF ALL URBAN SECTOR RELATED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
            Table A3.1: Advisory Technical Assistance Grants for the Urban Sector
                                  From Mid-1993 to Mid-2005
Year    No.   Country                             Advisory Technical Assistance                             Total ($)
1993   1916    PRC      Institutional Strengthening of the Environmental Protection Bureaus in Tangshan     450,000
                        and Chengde Municipalities
1993   1958    MAL      Urban Transport Planning                                                            600,000
1993   1980    BAN      Institutional Strengthening of Pourashavas for Urban Water Supply and Sanitation    450,000
                        Services
1993   1999    VIE      Institutional Strengthening of HCMC Water Supply Company                            600,000
1993   2000    VIE      HCMC Water Supply Master Plan                                                       600,000
1993   2012    BAN      Khulna-Jessore Drainage Rehabilitation                                              920,000
1993   2016    INO      Private Sector Participation in Urban Development (Bandung and Semarang)            600,000
1993   2015    PRC      Urban Environmental Improvement Planning                                            480,000
1993   2040    VIE      Ho Chi Minh City Environmental Improvement Planning                                 600,000
1994   2098    IND      Urban Sector Profile                                                                400,000
1994   2148    VIE      Urban Sector Strategy Study                                                         300,000
1994   2198    KIR      Integrated Urban Plans and Program Study                                            385,000
1994   2202    IND      Capacity Building for Improved Infrastructure Dev. in Selected Municipality in      600,000
                        Karnataka State
1994   2212    PRC      Beijing Urban Transport                                                             715,000
1994   2211    PRC      Capacity Building of the Beijing Industrial Hazardous Waste Management Center       425,000
1994   2210    PRC      Capacity Building of the Beijing Municipal Environmental Protection Bureau and      600,000
                        Affiliated Agencies
1994   2246    BAN      Study of Urban Poverty in Bangladesh                                                190,000
1994   2254    PHI      MWSS Operational Strengthening Study                                                600,000
1995   2281    CAM      Urban Development Strategy Study                                                    500,000
1995   2302    PRC      Symposium on Urban Transport                                                        100,000
1995   2319    TUV      Urban Planning and Environment Management                                           310,000
1995   2368    IND      Institutional Strengthening of Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Finance Corporation   100,000
1995   2376    VIE      Community Environmental Health Improvements for the Provincial Towns                500,000
1995   2401    PHI      MWSS Privatization Support                                                          582,000
1995   2456    PRC      Pilot Environmental Plans for Selected Medium-Size Cities                           537,000
1995   2471    IND      Resource Mobilization Study for Local Governments in Karnataka                      300,000
1995   2502    PHI      Private Sector Participation in Urban Development                                   500,000
1996   2596    VAN      Urban Growth Management Strategy for Port Vila                                      600,000
1996   2639    PAK      Urban Institutional Strengthening                                                   100,000
1996   2729    PRC      Industrial Pollution Investigation and Assessment in Town and Village Enterprises   600,000
1997   2751    PRC      Capacity Building of Wastewater Treatment Operations in Anhui Province              400,000
1997   2805    INO      Strengthening of Urban Waste Management Policies and Strategies                     600,000
1997   2804    PRC      Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) Chengdu Water Supply                                   600,000
1997   2837    INO      Capacity Building for Private Sector Participation in Urban Development             850,000
1997   2881    MON      Capacity Building for the Provision of Urban Services in Provincial Towns           825,000
1997   2906    PRC      Leadership Training on Urban Environmental Management in Key Cities                 600,000
1997   2959    VIE      Preparation of a Development Strategy for the Central Region of Viet Nam            898,000
1997   2972    LAO      Support for Urban Development Administration Authorities                            500,000
1997   2893    PRC      Hohhot Urban Development                                                            430,000
1997   2833    IND      Strengthening Housing Finance Institutions                                          600,000
1998   2893    PRC      Hohhot Urban Development (Supplementary)                                            150,000
1998   2726    PRC      Water Quality Management Planning for Suzhou Creek (Supplementary)                  400,000
1998   2998    NEP      Urban Water Supply Reforms in Kathmandu Valley                                      800,000
1998   3022    BHU      Capacity Building in the Urban Sector                                               500,000
1998   3053    BAN      Promoting Good Urban Governance in Dhaka                                            150,000
                                                                                              Appendix 3      71


 Year     No.    Country                              Advisory Technical Assistance                             Total ($)
 1998    3096     PRC       Urban Policy Workshop                                                                150,000
 1998    3124     PAK       Urban Sector Strategy Study                                                          150,000
 1998    3130     PAK       Water Resources Strategy Study                                                       650,000
 1998    3067      IND      Restructuring State-Level Housing Institutions                                       500,000
 1999    3185     NEP       Institutional Strengthening of Kathmandu Metropolitan City                           450,000
 1999    3196      PHI      National Urban Policy Framework                                                      150,000
 1999    3209      IND      Strengthening Institutional Capacities for Urban Infrastructure Finance and          500,000
                            Development
 1999     3226      BAN     Urban Sector Strategy                                                                150,000
 1999     3243       FIJ    Urban Sector Strategy Study                                                          670,000
 1999     3272      NEP     Urban Sector Strategy                                                                200,000
 1999     3297      BAN     Urban Transport and Environmental Improvement                                        645,000
 1999     3324      IND     Community Participation in Urban Environmental Improvement                           150,000
 1999     3326      INO     Urban Sector Development in a Decentralizing Environment                             600,000
 1999     3331      LAO     Capacity Building for Urban Development Administration Authorities                   600,000
 1999     3344      IND     Strengthening Microfinance Institutions for Urban and Environmental Infrastructure   500,000
                            Finance
 1999     3377     PRC      Urban Poverty Study                                                                  410,000
 1999     3379      IND     Strengthening Disaster Mitigation and Management at the State Level                1,000,000
 2000     3586      IND     Building HUDCO's Capacity for Lending to Community-Based Finance Institutions        150,000
 2000     3475      PHI     Institutional Strengthening of Housing and Urban Development Sector                  150,000
 2000     3480      IND     Reducing Poverty in Urban India                                                      300,000
 2000     3566     SAM      Capacity Building for Urban Planning and Management                                  500,000
 2000     3521     PRC      Assessment of Small and Medium Cities Urban Infrastructure Development               150,000
 2000     3487      VIE     Low Income Housing and Secondary Towns Urban Development Needs                       500,000
                            Assessment Study
 2000     3447     PRC      Strengthening Urban Solid Waste Management                                           600,000
 2001     3673     PRC      Pro-Poor Urban Heating Tariff Reforms                                                850,000
 2001     3645      THA     Planning for Sustainable Urbanization                                                500,000
 2001     3703      PHI     Capacity Building for the Regulatory Office of Metropolitan Waterworks and           800,000
                            Sewerage System
 2001     3749     PRC      National Guidelines for Urban Wastewater Tariffs and Management Study                700,000
 2001     3729      UZB     Capacity Building for Urban Water Supply                                             600,000
 2001     3770      IND     Support for Improvements in the Accounting System of the Calcutta Municipality       150,000
                            Corporation
 2001     3784      IND     Conservation and Livelihood Improvement in the Indian Sundarbans                     450,000
 2002     3860     SAM      Implementation of the Urban Planning and Management Strategy                         400,000
 2002     3902      IND     North Eastern Region Urban Sector Profile                                            150,000
 2002     4003      BAN     Supporting Urban Governance Reform                                                   400,000
 2002     3848      PHI     Metro Manila Solid Waste Management                                                1,250,000
 2003     4162      IND     Urban Sector Review and Strategy                                                     480,000
 2003     4086      IND     Capacity Building for Project Management and Comm. Mobilization in Madhya            520,000
                            Pradesh
 2004     4402     PRC      Heating Supply for Urban Poor in Liaoning Province                                   500,000
 2004     4352     MON      Developing an Urban Development and Housing Sector Strategy                          350,000
 2004     4335     PRC      Town-Based Urbanization Strategy Study                                               750,000
 2004     4415      AFG     Kabul Air Quality Management                                                         450,000
 2004     4518      IND     Capacity Building for Kerala Sustainable Urban Development                           500,000
 2004     4497      IND     Capacity Building for Municipal Service Delivery in Kerala                           800,000
 2005     4604     PRC      Nanjing Water Utility Long-Term Capital Finance in Commercial Markets                550,000
AFG = Afghanistan, BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, CAM = Cambodia, FIJ = Fiji Islands, HCMC = Ho Chi Minh City,
HUDCO = Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, KIR = Kiribati, LAO = Lao
People's Democratic Republic, MAL = Malaysia, MWSS = Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, MON = Mongolia,
NEP = Nepal, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, SAM = Samoa, THA = Thailand,
TUV = Tuvalu, UZB = Uzbekistan, VAN = Vanuatu, VIE = Viet Nam.
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.
72      Appendix 3



                Table A3.2: Project Preparatory Technical Assistance Grants

Year      No.    Country                  Project Preparatory Technical Assistance              Total ($)
1993     1911     LAO      Vientiane Integrated Urban Development                               600,000
1993     1335     NEP      Bagmati Command Area Development (Supplementary)                      16,000
 1993    1513        PHI   Manila North-East Water Supply (Supplementary)                        48,000
 1993    1917        PRC   Beijing Environmental Improvement                                    600,000
 1993    1952        VAN   Urban Infrastructure                                                 536,000
 1993    1977        IND   Urban Infrastructure Development                                     600,000
 1993    2009        INO   Industrial Pollution Control in Cimahi                               590,000
 1993    2006        PAK   Second Urban Water Supply and Sanitation                             500,000
 1993    2014        THA   Wastewater Management and Pollution Control in Samut Prakarn         600,000
 1994    2070        COO   Integrated Urban Infrastructure                                      455,000
 1994    2074        PAK   Sukkur Bridge                                                        100,000
 1994    2094        INO   Second West Java and Sumatra Urban Development Sector                100,000
 1994    2146        VIE   Second Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation                  550,000
 1994    2185        INO   Java Flood Control                                                   900,000
 1994    2187        PRC   Anhui Municipal Wastewater Treatment                                 283,000
 1994    2262        KAZ   Almaty Air Quality Study                                             100,000
 1994    2263        PHI   MWSS Water Supply Improvement Study                                  582,000
 1994    2272        PHI   Small Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Sector                       100,000
 1995    2280        CAM   Urban Water Supply and Sanitation                                    600,000
 1995    2292        THA   Nongkai-Udonthani Water Supply and Sanitation                        600,000
 1995    2303        THA   Bangkok Metropolitan Region Wastewater Management Action Plan and    600,000
                           Feasibility Study
 1995    2327        PAK   Bahawalpur Division Area Development                                 600,000
 1995    2373        IND   Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development                           600,000
 1995    2396        LAO   Secondary Towns Integrated Urban Development                         600,000
 1995    2410        BAN   Urban Poverty Reduction                                              600,000
 1995    2412        INO   Development of Madrasah Aliyahs                                      600,000
 1995    2445        PRC   Xian-Xianyang-Tongchuan Environment Improvement                       500,000
 1995    2480        SAM   Integrated Urban Development                                          552,000
 1995    2511        PRC   Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Conservancy                                   1,000,000
 1995    2515        INO   Preparation of Metropolitan Medan Urban Development                   100,000
 1996    2581        PHI   Infrastructure Improvement of Subic Bay Area Municipalities          800,000
 1996    2582        MON   Provincial Towns Basic Urban Services                                600,000
 1996    2592        CAM   Stung Chinit Water Resource Development                              800,000
 1996    2655        INO   Metropolitan Bandung Urban Development                               600,000
 1996    2666        BHU   Urban Infrastructure Improvement                                     400,000
 1996    2689        CAM   Integrated Urban Development                                         800,000
 1996    2711        LAO   Small Towns Water Supply and Sanitation                              500,000
 1996    2666        BHU   Urban Infrastructure Improvement                                     400,000
 1996    2700        IND   Housing Finance Facility                                              100,000
 1997    2770        PRC   Fuzhou Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment                          598,000
 1997    2790        VIE   Ho Chi Minh City Environmental Improvement                            600,000
 1997    2791        SRI   Urban Development and Low-Income Housing                            1,100,000
 1997    2803        PHI   Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation              800,000
 1997    2806        IND   Karnataka Coastal Environmental Management and Urban Development     800,000
 1997    2807        PHI   Clark Area Municipal Development                                     600,000
 1997    2816        BAN   Third Urban Development                                              600,000
                                                                                              Appendix 3       73


 Year     No.    Country                   Project Preparatory Technical Assistance                        Total ($)
 1997    2666     BHU       Urban Infrastructure Improvement (Supplementary)                                100,000
 1997    2835      PHI      Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement                                            150,000
 1997    2903     THA       Border Towns Urban Development                                                  800,000
 1997    2928     PAK       Quetta Water Supply and Environmental Improvement                               900,000
 1997    2936      IND      Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Fund                                     400,000
 1997    2940     PAK       North West Frontier Province Urban Development                                  950,000
 1998    3021      PHI      Mindanao Urban Planning and Basic Services Sector                            1,000,000
 1998    3025     PRC       Suzhou Creek Environmental Rehabilitation                                       965,000
 1998    3049     PRC       Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply (Phase II)                                         540,000
 1998    3055       FIJ     Suva-Nausori Water Supply and Sewerage                                          800,000
 1998    3059     NEP       Small Towns Water Supply and Sanitation                                         600,000
 1998    3085     COO       Urban Infrastructure                                                            750,000
 1998    3088      INO      Development of Rural-Urban Linkages                                             890,000
 1998    3089      IND      Calcutta Environmental Improvement                                            1,000,000
 1999    3291      PHI      Development of Poor Urban Communities                                           850,000
 1999    3333     LAO       Vientiane Urban Infrastructure and Services                                     600,000
 1999    3364     NEP       Urban Environmental Improvement                                                 750,000
 2000    3440     UZB       Urban Social Infrastructure Development                                         720,000
 2001    3646      INO      Urban Poverty Reduction                                                         800,000
 2001    3804      INO      Private Sector Participation Development Facility for Urban Infrastructure      600,000
 2001    3809      VIE      Central Region Urban Development                                              1,000,000
 2001    3690     BAN       Urban Governance and Infrastructure Improvement                                 350,000
 2001    3760      PHI      Metro Manila Urban Services for the Poor                                      1,000,000
 2001    3802     PAK       Southern Punjab Basic Urban Services                                            800,000
 2001    3685     MON       Integrated Development of Basic Urban Services in Secondary Towns               700,000
 2001    3759      IND      Integrated Urban Development in Madhya Pradesh                               1,000,000
 2001    3774     AZE       Urban Water Supply and Sanitation                                               740,000
 2002    3646      INO      Urban Poverty Reduction (Supplementary)                                         160,000
 2002    3291      PHI      Development of Poor Urban Communities (Supplementary)                           150,000
 2003    4182      IND      Urban Clean Fuel                                                                995,000
 2003    4106      IND      Kerala Sustainable Urban Development                                          1,000,000
 2004    4515      IND      Preparation of the Jammu and Kashmir Urban Infrastructure Development           500,000
                            Project
 2004    4361      INO      Urban Air Quality Improvement Sector Development Program                       700,000
 2004    4348      IND      North Eastern Region Urban Development                                       1,000,000
 2004    4385      PRC      Guangxi Nanning Urban Infrastructure Development                               560,000
 2004    4377      LAO      Northern and Central Region Water Supply and Urban Development                 200,000
 2004    4530      IND      Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development III                                 400,000
 2004    4531      SRI      Greater Colombo Wastewater                                                     850,000
 2004    4533      BHU      Urban Infrastructure Development                                               600,000
 2004    4534      PAK      Sindh Basic Urban Services                                                     795,000
  2004     4535      BAN      Secondary Towns Water Supply and Sanitation                             800,000
  2005     4578      PAK      Mega City Development                                                   150,000
AZE = Azerbaijan, BAN = Bangladesh, BHU = Bhutan, CAM = Cambodia, COO = Cook Islands, FIJ = Fiji Islands,
IND = India, INO = Indonesia, KAZ = Kazakhstan, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, MON = Mongolia, MWSS =
Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, NEP = Nepal, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's
Republic of China, SAM = Samoa, SRI = Sri Lanka, THA = Thailand, UZB = Uzbekistan, VAN = Vanuatu, VIE = Viet Nam.
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.
74       Appendix 3



                       Table A3.3: Regional Technical Assistance Grants

  Year     No.    Country                        Regional Technical Assistance                      Total ($)
  1993                      None
  1994    5611   Regional   Megacities Management in Asia and the Pacific                           550,000
  1995    5662   Regional   Impact Evaluation Study of Bank Assistance in the Urban Dev. and        400,000
                            Housing Sector
  1995    5646   Regional   Regional Study on Urban Infrastructure Finance                          480,000
  1996                      None
  1997    5764   Regional   Enhancing Municipal Service Delivery Capability in Selected DMCs        550,000
  1997    5728   Regional   Chiang Rai-Kunming Road Improvement via Lao People's Democratic         600,000
                            Republic
  1998                      None
  1999    5846   Regional   Development of the Cities Data Book for the Asian and Pacific Region    400,000
  2000    5926   Regional   Public-Private Community Partnerships in Urban Services for the Poor    550,000
  2001    6016   Regional   Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities                                   150,000
  2002    6026   Regional   Promoting Urban Poverty Reduction through Participation in the Cities   670,000
                            Alliance
  2003    6016   Regional   Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities (Supplementary)                   92,020
  2003    6121   Regional   Rural, Urban and Subregional Linkages in the Mekong Region              400,000
  2003    6130   Regional   Study of Urban Violence in Asia: Towards More Effective Urban           150,000
                            Upgrading
  2003    6151   Regional   ADB's Participation in the Cities Alliance                              350,000
  2004    6016   Regional   Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities (Supplementary)                   466,500
 2005     6240 Regional Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations            150,000
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country.
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.

                      Table A3.4: Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction Grants
Year      No.     Country                       Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction                  Total ($)
2000     9003       PHI     On-Site Urban Upgrading for Vulnerable Slum Communities of Payatas   1,000,000
2000     9002      PNG      Low-Cost Sanitation, Community Awareness and Health Education        1,740,000
                            Program
 2000     9004       PHI    Off-Site and Off-City Relocation of Vulnerable Slum Communities of   1,000,000
                            Muntinlupa
 2002     9021       IND    Rainwater Harvesting and Slum Development in Rajasthan               1,900,000
                            Strategic Private Sector Partnerships for Urban Poverty Reduction in 3,600,000
 2002     9022       PHI    Metro Manila
 2002     9023       CAM    Income for the Poor through Community-Based Environmental            1,000,000
                            Improvements in Phnom Penh
 2003     9035       LAO    Solid Waste Management and Income Generation for Vientiane's Poor    1,000,000
 2004     9054       UZB    Affordable Services and Water Conservation for the Urban Poor        1,500,000
 2004     9058       VIE    Expanding Benefits of the Poor through Urban Environmental           1,000,000
                            Improvements
 2005     9065       INO    Enriching Lives of the Urban Poor through Food Fortification         1,750,000
 2005     9074       INO    Seismically Upgraded Housing in Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam and North   2,000,000
                            Sumatera
CAM = Cambodia, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, PHI = Philippines,
PNG = Papua New Guinea, UZB = Uzbekistan, VIE = Viet Nam.
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.
                                                                                     Appendix 4     75


                                     URBAN SECTOR NEEDS

1.      Well-managed urbanization taking place in well-regulated economies facilitates
sustained economic growth and thereby promotes broad social welfare gains. The
agglomeration of economic activities through the urbanization process contributes to growth
through (i) raising the productivity of outputs and employment; (ii) mobilizing saving and allowing
accumulation of wealth in the form of real estate; and (iii) increasing fiscal flows, with cities
providing the largest share of tax revenues. However, policy and regulatory weaknesses can
compromise the potential for beneficial development through urbanization, and poorly managed
urbanization results in suboptimal use of public and private resources, failure of economic gains
to be widely distributed, and significant social and environmental costs. Efficient urban growth is
further compromised by inadequate, poorly distributed and poorly maintained infrastructure and
services, and inadequate cost recovery for services provided.

2.        The development needs of the urban sector in the Asia and Pacific region span the full
range of activities, infrastructure, services, and facilities required to (i) improve the efficiency of
cities as places to invest and work in, and (ii) improve the condition of cities as places in which
to live and prosper. Improved governance and regulatory environments are required to iron out
urban market distortions and attract capital. Administrative reform and capacity building is
required to improve urban planning and management, and to ensure that cities develop
efficiently and maximize their development potential. Improved and extended infrastructure,
utilities, and services are required to support both economic development and improved quality
of life.

3.       In both low-income (Asian Development Fund) and medium-income (ordinary capital
resources) countries, there is a need to address the requirements of the urban poor for decent
living conditions and access to work so that they too can enjoy the benefits of economic growth.
Poverty has many dimensions, in addition to material deprivation, Asia's urban poor suffer from
the cumulative deprivation which results from squalid living conditions and poor access to
services. Urban poverty is manifested not only in economic stress resulting from unemployment
and low paying jobs, but in a poor quality of life as a result of inadequate and insecure access to
shelter, education, health services, and infrastructure. The urban poor are exposed to
environmental hazards and risks, have weak family support and coping mechanisms, and are
highly vulnerable to economic and market changes. Poverty is compounded by the high levels
of environmental stress in cities--a function of rapid growth, industrialization, inadequate and
ineffective waste management and disposal systems, and increasing vehicle densities.
Notwithstanding the negative impact on quality of life, the economic impact of pollution in Asian
cities, in terms of loss of productivity, has been estimated at between 1% and 5% of their city
gross domestic product (GDP).

4.       Addressing these needs requires intervention on a number of fronts. Firstly, national
governments need to work with the newly empowered local governments in improving the policy
and regulatory environment to (i) encourage efficient and effective urban development, and
(ii) create the conditions for greater private sector investment in urban infrastructure and service
provision. This requires policy reform and institutional change; the development and
implementation of improved regulation; incentive systems; and strengthened relationships
among local government, the private sector, and civil society.

5.     Secondly, there is a need for the strengthening of local governments to better equip
them to support efficient, effective, and sustainable urban development. This demands that local
governments address issues such as promotion of the local economy, improved access to
76        Appendix 4



private capital, reform in development planning and promoting effective real estate markets, and
increased preparedness in disaster prevention and mitigation. To achieve this requires a range
of interventions including institutional strengthening, support for improved urban governance,
organizational reform, and human resource development. Improved urban management
efficiency and sustainability also requires (i) municipal finance reform, (ii) enhanced cost
recovery for services, (iii) improved urban planning and regulation, and (iv) the mobilization of
private-sector resources for expanded and improved infrastructure and service provision.

6.       Thirdly is the need for improved urban infrastructure and services. This requires both
improved management and dramatic increases in investment. There are a variety of estimates
for infrastructure financing requirements for Asia, the most recent of which were prepared for
the Connecting East Asia: A New Framework for Infrastructure.1 Such estimates are necessarily
highly approximate since the relationship between the supply of infrastructure and services, its
impact on growth, and the further demand this growth places on infrastructure provision, is
complex. In 2004, conservative estimates suggested that in Asia and the Pacific, expenditures
of about $400 billion per year on infrastructure (both capital requirements and operating costs)
would be required for the next 25 years to sustain current levels of growth.2

7.        A model to predict future infrastructure demand in all sectors (net of requirements for
rehabilitation) calculated that infrastructure investment needs for all developing countries (World
Bank member developing countries) over the period 2005­2010 amounted to $465 billion per
year or 5.5% of developing countries' GDP (including both capital and maintenance
requirements).3 A similar methodology, adopted for East Asia4 and extended to include all Asian
Development Bank developing member countries (DMCs) over the same period, indicates a
requirement of $230 billion per year, again including both capital and maintenance costs, and
covering the following sectors: (i) electricity generation and supply, (ii) telephone landlines,
(iii) telephone mobile, (iv) paved intercity roads, (v) rail lines, and (vi) access to improved water
supply and sanitation. This methodology is based on infrastructure stock trends, using real
demand data from eight Asian countries for which data is available, and adjusting for economic
growth and geographic variables to extend this analysis to other countries within the same
income group. Costs of increasing infrastructure stock, and for associated maintenance
requirements, are based on best practice unit costs derived from the actual cost of infrastructure
and service provision, and are reduced to an average cost per capita per year for middle-
income and low-income economies to derive the total funding requirement.5

8.      To estimate approximate urban development financing requirements, a similar
methodology was used excluding power, telecommunications, railways, and intercity roads; and
including solid waste management and slum upgrading. The same best practice unit costs were
used for water supply and sanitation, and similar figures were derived for solid waste
management and slum upgrading based on recent field data6 (Table A4.1). This analysis
suggested that total financing requirements for just water supply, sanitation, solid waste
1
    Asian Development Bank, Japan Bank for International Cooperation, World Bank. 2005. Connecting East Asia:
    A New Framework for Infrastructure. Washington DC.
2
    World Bank. 2004. World Bank Development Report 2004. Washington DC.
3
    Fay, Marianne and Tito Yepes. 2003. Investing in Infrastructure: What is Needed from 2000­2010? World Bank
    Working Paper No. 2545. Washington DC: World Bank.
4
    People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Mongolia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Thailand,
    Viet Nam, Cambodia, Fiji Islands, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Myanmar, Palau,
    Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, and Vanuatu.
5
    The figures for the People's Republic of China and Malaysia are adjusted slightly from the middle-income country
    figure to provide a better fit with observed data.
6
    Figures taken from recent urban development projects with components in these sectors.
                                                                                                  Appendix 4       77


 management, and slum upgrading in urban areas will be $25 billion per annum (Table A4.2).
 Demand for additional urban roads and mass transit systems is difficult to estimate. However,
 based on past urban investment patterns on urban roads and highways, this number doubles to
 $50 billion per year if urban roads are included. Demand for mass transit systems is yet harder
 to assess. However, megacities and large cities across the region are going to find investment
 in such systems increasingly necessary as cities expand and traffic volumes exceed the
 carrying capacities of urban road networks. Even based on the conservative assumption that
 100 kilometers of rail mass transit system are constructed annually across the region, this adds
 a further $10 billion per annum to the urban funding requirement.

 9.      Excluding electricity, intercity roads and rail, and telecommunications, it is estimated that
 the DMCs will need to spend about $60 billion per annum on the development of urban
 infrastructure and services between 2006 and 2010 in the infrastructure sectors of water supply,
 sanitation, solid waste management, slum upgrading, urban roads, and mass transit systems.

                                    Table A4.1: Best Practice Unit Costs

                                                                                         Unit Cost ($)
                                                                                             Maintenance/Year
 Sector                                             Unit                      Capital          as % of Stock
                                                                                                    Value
 Water Supply                         Per connected household                      400                 3
 Sanitation                           Per connected household                      700                 3
 Solid Waste Management               Per household served                         120                 5
 Slum Upgrading and/or                Per household upgraded                       300                 3
 Urban Renewal
 Urban Road                           Per km of 4 lane highway               650,000                     2
 Mass Transit                         Per km of underground or              100 million                  5
                                      elevated railway
km = kilometer.
Sources: Fay, Marianne and Tito Yepes. 2003. Investing in Infrastructure: What is needed from 2000 to 2010? World
         Bank Paper No. 3102. Washington DC: World Bank; Expenditures on Infrastructure in East Asia Region,
         2006­2010 (for Asian Development Bank-Japan Bank for International Cooperation-World Bank East Asia
         Pacific Infrastructure Flagship Study, February 2005); This special evaluation study's estimates of urban roads
         and mass transit costs.

 10.     Overall, the funding requirements for infrastructure translate to 6.9% of GDP for the
 People's Republic of China, 3.6% for other middle-income countries, and 6.3% for low-income
 countries. While this analysis is useful in providing some indication of the likely funding
 requirements--both for national and urban infrastructure and services--these service costs can
 ultimately only be met either directly by consumers through service tariffs, or indirectly by
 taxpayers through subsidies. Financiers, whether the private sector or official lenders or donors,
 can only change the time profile of user charges or taxes through loans or equity--which
 eventually must be repaid or remunerated.
                                                                                                                                   78
                       Table A4.2: Expected Infrastructure Expenditure for Asia: Total and Urban Sectora

                                                            Infrastructure




                                                                                                                                   Appendix 4
                                                        Expenditures ($) per    2003 Population    Expected Annual Expenditure
                                        Country          person per annum           (Million)      Needs Per Country ($ million)
                                    Classification by                  Urban                                         Urban
Country                                 Incomeb           Totalc      Sectora   Totald    Urbane       Total         Sectora
Afghanistan                       Low income               48.0         22.0       22.2     6.7       1,065.6         147.4
Azerbaijan                        Lower-middle income      90.0         21.0        8.2     4.3         741.1          90.3
Bangladesh                        Low income               48.0         22.0      133.4    37.0       6,403.2         814.0
Bhutan                            Low income               48.0         22.0        0.7                  35.2           0.0
Cambodia                          Low income               48.0         22.0       13.3     2.5         637.8          55.0
China, People's Republic of       Lower-middle income      90.0         21.0    1,292.3   498.0     116,307.0      10,458.0
Cook Islands                                                                        0.0                   0.0           0.0
Fiji Islands                      Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0         0.8                  74.8           0.0
Hong Kong, China                  High income                                               6.8           0.0           0.0
India                             Low income              48.0         22.0     1,068.0   301.3      51,264.0       6,628.6
Indonesia                         Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0       215.0    94.7      19,353.9       1,988.7
Kazakhstan                        Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0        14.9     8.3       1,341.8         174.3
Kiribati                          Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0         0.1                   8.0           0.0
Republic of Korea                 High income                                      47.8    40.0           0.0           0.0
Kyrgyz Republic                   Low income              48.0         22.0         5.0     1.7         240.5          37.4
Lao PDR                           Low income              48.0         22.0         5.7     1.2         272.6          26.4
Malaysia                          Upper-middle income     97.0         19.0        25.1    14.7       2,429.9         279.3
Maldives                          Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0         0.3                  25.7           0.0
Federated States of Micronesia,   Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0         0.1                   9.7           0.0
Mongolia                          Low income              48.0         22.0         2.5     1.4         120.0          30.8
Myanmar                           Low income              48.0         22.0        53.2    14.4       2,554.6         316.8
Nauru                                                                                                     0.0           0.0
Nepal                             Low income              48.0         22.0       24.2      3.2       1,161.6          70.4
Pakistan                          Low income              48.0         22.0      146.0     50.6       7,005.6       1,113.2
Palau                             Upper-middle income     97.0         19.0        0.0                    2.0           0.0
Papua New Guinea                  Low income              48.0         22.0        5.6      1.0         269.8          22.0
Philippines                       Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0       81.1     49.7       7,299.0       1,043.7
Marshall Islands                  Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0        0.1                    5.3           0.0
Samoa                             Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0        0.2                   16.1           0.0
Singapore                         High income                                      4.2      4.3           0.0           0.0
Solomon Islands                   Low income              48.0         22.0        0.5                   24.4           0.0
Sri Lanka                         Lower-middle income     90.0         21.0       19.3       4.6      1,732.7          96.6
Taipei,China                                                                      22.6                    0.0           0.0
                                                                      Infrastructure
                                                                   Expenditures ($) per           2003 Population          Expected Annual Expenditure
                                             Country                person per annum                  (Million)            Needs Per Country ($ million)
                                         Classification by                      Urban                                                        Urban
Country
                                             Incomeb                Totalc      Sectora         Totald        Urbane           Total         Sectora
Tajikistan                             Low income                    48.0        22.0             6.6          1.7               315.5          37.4
Thailand                               Lower-middle income           90.0        21.0            64.0         12.7             5,756.3         266.7
Timor-Leste                            Low income                    48.0        22.0             0.8                             37.3            0.0
Tonga                                  Lower-middle income           90.0        21.0             0.1                              9.1            0.0
Turkmenistan                           Lower-middle income           90.0        21.0             6.3           2.2              566.9          46.2
Tuvalu                                                                                            0.0                              0.0            0.0
Uzbekistan                             Low income                    48.0          22.0          25.7           9.4            1,233.6         206.8
Vanuatu                                Lower-middle income           90.0          21.0           0.2                             18.7            0.0
Viet Nam                               Low income                    48.0          22.0          80.9          20.7            3,883.3         455.4
  Total                                                                                       3,397.0       1,193.1          232,222.5      24,405.4
a
    Urban sector expenditure in this table is confined to water supply, sanitation, solid waste management, and slum upgrading in urban areas.
b
    Country Classification, World Bank Data, and Statistics.
c
    Tito Yepes. 2005. Expenditure on Infrastructure in East Asia Region, 2006­2010. ADB-JBIC-World Bank East Asia Pacific Infrastructure Flagship Study.
d
    Asian Development Bank Statistical Database System.
e
    World Bank. 2005. 2005 World Development Indicators. Washington DC.




                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 4
                                                                                                                                                           79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                                ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK'S LENDING TO THE URBAN SECTOR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 5
                                                                           Table A5.1: Urban Sector Loans by Country, 1993­2004
                                                                                                 ($ million)

               1993             1994           1995             1996              1997             1998           1999             2000           2001             2002             2003            2004             Total
 Country   No.    Amt.    No.      Amt.    No.    Amt.    No.      Amt.     No.      Amt.    No.      Amt.    No.    Amt.    No.      Amt.    No.    Amt.    No.      Amt.    No.      Amt.     No.    Amt.    No.      Amt.
 AZE         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     2     30.0     2         30.0
 BAN         1     31.0     0        0.0     1     65.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     1       60.0     0         0.0     1     80.0     4       236.0
 BHU         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     1        5.7     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1          5.7
 CAM         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     1       20.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     1     20.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1         6.3     0      0.0     3         46.3
 COO         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1      2.2     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1          2.2
 FIJ         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1        47.0     0      0.0     1         47.0
 FSM         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     1       10.6      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1         10.6
 HKG         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     0          0.0
 IND         0      0.0     0        0.0     2 105.0        0        0.0      3     300.0      1      250.0     4 375.0        3      370.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1       200.0     1 250.0       15     1,850.0
 INO         1     85.0     0        0.0     2 200.0        1       80.0      3     224.0      0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     2        88.6     0      0.0     9       677.6
 KGZ         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     1       36.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1         36.0
 KIR         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     1       10.2     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1         10.2
 KOR         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     0          0.0
 LAO         1     13.0     0        0.0     1     20.0     0        0.0      1       27.0     0        0.0     1     20.0     0        0.0     1     25.0     0        0.0     1        16.0     0      0.0     6       121.0
 MAL         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0/0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     0          0.0
 MON         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      1        6.8     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1     15.0     1       20.1     0         0.0     0      0.0     3         41.9
 MYA         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     0          0.0
 NEP         1     12.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     1        5.0     0      0.0     2      155.0     0      0.0     1       30.0     2        15.0     0      0.0     7       217.0
 PAK         1     72.0     1       45.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      1       70.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1     20.8     0        0.0     2        90.0     0      0.0     6       297.8
 PHI         1     43.2     0        0.0     1     30.0     1       50.0      1       22.0     4      318.2     0      0.0     2      175.0     1     30.0     0        0.0     2        33.8     0      0.0    13       702.1
 PNG         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     1       15.3     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1         15.3
 PRC         0      0.0     1     160.0      0      0.0     1       28.0      1     100.0      1      102.0     1 300.0        1      130.0     0      0.0     1       82.4     3       453.0     0      0.0    10     1,355.4
 RMI         1      0.7     0        0.0     1      9.2     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     2          9.9
 SAM         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1         8.0     0      0.0     1          8.0
 SIN         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     0          0.0
 SOL         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     0          0.0
 SRI         1     40.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      1       75.0     1       70.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1        60.3     0      0.0     4       245.3
 THA         0      0.0     1       38.5     1 150.0        0        0.0      1       50.0     1       80.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     4       318.5
 UZB         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     1     36.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1         36.0
 VAN         0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     1       10.0      0        0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0      0.0     0        0.0     0         0.0     0      0.0     1         10.0
 VIE         1     65.0     0        0.0     1     66.0     0        0.0      1       69.0     0        0.0     1     70.0     0        0.0     1     60.0     1       30.0     1        44.0     0      0.0     7       404.0
 Total       9 361.9        3      243.5    10 645.2        6      198.6     14      943.8    11      841.1     8 785.0       10      881.3     7 189.0        5      222.5    18     1,061.9     4 360.0      105     6,733.8
Amt = amount; AZE = Azerbaijan; BAN = Bangladesh; BHU = Bhutan; CAM = Cambodia; COO = Cook Islands; FIJ = Fiji Islands; FSM = Federated States of Micronesia; HKG = Hong Kong,
China; IND = India; INO = Indonesia; KGZ = Kyrgyz Republic; KIR = Kiribati; KOR = Republic of Korea; LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic; MAL = Malaysia; MON = Mongolia;
MYA = Myanmar; NEP = Nepal; PAK = Pakistan; PHI = Philippines; PNG = Papua New Guinea; PRC = People's Republic of China; RMI = Republic of the Marshall Islands; SAM = Samoa;
SIN = Singapore; SOL = Solomon Islands; SRI = Sri Lanka; THA = Thailand; UZB = Uzbekistan; VAN = Vanuatu; VIE = Viet Nam.
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.
                                                  Table A5.2: Annual Urban Lending by Country
                                                                   ($ million)




                                                                                                                            MON
                                     COO
                              CAM




                                                           HKG




                                                                                              KOR




                                                                                                                                    MYA
                 BAN


                        BHU




                                                                                                                     MAL
                                                                                                      KGZ


                                                                                                             LAO




                                                                                                                                                   PAK
                                                   FSM




                                                                                                                                           NEP
         AZE




                                                                              INO
                                                                    IND




                                                                                       KIR
                                           FIJ
  Year




1968                                                                                                                  7.2
1969
1970
1971                                                                                           8.8
1972                                                       21.5                               31.3                    6.1
1973                                                                                                                               13.0
1974                                                                          11.5                            6.0
1975                                                       20.0
1976                                                                          1.15                                                                 22.0
1977                                                      20.50                                                                                    39.5
1978                                                                                                                 16.0          7.96
1979                                                                          40.3            47.1
1980                                                       20.0               32.0            27.9
1981                                                                          74.8           102.2
1982             14.4                                                                                                30.2          15.0
1983                                                                          36.7           122.8
1984                                                                                          94.0
1985                                                                         172.6            35.0                   45.0
1986                                                                                                                                               55.2
1987                    3.3                                                                   33.2
1988                                                                         175.0            20.6
1989             24.2                       9.6                              120.0                                                                151.0
1990             43.0                                                         39.0
1991             91.5                                                        253.0                            9.6
1992             55.0                                                        158.4                            9.5
1993             31.0                                                         85.0                           13.0                          12.0    72.0
1994                                                                                                                                               45.0
1995             65.0                                              105.0     200.0                           20.0
1996                          20.0                 10.6                       80.0
1997                                                               300.0     224.0                           27.0            6.8                   70.0
1998                    5.7                                        250.0              10.2                                                  5.0




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 5
1999                          20.0                                 375.0                                     20.0
2000                                                               370.0                      36.0                                        155.0
2001                                 2.2                                                                     25.0           15.0                   20.8
2002             60.0                                                                                                       20.1           30.0
2003                           6.3         47.0                    200.0      88.6                           16.0                          15.0    90.0
2004     30.0    80.0                                              250.0
Grand




                                                                                                                                                          81
 total   30.0   464.1   9.0   46.3   2.2   56.6    10.6    82.0   1,850.0   1,792.0   10.2   522.9   36.0   146.1   104.5   41.9   36.0   217.0   565.5
                                                                                                                                                                     82
                                                                                                                                                        Grand
                                                                                                                                                        Total
                                                             SAM
                            PNG




                                       PRC




                                                                                                                               VAN
                                                                                  SOL




                                                                                                        THA




                                                                                                                   UZB
                                                  RMI
                 PHI




                                                                                            SRI
                                                                       SIN




                                                                                                                                           VIE
     Year




                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 5
    1968                                                                                                                                                  7.2
    1969
    1970                                                                    8.3                                                                           8.3
    1971                                                                                                                                                  8.8
    1972                                                                                                                                                 58.9
    1973                                                                                                   19.6                              4.6         37.2
    1974                                                                                                                                                 68.8
    1975                                                                                                                                                 36.8
    1976                      13.5                                        23.6                                                                           60.3
    1977                                                                                                                                                 60.0
    1978            49.0       5.4                                                                                                                       78.4
    1979                                                                  15.1                             68.0                                         170.5
    1980            42.8                                                             1.65                  20.0                                         144.4
    1981            46.0                                                                                                                                223.0
    1982                                                                                                                                                 59.6
    1983            39.3                                                                                                                                198.8
    1984                                                                                                                                                 94.0
    1985                                                                                                 168.9                                          421.5
    1986                                                                                                                                                 55.2
    1987                                                                                                                                                 36.5
    1988                                                                                                                                                195.6
    1989           156.4                                                                                                                                461.2
    1990            22.0                                                                                                                                104.0
    1991            31.4                 70.0                                                  20.0                                                     475.5
    1992                      11.3       85.0                                                  27.0        70.3                                         416.5
    1993            43.2                              0.7                                      40.0                                         65.0        361.9
    1994                                160.0                                                              38.5                                         243.5
    1995            30.0                              9.2                                                150.0                              66.0        645.2
    1996            50.0                 28.0                                                                                    10.0                   198.6
    1997            22.0                100.0                                                  75.0        50.0                             69.0        943.8
    1998           318.8                102.0                                                  70.0        80.0                                         841.1
    1999           175.0      15.4      300.0                                                                                               70.0        785.0
    2000                                130.0                                                                                                           881.4
    2001            30.0                                                                                              36.0                  60.0        189.0
    2002                                82.36                                                                                               30.0        222.5
    2003            33.8                453.0                    8.0                           60.3                                         44.0      1,061.9
    2004                                                                                                                                                360.0
   Grand
    Total        1,157.1      45.6    1,510.0         9.9        8.0      47.0       1.65     292.3      665.3        36.0       10.0      408.6     10,214.7
AZE = Azerbaijan; BAN = Bangladesh; BHU = Bhutan; CAM = Cambodia; COO = Cook Islands; FIJ = Fiji Islands; FSM = Federated States of Micronesia; HKG = Hong
Kong, China; IND = India; INO = Indonesia; KIR = Kiribati; KOR = Republic of Korea; KGZ = Kyrgyz Republic; LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic; MAL = Malaysia,
MON = Mongolia; MYA = Myanmar; NEP = Nepal; PAK = Pakistan; PHI = Philippines; PNG = Papua New Guinea; PRC = People's Republic of China; RMI = Republic of
the Marshall Islands; SAM = Samoa; SIN = Singapore; SOL = Solomon Islands; SRI = Sri Lanka; THA = Thailand; UZB = Uzbekistan; VAN = Vanuatu; VIE = Viet Nam.
Source: Asian Development Bank's internal databases.
                                                                                                   Appendix 6       83


      FINDINGS FROM ALL 51 PROJECT COMPLETION REPORTS FOR URBAN SECTOR
                 PROJECTS, ISSUED BETWEEN MID-1998 AND MID-2005

1.      Success Ratings. Thailand and the People's Republic of China (PRC) have had the
highest success rates for completed projects. Comparing urban sector projects with and without
project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA), projects preceded by a PPTA were not
significantly more successful than projects not preceded by a PPTA (81% versus 79% of all
projects with project completion reports [PCRs] were rated successful).1 So far, urban sector
projects administered by resident missions have not been ranked more successful than projects
administered by staff in headquarters.

2.      Project Support by the Asian Development Bank. Comparing the average number of
mission days needed for urban sector projects and all Asian Development Bank (ADB) projects
(according to the Special Evaluation Study on Project Cost Estimates2), there was little
difference: fact-finding took around 50 days and appraisal lasted around 70 days in both cases.
Project administration missions took around 150 days.3

3.      Disbursement Ratios. Amounts disbursed were on average 84% of the loans for the
51 completed projects with PCRs, somewhat similar to the average for all projects (footnote 2).
Large amounts of ADB loans were cancelled or lapsed when the loan was closed, both in the
urban sector and in all other sectors. Other Operations Evaluation Department studies have
pointed out the problems with estimating project cost accurately (footnote 2), and the effects of
certain contingent problems, such as local currency devaluations against the US dollar in the
1990s, which have contributed to loan cancellations. The ADB-wide phenomenon of loan
cancellations also points to certain systemic problems that ADB loans face in general, that are
unrelated to the specific features of the urban sector. However, some sector influence was
evident, since water supply, sanitation, and waste management (WSSWM) projects fared worse
than the other categories, at 76% disbursements; multisector projects (88%) and other urban
sector projects did relatively better (86%).

4.      Scope Changes. Multisector projects had an average of 9.2 scope changes per project,
water supply 5.5, and other types of projects 2.0. Projects had more major scope reductions
than scope additions. From the special evaluation study on project cost estimates (footnote 2), it
is clear that the number of scope changes officially sanctioned by ADB is usually between one
and two per project, so that it can be concluded that when the project ends, there is usually a
different set of outputs from that which was set as the target at the project approval stage. This
is especially the case for the multisector projects.

5.     Time Overruns. Forty-five of the 51 projects had time overruns, and the average
duration of an urban sector project was 6.9 years compared to an intended duration of
4.8 years. This was not very different from the average for all ADB supported projects: 4.8 years
versus 6.6 years (footnote 2). WSSWM projects had especially long delays between appraisal
and actual loan effectiveness. The reasons are unclear. Comparing the relative prevalence of

1
    The reasons were not investigated. More projects without a project preparatory TA may have been follow-up
    projects; projects without a project preparatory TA may have had a better standard of preparation by the Executing
    Agency.
2
    ADB. 2004. Special Evaluation Study on Project Cost Estimates. Manila.
3
    Table 37 of the Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance Portfolio Performance for the Year Ending
    31 December 2004 shows that from 1998­2004, project administration missions averaged 19.4 person-days per
    project. With an average actual project duration of 7 years (footnote 2), the total number of project administration
    mission days per project is approximately 136 days on the average.
84         Appendix 6



reasons for time overruns, delays caused by land acquisition were much more prevalent in
urban sector projects than in other types of projects, as well as delays caused by slow progress
with works, slow start-up, and government inaction. Other project delays, such as those
resulting from procurement activities, policy approvals, consultant progress, contractor progress,
ADB inaction, and calamities, were similar to those in other sectors. Thirty-five percent of the
PCRs mentioned that there were problems with project design, which reduced the success of
the project; this was mostly the case with multisector projects (47%) but also WSSWM projects
(27%). Twenty percent of the projects had problems caused by unanticipated decentralization
processes in various developing member countries.

6.      Land Acquisition and Resettlement. Land acquisition led to problems in two thirds of
the multisector projects where land was to be acquired, and half of the WSSWM projects where
it was acquired. Issues with land acquisition were often underestimated, partly because of
unforeseen project delays which set in motion a vicious cycle. Sixty-one percent of projects had
a land acquisition cost component, a percentage much higher than for other types of projects.
Resettlement was needed in 14 projects (27%), and in about half of the cases, it proved to be a
much larger issue than foreseen--again mainly in multisector projects and much less so in
WSSWM projects. Resettlement, particularly in the PRC, was implemented successfully,
involving almost 40,000 people in four projects. Outside the PRC, the experiences were more
varied, mostly because of delays and, in two cases, court action (Loan 942-BAN[SF]4 and
Loan 1154-PNG).5

7.      Loan Covenants. The average number of covenants in the urban sector projects was
28, with little difference between the averages for multisector, WSSWM, and other urban sector
projects. Compliance with loan covenants was on average 80%, with no differences between
the averages for the different types of projects. Partly complied with covenants were generally
between 5% and 8%; noncompliance was around 6%­7%. Compliance with loan covenants
was overall highest in the PRC at 88%. Commonly, the covenants not complied with pertained
to nonrevenue water reduction, financial targets, and benefit and monitoring evaluation report
preparation and submission.




4
    Loan 942-BAN(SF): Dhaka Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project, for $24.2 million, approved 12 January 1989.
5
    Loan 1154-PNG: Transport Infrastructure Development Project, for $30.0 million, approved 14 January 1992.
                                                                                            Appendix 7      85


    COUNTRY CASE STUDIES: PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, INDIA, AND PHILIPPINES

A.        People's Republic of China (PRC)

1.      The Government of the People's Republic of China (PRC) does not see a need for
borrowings from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) higher than $1.5 billion­$1.7 billion per
year, and transport and energy have traditionally been the major ADB-supported sectors.
A senior official at the Ministry of Finance stated to the study team that the PRC did not regard
itself as dependent on ADB financing for the urban sector; sufficient project finance was
currently available from state and commercial banks in the country. The ministry and municipal
borrowers were looking to ADB for significant added value in support of knowledge generation
and transfer to address the PRC's formidable urbanization challenges. ADB's added value
currently left a lot to be desired and could not always justify the transaction costs that PRC
governments incurred when dealing with ADB loans. Right or wrong--and it was corroborated
by subsequent interviews with stakeholders and a questionnaire survey that other stakeholders
held a more positive view of ADB's added value--the perception at the center may limit the
potential for expansion of ADB's lending to the urban sector. Nevertheless, the urban sector has
been one of the four sectors for which the PRC borrows, as it evolved from its early focus on
mitigating severe environmental pollution in cities and addressing pressing problems, such as
restoring city or district heating systems.

2.      Urbanization in the PRC. The PRC's degree of urbanization has doubled in the last
25 years. In 2005, it reached 42% of the population. With 536 million urbanites, the number is
larger than the combined urban population of the next four largest urban developing member
countries (DMCs): India, Indonesia, Pakistan and the Philippines. By 2015, the expectation is
that urbanization will have crossed the internationally still modest 50% line, and that 700 million
Chinese will then live in cities.1 The PRC has 663 statutory cities, 60 of which have populations
above 1 million, and over 20,000 statutory towns. The 60 largest cities, with 12% of the
population, produced 34% of non-farming gross domestic product (GDP) in 2005.

3.      Government Response. The PRC started paying more attention to the urbanization
challenge by the end of the 1990s. The PRC's Tenth Five-Year Plan (2001­2005) diverted from
earlier policies, which promoted efforts to reduce cities' attraction to rural migrants. Promoting
small town-based urbanization became one of the five key policy thrusts. Urbanization in the
PRC follows different patterns from many other countries. Rural migration to cities has been
more controlled because of mandatory urban registration and restricted access to social safety
nets in places other than where rural people have been registered. The dominant enterprise
structure of vertically integrated state-owned enterprises has historically localized supply chains
within cities. The policy of allocation of inner urban land to state-controlled enterprises at no cost
meant that, up until very recently, there had been little economic incentive for these firms to
relocate to lower-cost suburban sites. This hampered suburbanization and caused a high
degree of congestion and pollution in inner cities.

4.      Problems with Urbanization. Apart from air and water pollution, which continue to be
serious urban problems in the PRC, traffic congestion and water shortages are serious negative
externalities of PRC urbanization. The Ministry of Water Resources has reported that 420 out of
658 cities had water shortages, 110 of these severe. Fifty-three percent of monitored sections of
the seven key river systems in the PRC had water quality unsuitable for normal water treatment

1
    United Nations. 2004. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003 Revision. New York: Department of Economic and
    Social Affairs, Population Division.
86        Appendix 7



processes or irrigation. Despite the huge investments in domestic wastewater infrastructure in
urban areas directed by the state council at the start of the millennium, it is likely that surface
and groundwater quality will deteriorate further in many cities because of nonpoint pollution in
areas outside the purview of municipal monitoring and control. Land consumption has also
become a more serious issue. Concerns over rampant conversion of agricultural land have
triggered periodic inspections and clampdowns by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Lands.
However, the basic problem is that, under the current fiscal system in the PRC, leasing of land-
use rights accounts for a large proportion of local government financing. Municipal solid waste
will increasingly contribute to consumption of suburban land, and to air and water pollution. The
World Bank estimates that waste generation in PRC cities will grow from 195 million tons in
2005 to 306 million tons in 2015. These estimates do not include waste generated in the
expanding suburban areas.

5.      Land Markets in the PRC. The PRC is different from non-transition DMCs in that it
owns all city land. In large cities such as Shanghai, the model of auctioning the long-term
leasing of land to companies has faciliated the financing of much of the modern inner city
infrastructure and the road corridors. Unfortunately, in many other cities, the absence of fully-
functioning land markets typical of transition economies still constrains the availability of
serviced land, drives up the price of available land, and hence limits the location choices of
enterprises and households. In core cities, the old practice of designating land-use rights to
state-owned enterprises is changing, but in many places this does not happen fast enough to
respond to new demands for land. Maximizing agglomeration benefits to metropolitan regions in
the PRC will require both the removal of constraints to town-based urbanization and better
management of the metropolises. There is considerable scope for policy development and the
associated capacity and institution building.

6.      Capital Investment Requirements for the PRC's Urban Regions. An ADB advisory
technical assistance (TA) on public infrastructure investment policy in the PRC2 has estimated
capital investment requirements, based on data available for 1999. The TA estimated that
capital investment in urban infrastructure would climb from just under 2% of GDP in 1999 to
2.3% in 2010, and 2.7% in 2020. Approximately $50 billion of new annual capital investment
was projected in 2010 for water supply, wastewater treatment, solid waste, power, and roads in
PRC's urban areas; rising to $100 billion per year by 2020. Recurrent investment in operations
and maintenance would incur an additional $25 billion per year.

7.         ADB's Lending Operations. Compared to other DMCs, the PRC started borrowing
from ADB for the cofinancing of urban operations relatively late. The first loan in the PRC was
for a large bridge in Shanghai in 1991. Since then, urban sector lending for the PRC accounts
for about a quarter of all ADB's urban sector lending to DMCs--a figure that may seem large but
is still lower than the PRC's share of total urban population in ADB's DMCs, which is 42%. On a
per capita basis, India has borrowed about 26% more than the PRC for the urban sector.3 So
far, 12 projects (with loans totaling $1,513 million) have been completed, 6 of which in water
supply, sanitation, and waste management (WSSWM). Nine projects are ongoing (including 6 in
WSSWM) with loans totaling $994 million, and 11 are under preparation with indicative loan
amounts totaling $1,221 million, 9 of which will be WSSWM or multisector. The location of the
projects is indicated in Figure A7.1.

2
    ADB. 2002. Strengthening Public Infrastructure Investment Policy in PRC: Strategic Options for Central, Provincial
    and Local Governments. Final Report by Chreod Ltd. on TA 3253-PRC. Manila (also published by China Finance
    and Economic Publishing House, Beijing. 2004).
3
    India: $6.34 per capita, PRC: $5.02 per 2005 urban resident, over the period 1985­2005.
                                                                                           Appendix 7         87


                Figure A7.1: Urban Lending in the People's Republic of China




  Notes: 1990 (year of approval) completed projects: Loan 1082-PRC: Shanghai Nanpu Bridge Project, for
         $70.0 million, approved 28 May 1991; Loan 1188-PRC: Shanghai Yangpu Bridge Project, for
         $85.0 million, approved 17 November 1992; Loan 1313-PRC: Dalian Water Supply Project, for
         $160.0 million, approved 20 September 1994; Loan 1490-PRC: Anhui Environmental Improvement
         Project for Municipal Wastewater Treatment, for $28.0 million, approved 26 November 1996); Loan
         1636-PRC: Fuzhou Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment Project, for $102.0 million, approved
         30 September 1998; Loan 1205-PRC: Qingdao Environmental Improvement Project, for
         $103.0 million, approved 10 December 1992; Loan 1491-PRC: Anhui Environmental Improvement
         Project for Industrial Pollution Abatement, for $112.0 million, approved 26 November 1996; Loan
         1328-PRC: and Qitaihe Thermal Energy and Environmental Improvement Project, for $165.0 million,
         dated 27 October 1994; 1990 (year of approval) multi-location projects (completed): Loan 1544-PRC:
         Zheijiang-Shanxi Water Supply Project (Phase I), for $100.0 million, approved 24 September 1997;
         Loan 1270-PRC: and Tangshan and Chengde Environmental Improvement Project, for $140.0 million,
         approved 25 November 1993; 1990 (year of approval) ongoing projects: Loan 1692-PRC: Suzhou
         Creek Rehabilitation Project, for $300.0 million, approved 29 June 1999; 2000 (year of approval)
         ongoing projects: Loan 1797-PRC: Tianjin Wastewater Treatment & Water Resources Protection
         Project, for $130.0 million, approved 11 December 2000; Loan 1985-PRC: $82.36 million, approved
         19 December 2002; Loan 1985-PRC: Hebei Province Wastewater Management Project, for
         $82.36 million, approved 19 December 2002; Loan 1995-PRC: Harbin Water Supply Project, for
         $100.0 million, approved 11 March 2003; Loan 1996-PRC: Wuhan Wastewater Management Project,
         for $83.0 million, approved 25 April 2003; and Loan 2024-PRC: Xi'An Urban Transport Project, for
         $270.0 million, approved 27 November 2003.

8.     The indications are that ADB is reducing its urban orientation in favor of other sectors,
contrary to the World Bank which is increasingly concentrating on urban sector lending. The
88      Appendix 7



PRC/ADB Poverty Reduction Partnership Agreement in 2003 targeted two thirds of lending
volume to central and western provinces by 2005, while recognizing that urban projects could
continue in coastal regions if directed towards the urban poor. ADB's support is also focusing
more on medium and small metropolitan regions, as opposed to large metropolitan regions.
Most likely, ADB's first urban sector loan in the PRC will be for water and wastewater
investments in small cities in Henan Province.

9.      Success of ADB's Lending. Completed projects have invariably been rated successful
or highly successful by operating department's project completion reports (PCRs) and by the
Operations Evaluation Department's evaluations. The PRC's overall good performance with
respect to ADB loans extends to the urban sector. In the project locations, ADB has contributed
to significant results, and scores on the sustainability of the investments have been higher than
in many other DMCs. However, not everything has gone well. Considerable transaction costs
are incurred both by ADB and the PRC. Loan cancellations for the completed projects have
been extraordinarily high, amounting to 25% of the loan amounts. This is 5-8% higher than the
(high) ADB average for loan cancellations. Project implementation units (PIUs) consulted by this
study reported that they were dissuaded from seeking the reallocation of savings because the
process required approval by the headquarters in Manila, and were tied to pre-set
reimbursement ceilings that seemed difficult to change. The more "competitive" financing from
domestic sources on some projects, although not financially competitive with ADB loans,
required far less administration costs and could finance directly, rather than reimburse, such as
is the case with some of ADB's financing. It was easier to get replacement financing from local
banks. The complete dropping of components from the ADB loan agreement, while occasionally
unavoidable, suggests that initial project preparation may have been less than adequate.
Special circumstances also played a role, i.e., the slump in equipment prices and heavy
competition for civil works contracts in the 1990s.

10.     Comparison with the World Bank. Project administration by ADB was often compared
with that by the World Bank. Decision making in the World Bank was viewed as more
decentralized. When a World Bank loan encountered savings, the task team leader had the
authority to approve reallocation to other components. If a component was dropped, the task
team leader could appraise an additional component or reallocate to existing components that
might need more financing. As long as the original intention of the loan remained consistent, the
only internal approval was generally a sign-off and amendment to the Loan Agreement by legal
staff. Senior management was consulted depending on the scale of a loan amendment, but
there was more flexibility and approval authority vested by the World Bank in its task team
leaders than by ADB in its project officers.

11.   In spite of the drawbacks, the ongoing ADB urban sector project portfolio is widely
acknowledged to perform well, as was confirmed during the field visits (Box A7.1).

 Box A7.1: Excellent Progress with ADB-supported Projects in the People's Republic of
                                       China

Harbin Water Supply Project,a with an estimated cost of $400 million, is supported by a loan of
$100 million. It is 1.5 years into its implementation period, and scheduled to be completed a year ahead
of schedule, by the end of 2007. The project is already regarded as very successful. It is constructing the
Mopanshan dam, resettling about 10 villages (1,871 families) in the reservoir basin, laying a
176 kilometer (km) 2.3 meter (m) diameter pipeline from the dam to Harbin city (including a number of
river crossings), and constructing a large water treatment plant and pumping stations, and associated
reservoir storage, with a capacity to provide around 450,000 cubic meters (m3) of water per day to the
                                                                                               Appendix 7       89


city. The project subcomponent, which involves laying around 110 km of pipeline within the city to
improve the overall distribution network, has not yet started.

Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation Project,b at an estimated cost of $876 million, included an Asian
Development Bank (ADB) loan of $300 million, approved in 1999. The project had 10 components,
including wastewater interception in various areas, low flow augmentation structures, wastewater
treatment, relocation of night soil and garbage wharves, a flow control structure, sediment dredging and
disposal, re-aeration, and embankment construction. The project had top political support and a high
public profile, won international environmental awards, and created much goodwill for ADB. ADB's recent
project completion report rated it highly successful. However, the Government cancelled $135 million out
of the loan, due to cost savings and ADB's adherence to the agreed (low) reimbursement percentages on
the civil works portions. It was easier to get replacement financing from local banks. ADB's
reimbursement "inflexibility" has not encouraged the Shanghai local government to request the Central
Government for ADB involvement in follow-up projects.

Tianjin Wastewater Treatment and Water Resources Protection Projectc is 2.5 years into its
implementation period. The project is on schedule, and close to completion. The total project cost is
$340.7 million and ADB supports the project with a $130 million loan (38%). There are two components:
(i) wastewater collection and treatment, and (ii) water resources protection. The Government is satisfied
with the smooth implementation of the project.

Hebei Province Wastewater Management Project,d at $165.34 million, includes financing of
$82.36 million by an ADB loan. It has five components, covering improved wastewater collection and
treatment systems in four project cities. Hebei project management office manages both ADB and World
Bank projects. The project is ahead of schedule; most components do well. The wastewater project in
Zhangjiakou has a very high profile because of its effect on the water for Beijing, which is downstream.
The sewage company consulted was content with ADB's support to the project.

The Wuhan Wastewater Management Projecte consists of (i) three wastewater treatment plants for the
central city of Wuhan, with a joint capacity of 520,000 m3/day; (ii) 105 km of sewers; and (iii) capacity
building (including project management), expanded environmental monitoring, development of a water
quality model, and establishment of a wastewater management training center. The total cost of the
project is $193.6 million, including $83 million of an ADB loan. Counterpart funds are provided through
revenues ($86.8 million) and local bank loans ($5.7 million). This is Wuhan's first project in the urban
sector. The project management office commended ADB's involvement. The successful cooperation has
already led to the preparation of another wastewater project with a total investment of $250 million, with
$100 million ADB cofinancing.
a
  ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
  People's Republic of China for the Harbin Water Supply Project. Manila.
b
  ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and
  Technical Assistance Grant to the People's Republic of China for the Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation Project. Manila.
c
  ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
  People's Republic of China for the Tianjin Wastewater Treatment and Water Resources Protection Project. Manila.
d
  ADB. 2002. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
  People's Republic of China for the Hebei Province Wastewater Management Project. Manila.
e
  ADB. 2002. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
  People's Republic of China for the Wuhan Wastewater Management Project. Manila.
Source: Special evaluation study field visits to the People's Republic of China, August­September 2005.

12.     The group of ongoing projects is almost exclusively in the WSSWM sector, and their
straightforward nature might be one reason for their success. However, there is strong demand
from cities for multisector projects, in order to deal with complex and pressing issues in a more
comprehensive way. Demand from smaller cities has led to the preparation of the first sector
loan. The new demands find growing support for more sector loans and multisector projects
within the Ministry of Finance and the National Development and Reform Commission. The
90     Appendix 7



trend is, therefore, towards greater complexity but also greater responsiveness to city needs,
capacity building, and larger potential impact.

13.   Perceptions Regarding ADB's Added Value and its Transaction Costs. These were
gauged during the interviews. The response can be summarized as follows:

       (i)      ADB's involvement leads to better preparation of the projects. As a result,
                implementation is more smooth and successful than that of projects funded
                exclusively by domestic commercial banks.
       (ii)     The good reputation of ADB helps the executing agencies (EAs) to raise
                additional loan financing from domestic commercial banks at lower costs.
       (iii)    ADB projects often receive more support from local government in land
                acquisition, resettlement, staffing, and tariff adjustment; and counterpart funds
                are more easily secured.
       (iv)     ADB helps EAs develop capacity; projects are mainly implemented through
                internally staffed PIUs and specially created companies that later operate the
                project outputs.
       (v)      There are fewer influences from local government during implementation
                regarding issues that have been decided already before (requests to change the
                schedules or the scope of projects, etc.).
       (vi)     Contractors in the PRC are more interested in bidding for ADB project contracts
                due to ADB's good reputation with respect to transparent procedures and secure
                payment. Contractors put in lower bids as the risks are perceived as lower.
       (vii)    ADB's interest rates are competitive, and long-term loans on similar conditions
                can not be obtained from banks in the PRC.
       (viii)   ADB's environmental safeguards have generally been appreciated and are
                acknowledged to have improved the quality of the projects. ADB's resettlement
                policy has been criticized on the ground that the policy of negotiating
                compensation directly with households is unworkable in the PRC, where land is
                collectively owned. The country's own system provides for negotiation and
                payment to village and town governments.

14.   Key Recommendations.             ADB's    clients   in   the   PRC   gave    the   following
recommendations:

       (i)      More responsibility should go to ADB mission leaders in order to improve
                efficiency and effectiveness, particularly at the preparation stage, and to
                minimize approval procedures by invisible departments based in ADB
                headquarters.
       (ii)     Responsibilities for procurement and payment control should be transferred to
                the ADB resident mission in Beijing, and ideally to Chinese speaking officers
                and/or staff. Problems due to the language barrier and the needs of back and
                forth language translation and transmission should be minimized.
       (iii)    ADB's support in the form of capacity building TA, and with policy and strategy
                studies for local governments, is highly appreciated and should be strengthened
                further. This could then be followed by loans targeting the priorities and
                challenges identified.
       (iv)     The strict reimbursement mechanism should be replaced by a more flexible
                mechanism that would allow the reallocation of loan funds among projects' major
                expenditures (civil works, equipment, training, etc.) so that any loan savings are
                easily utilized.
                                                                                             Appendix 7       91


          (v)     The size and performance of imprest accounts should be increased, in order to
                  minimize the need for a resorting to local banks in order to obtain bridging funds.
          (vi)    Project preparation procedures should be simplified and shortened.
          (vii)   It should be possible to make more use of retroactive financing in ADB projects.

15.     ADB's TA Program in the PRC. ADB's support of institutional and capacity
development was substantial but has been on the decline in the period after the urban sector
strategy (USS). The same has been the case for ADB's project preparatory TA resources for the
PRC. Loan consulting services for similar objectives has been at around 1.8% of the loans for
the PRC before the USS; this was below the ADB average and declined to 0.8% after the USS.
Much of the loan component is in practice directed towards management improvement of the
PIUs. The World Bank, while not having devoted similar resources to grant-based TA, has often
succeeded in securing bilateral grant funds for loan preparation; its loan consulting services
have been between 3% and 5% of project cost, and have been directed more at local policy
reforms. A close look at ADB's advisory TA program shows that they have performed important
reform-oriented functions at the national level, and often kick-started capacity and institutions at
the local level.

B.        India

16.     India, like the PRC, has only had access to ordinary capital resources (OCR) loans and
has not borrowed for the agriculture and natural resources sector (barring one exception), the
education and health sectors, and some other sectors. Apart from the urban sector, the
mainstay has been borrowing for the energy sector, the finance and governance sectors, and
the transport and communications sector. ADB lending for the urban sector in India began in
1995 with the approval of two loans of $85 million and $20 million respectively, for the
Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Project (KUIDP).4 This was regarded as somewhat of a
breakthrough, as the urban sector was then regarded as part of the social infrastructure macro
sector, for which India had not previously wished to borrow. Fifteen loan approvals for the urban
sector followed for another nine projects, for a total of $2,071.2 million until 2005 (Table A7.1
and Figure A7.2). Two approved housing finance loans were declined before being signed (not
shown below).5 Two projects have been completed so far. ADB has a considerable pipeline of
new urban sector projects for India, which is envisaged to lead to loans totaling $1,250 million in
2005 and 2006. Between 1993 and 2004, ADB approved 31 grant-based TAs, for $17 million:
52% were for urban sector profile studies and project preparation activities, 22% for institutional
strengthening of urban local bodies and housing finance institutions, 16% for capacity building
of project implementation agencies, and 10% for poverty reduction and community development
objectives.




4
    ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Two Proposed Loans and
    Technical Assistance to the Republic of India and the Housing Development Finance Corporation Limited for the
    Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project. Manila.
5
    ADB. 2000. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on Four Proposed Loans to the
    Housing and Urban Development Corporation, National Housing Bank, Housing Development Finance
    Corporation, and ICICI for the Housing Finance II Project in India. Manila.
92      Appendix 7



  Table A7.1: Projects and Asian Development Bank Loans for the Urban Sector in India

                                                                                              $ million     Year of
 Loan No.                                  Project Title                                      loan size    Approval
 1415/16       Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project                               105.0        1995
 1549/50/51    Housing Finance Project                                                          300.0        1997
 1647          Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project                               250.0        1998
 1704          Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environmental                            175.0        1999
               Management Project
 1719/20/21    Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project                          200.0        1999
 1759/61       Housing Finance II Project                                                       120.0        2000
 1813          Calcutta Environment Improvement Project                                         250.0        2000
 2046          Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement in Madhya                       200.0        2003
               Pradesh
 2151          Multisector Project for Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project in Jammu           250.0        2004
               and Kashmir
 2226          Kerala Sustainable Urban Development Project                                     221.2        2005
Source: Asian Development Bank databases.

                             Figure A7.2: Urban Sector Lending in India




Notes: 1990 (year of approval) completed projects: Loan 1415-IND: Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development
       Project, for $85.0 million, approved 14 December 1995; and Loan 1416-IND: Karnataka Urban
       Infrastructure Development Project, for $20.0 million, approved 14 December 1995; 1990 (year of
       approval) ongoing project: Loan 1647-IND: Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project, for
       $250.0 million, approved 3 December 1998; 1990 (year of approval) completed multi-location
       projects: Loan 1759-IND: Housing Finance II Project (National Housing Bank), for $40.0 million, approved
                                                                                                Appendix 7       93


         21 September 2000; Loan 1758-IND: Housing Finance II Project (Housing and Urban Development
         Corporation [HUDCO]),for $100.0 million, approved 21 September 2000 (The approved amount was
         terminated 7 September 2001); Housing Finance II Project (Housing Development Finance Corporation
         [HDFC]), for $80.0 million, approved 21 September 2000 (the approved amount was terminated 8 October
         2001); 2000 (year of approval) ongoing projects: Loan 1704-IND: Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal
         Environmental Management Project, for $175.0 million, approved 26 October 1999; Loan 1813-IND: Calcutta
         Environmental Improvement Project, for $250.0 million, approved 19 December 2000; Loan 2151-IND:
         Multisector Project for Infrastructure Rehabilitation in Jammu and Kashmir, for $250.0 million, approved
         21 December 2004; Loan 2046-IND: Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement in Madhya
         Pradesh, for $200.0 million, approved 12 December 2003; 2000 (year of approval) completed multi-location
         projects: Loan 1719-IND: Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project (HUDCO), for $90.0 million,
         approved 17 December 1999; Loan 1721-IND: Urban and Environmental Infrastructure Facility Project
         (Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation), for $30.0 million, approved 17 December 1999; 2000
         (year of approval) ongoing multi-location projects: Loan 1720-IND: Urban and Environmental Infrastructure
         Facility Project (ICICI), for $80.0 million, approved 17 December 1999; Loan 1759-IND, and Loan 1761-IND:
         Housing Finance II Project (ICICI), for $80.0 million, approved 21 September 2000.


17.     Urbanization. Although the share of the urban sector in India's GDP has increased from
60% to nearly 70% in 2001, urban population growth has strained the level and quality of urban
services. While 46% of urban households have safe sanitary facilities, only 28% are connected
to public sewerage systems. Of the 89% who nominally have access to piped drinking water,
most receive water of poor quality, and very irregularly. India's Planning Commission has
estimated that 21% of the urban population is living in squatter settlements. The urban
population living below the income poverty line is smaller than the rural population, and has
shown a gradual reduction over the years. However, there has been an increase in the actual
number of urban poor living in squalid social, health, and housing conditions. Overall, Indian
cities house 315 million people, which represents 25% of the population.

18.     Government Response. Since the formulation of the ADB USS in 1999, India has
witnessed rapid economic growth and the national urbanization approach has gone through
important revisions. The core elements of the new national strategy in India are
(i) administrative decentralization and devolution of fiscal authority to urban bodies as a result of
the 74th constitutional amendments in 1992; (ii) increased emphasis on governance and
business process reforms in urban management; (iii) growing awareness of the need to
introduce market disciplines in urban infrastructure financing and service provisions;
(iv) emergence of urban investment policies by the Government of India, based on state and
municipal reforms in fiscal management; and (v) increased reliance on market loans for
financing urban infrastructure investments. The Indian financial market witnessed significant
structural changes with the introduction of innovative municipal and urban infrastructure
development bonds. The rules of the game changed for external assistance in urban
development, with the emergence of private financial institutions to support urban infrastructure
investments, larger foreign direct investment flows in infrastructure and housing sectors,
growing demand-based infrastructure financing structures, and increasing community
participation in municipal service management.

19.     Public sector investment in India has traditionally been oriented more to the rural than
the urban sector. This started changing at the time of the 8th Five Year Plan (FYP) in 1992.
India's 10th FYP (2002­2007) estimated the investment requirements of urban water supply and
sanitation of $2.5 billion per year.6 In comparison, the combined planned allocation for the
Ministry of Urban Development (MUD) and Ministry of Employment and Poverty Alleviation

6
    This estimate is based on the assumptions of 100% service coverage for water supply and 75% coverage for
    sanitation by 2007.
94       Appendix 7



(MEPA) for urban development projects7 is $2 billion for the plan period, i.e., $400 million per
year, which is only 16% of the investment needs. This means that nearly 84% of the needed
urban investment would have to come from other sources such as external assistance, the
private sector, and institutional financial markets.

20.      As part of the new reform-based urban investment strategy, MUD and MEPA formulated
the Urban Reform Incentive Fund, City Challenge Fund, and Pooled Financing Facility for Small
Urban Local Bodies.8 These schemes were subsequently merged with the much larger National
Urban Renewal Mission (NURM) declared in 15 August 2005. The main objectives are
(i) planned development of urban centers, (ii) integrated development of urban infrastructure,
(iii) provision of adequate urban services with a primary focus on the urban poor, (iv) effective
linkage between asset creation and asset management, and (v) reform-linked provision of
investment funds to urban local bodies. Under the NURM, the Government proposes to provide
Rs55 billion ($1.24 billion as of 3 April 2006) during 2005­2006 through a combination of
sources such as plan allocation, external assistance, and market borrowing to urban local
bodies as loans and grants. This represents a tripling of investment compared to previous
years. The investment support under NURM is conditioned on a large number of fiscal and
service management reforms at the level of urban local bodies, and institutional reforms at the
level of state governments.9 Although NURM is a quantum leap for the urban sector, it is only
one of the special programs launched by the new Government in 2005, and by no means the
largest.10

21.     Support of External Agencies. During 1993­2004, external agencies approved
$6.78 billion to support the urban sector, 90% of which was loans. ADB was the largest external
contributor during this period but World Bank funding is currently growing faster. After 1999, the
World Bank approved urban projects worth $2.12 billion in loans. Japan Bank for International
Cooperation funding was smaller, and was mainly for the urban water supply and transportation
sectors. Of the grant donors, the United States Agency for International Development, United
Nations Development Programme, United Kingdom Department for International Development,
and the Netherlands have been particularly active. Since 2003, the Government of India has
limited the number of bilateral agencies in India.

22.    External assistance has not kept pace with growing urban investment needs. The
Government's strategy to preselect states for external loan-based urban investments--within
the framework of capital expenditure plan allocations, its loan guarantee policy, and the limited
number of states and urban local bodies that are allowed to absorb reform-linked loans--limits


7
   Major urban sector projects covered in the 10th FYP are the Mega City Project, Integrated Development of Small
   and Medium Towns, Accelerated Urban Water Supply Program, Local Sanitation Program, Solid Waste
   Management Projects, Urban Transportation Projects, and Poverty Alleviation Programs.
8
   Some of these initiatives are supported by the United States Agency for International Development-assisted
   Financial Institutional Restructuring Project.
9
  Urban Local Body level reforms are: implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, accrual and fund based
   municipal accounting, e-governance, property tax reforms, reasonable cost recovery, and earmarking internal
   resources for service provision for the urban poor. State level reforms are related to repeal of the urban land ceiling
   act, rationalization of stamp duties, reforms in the rent control act, and the introduction of independent regulators
   for urban services.
10
   The total outlay for the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission for urban infrastructure development is
   expected to be Rs100,000 crores ($22 billion) in 63 of the largest cities in India. ADB's plan is to dovetail with this
   new initiative. While the funds are grants, ranging from 30% for larger cities to 70% for smaller cities, subject to
   certain commitments by the cities, ADB loans could provide the remaining funds. ADB is providing a TA to assist
   the Government in initiating the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. This may lead to subsovereign
   lending, partnerships with private sector banks, public private partnerships, and bond issues.
                                                                                          Appendix 7       95


the flow of external finance to the urban sector.11 ADB projects are in Jammu, Karnataka,
Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, North Eastern States, Rajasthan and West Bengal. The
World Bank has a similarly limited number of focal states.

23.    Urban Sector Strategic Guidelines. ADB's urban strategic guidelines for India revolved
around the India Urban Sector Strategy of August 1998, the USS of 1999, and the Country
Strategy and Program (CSP) 2003­2006.12 The India Urban Sector Strategy was based on the
outcome of the TA on the Urban Sector Profile of 1994.13 The strategy remained a staff paper
and, therefore, had no official status in ADB.

24.     The strategy reflected a 1996 expert group's estimate that the annual investment
requirement for water supply, sanitation, and roads (excluding urban mass transit) was
equivalent to $8.1 billion for the period 1996­2001 and $7.9 billion for 2001­2006. Under the 8th
FYP, the total annual outlay for urban infrastructure averaged only $1.1 billion, which is less
than half the annual operations and maintenance requirement for core services. Factoring in
investments from the private sector and other sources, the expert group estimated the funds
available for urban infrastructure as $1.4 billion per annum. This implied that there was a gap of
at least $200 million per year to clear the backlog over the period 1995­2005. If urban transport
requirements were added, then the gap would rise another $150 million a year.

25.    The strategy indicated that ADB's principal activity should be to finance multisector
urban projects. In line with ADB's USS, it stressed that such projects should be demand-driven,
improve urban environmental and living conditions (especially of the urban poor), and
strengthen the capacity of local governments. The strategy outlined various ongoing initiatives,
notably in the area of housing finance, but did not project the size of the ADB investment
required, the commitment made, and the ADB staff input required for implementing the strategy.

26.    ADB set out to revise the India strategy of 1998 in 2003 through a TA.14 Like the 1998
strategy, the TA recommended three focus areas for ADB's urban intervention: (i) infrastructure
and services, (ii) transportation, and (iii) housing. Contrary to the above recommendations of the
TA, the urban sector strategy formulated by MUD and MEPA focused on the reform-linked
urban infrastructure investment approach, as well as increasing the provision of basic urban
services, particularly for the urban poor.

27.     The CSP 2003­2006 was the first operational strategy proposed for India after the
adoption of ADB's Poverty Reduction Strategy in 1999, and it aimed to help achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. The strategic link of urban development with
poverty reduction was established through social development, which included social
infrastructure projects and state level interventions to strengthen the delivery of pro-poor social
services. The CSP shared the Government's vision of sustainable urban development but
acknowledged two constraints to ADB urban sector operations in India; (i) ADB was anticipated
to provide one urban project at most a year given the immense resource constraint; and (ii) lack
of Asian Development Fund15 resources would not allow ADB to extend support to direct
poverty reduction projects. "Financially viable, revenue-generating projects at the state level
appeared to be best suited for ADB financing considering the relatively high cost of ADB funds

11
   The World Bank has confined its urban operations to Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, (recently) Karnataka and Tamil
   Nadu.
12
   ADB. 2003. Country Strategy and Program (2003­2006): India. Manila.
13
   ADB. 1994. Technical Assistance to India for the Urban Sector Profile. Manila.
14
   ADB. 2003. India Urban Sector Review and Strategy. Manila.
15
   Concessional loan funds that ADB makes available to certain low income countries.
96      Appendix 7



(relative to cheaper World Bank concessional funds) and the opportunity to promote urban
governance reform at the level of local government. The strategy was to help develop
decentralized, professionally managed, and financially sound urban local governments that
could be engines of growth and provide essential social services in a cost-effective manner"
(footnote 12).

28.       Multisector Projects. ADB's urban sector project interventions in India, starting with
the KUIDP in 1995, have been generally in line with the multisector framework used in the urban
development planning practice in India. Except for the housing and urban finance credit lines, all
ADB's loans for the urban sector have been for multisector projects. The Government's policy to
assign focal states for external assistance caused state governments to view externally aided
projects as a one-time opportunity, demanding a wide range of investments in many sectors at
once, which has increased the complexity of the urban projects. Project preparatory TA
consultants were often pressed to incorporate components such as urban water supply,
drainage and sanitation, roads, traffic management, low-income housing, slum improvements,
residential and industrial sites and services, truck and bus terminals, microcredit mechanisms,
and community development. The approach delivered sometimes impressive results in high
profile activities such as water supply, slum improvement, and community development.
However, it also caused the delivery of large sewage treatment plants, which have remained
insufficiently utilized due to lack of connections with households (as in the PRC). It is early to
assess the extent to which the multisector project modality works better than the single sector
modality, as KUIDP is the only completed multisector project in India so far. It was rated
successful by ADB's PCR, and OED's Project Performance Audit Report has confirmed this
rating, mainly because it generated significant positive externalities in Karnataka State, and
significantly informed the national debate on urbanization. It was the first major "integrated"
urban investment project in several mid-sized cities in India in many years, not only for ADB but
also for the Government of India. As such, it generated substantial experience with the modality,
and led to further statewide and India-wide policy initiatives. It also helped establish the
Karnataka (KUIDFC) as a professional urban investment center. After the start of KUIDP, the
World Bank developed similar multisector projects, and other agencies followed with related
types of projects for the urban sector. The Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project
(RUIDP) also looks successful, due to the highly appropriate inclusion of the construction of a
2.3 m diameter pipeline over 72 km to a reservoir, which will save Jaipur's water supply.
Projects in Madhya Pradesh, Coastal Karnataka, and Kolkata appear to be very appropriate in
addressing major problem areas, but are at relatively early stages and are facing
implementation delays. Some key experiences with ongoing multisector projects are
summarized in Box A7.2.

                Box A7.2: Uneven Progress in India with Multisector Projects

Karnataka Urban Development and Coastal Environment Management Project, supported by an
Asian Development Bank (ADB) loan of $145 million, has 60 subcomponents in six sectors across
10 towns. Project performance has been satisfactory except in Mangalore, which receives around half of
the project investments. Mangalore subcomponents have experienced a 2-year delay, mainly due to poor
project ownership, lack of agreement on the size of loan, inability to channel the planned community
participation, and disagreement over project-related reform initiatives. In addition, there were internal
problems between the project management unit (PMU), project implementation unit (PIU), project
management consultant, design and supervision engineers, and quality control consultants.

Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project (RUIDP), supported by a $250 million loan, is
helping six towns in Rajasthan, including Jaipur. In the absence of a dedicated finance corporation, as in
Karnataka, the RUIDP has been designed on the traditional model of a PMU set up within line department
                                                                                          Appendix 7      97


structures. Project implementation is carried out by eight PIUs established in the six project towns. Project
performance is rated satisfactory in spite of a slippage of about 2 years. ADB is regarded as having taken
long to decide on a major scope change, in order for the project to build a necessary pipeline to a remote
water source.

Kolkata Environmental Improvement Project (KEIP), supported by a loan of $220 million, is to improve
sewerage, drainage, solid waste, canals, slums, and helps with resettlement. The Department for
International Development (DFID) supports the project with a grant equal to $42 million for capacity
building of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC). The project is already delayed by 18 months, due to
reasons such as (i) lack of project ownership by the state government and KMC, (ii) sketchy feasibility
studies, (iii) poor staffing of the PMU, (iv) lack of incentives to promote speedy implementation (the
Government pays the commitment charges), and (v) a weak setup for community consultation and public
relations. Due to slow progress and high commitment charges, the Government recently canceled
$44 million of the ADB loan. This negative experience has led to a revitalization of the project in 2005 and
has significantly improved project performance. For instance, contract awards have speeded up
significantly, and coordination of KMC's poverty reduction initiatives with those under KEIP and DFID is
very successful.

Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement Project of Madhya Pradesh, supported by a
$181 million loan, is helping six urban centers with water supply, environmental improvements, and
capacity building. The project is cofinanced by DFID with a grant equivalent to $30 million. After the
project preparatory technical assistance in 2003, the loan took nearly 20 months to become effective
(May 2005). Four public elections, the "code of conduct laws", and political discussion of the cost of ADB
loans, contributed to the delay. One of the present difficulties is the lack of funds for establishing PMUs
and PIUs. The absence of retroactive financing by ADB delayed the establishment of the project
management consultant and Design and Supervision Consultant teams. Although consultants funded by
a bridging technical assistance designed fast-track subprojects, their mainstreaming--to satisfy
community expectations--could not be achieved. Given the need for and the suitability of the subprojects
planned, the expectations are still high.

Source: Special evaluation study field visits to India, July­September 2005.

29.     Credit Lines for Urban Sector Projects. Housing finance loans were an important
component of ADB's urban sector programs during the late 1990s, the main objective of which
was to provide housing financial assistance to low-income households. The results varied
significantly, from highly successful projects to unsuccessful projects and cancelled loans.
Although the first loans provided to the National Housing Bank (NHB) and Housing and Urban
Development Corporation (HUDCO) were successful, only NHB has participated in a second
(smaller) housing finance loan. With more attractive finance gradually becoming widely available
in India, HUDCO did not use the second loan, mainly because of the high cost of the necessary
foreign exchange swap and a project design which was perceived as poor. HUDCO was also
discouraged by observations of ADB auditors that HUDCO (as NHB later) did not fully comply
with loan eligibility and end-user guidelines. ICICI Limited (ICICI), a private banking and
financial institution, also participated in the second housing loan with a net loan of $80 million
(footnote 5).

30.    NHB utilized $20 million from its $40 million loan for refinancing of loans of housing
finance institutions. Following problems with the provision of end-user details to ADB, NHB
cancelled $20 million and further refunded $13 million from the amount withdrawn earlier,
reducing the net loan to $7 million. In contrast, ICICI has withdrawn and disbursed $70 million
from the second housing loan, and is likely to withdraw the remaining part before loan
completion in 2007. ADB loan review missions assess the ICICI housing loan as successful.
98     Appendix 7



31.      Determination of the eligibility of low-income households for utilizing housing loans was
one of the main difficulties experienced in these loans. ICICI resolved this by an agreement with
ADB to use a household monthly income threshold of Rs7,000 ($165) taking into account the
income of the head of the household and spouse (and not any other earning members of the
family) and linking this with the general consumer price index. While the loan has been very
successful in the retail segment, its performance in housing loans to community-based financial
institutions and "employer assisted housing schemes", was less than satisfactory. Based on its
poor disbursement through community/group-based lending mechanisms, the loan was later
reoriented to meet growing demand from the retail segment.

32.     ADB supported an urban infrastructure financing facility with an $80 million loan to ICICI
for supporting urban environmental projects on a commercial format. The loan became effective
in 2000 and is expected to close in 2006. Due to poor disbursement, ICICI has cancelled
$38 million from the agreed loan of $80 million. The facility's performance is less than
satisfactory, mainly because of the lack of commercially viable water supply and sanitation
projects. This has prompted both ADB and ICICI to agree upon funding industrial projects,
mostly in pollution mitigation, treatment of industrial waste, and other related projects.

33.      With the exception of the ICICI component of the second housing finance loan, the
performance of ongoing housing and urban infrastructure finance loans is less than satisfactory.
Difficulties in determining low-income households, monitoring the end-use of funds, the high
cost of ADB funds, and the Reserve Bank of India's guidelines on priority lending are some of
the reasons for the lack of demand for ADB housing loans.

34.     Views on Project Problems. A discussion with a senior official of the Ministry of
Finance, as the Borrower, pointed to (i) dissatisfaction with ADB's commitment fees, which are
charged rigidly when there are project delays, even when project schedules are legitimately
different from the standard commitment fee schedules; and (ii) high transaction costs to meet
ADB safeguards.

35.     Interviews held with senior project staff pointed to the following main reasons for the
generally slow rate of fund absorption and ADB urban sector lending: (i) institutional complexity
involved in designing and implementing integrated urban projects; (ii) inadequate local
government ownership--in many cases, projects were driven by the central Government and
state governments; (iii) weak "eligibility criteria" for the inclusion of urban local bodies in the
project; (iv) lack of market discipline by local governments in formulating revenue-generating
subprojects; (v) poor local capacity to design and implement projects; (vi) lack of advance
actions to sustain investments such as institutional reforms--particularly those related to cost
recovery, acquisition of land, and procurement of technical expertise; (vii) inadequate
community participation; and (viii) weak communication and media relation strategy of projects.

36.      Performance of Nationally Funded Projects. In spite of all the drawbacks to the
success of the completed and ongoing ADB supported projects, their performance may not be
worse than that of projects exclusively supported by the Government of India. Supplementary
Appendix I contains performance assessments of two of the three main centrally sponsored
schemes by the Comptroller and Auditor General and the National Institute of Urban Affairs:
(i) the Accelerated Urban Water Supply Program, and (ii) the Mega City Scheme.

37.     One argument often brought forward was the need for clear added value beyond the
financial value of ADB loans. Project financing within India by commercial banks and semi
government financing organizations has recently become much more competitive; the difference
                                                                               Appendix 7    99


between ADB and commercial and parastatal financing organizations is sometimes summarized
as 7.0% real interest rate (including swap) for OCR loans and 7.5% to 9.0% for other project
financiers. State governments in particular are sensitive to this comparison. Views from various
stakeholders on value created and value lost as a result of ADB involvement in urban sector
projects were summarized in Supplementary Appendix J. There are some considerable
criticisms of ADB's practices.

38.     ADB's urban sector program is clearly evolving, and experimenting with a variety of
project modalities and implementation structures: KUIDP was decentralized, Karnataka Urban
Development and Coastal Environment Management Project and RUIDP were centralized, the
Kolkata Environmental Improvement Project (KEIP) is driven by a PMU based in a local
government, and the Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement Project of Madhya
Pradesh is driven by PIUs similarly based in local governments. The Northern Karnataka Urban
Infrastructure Development Project will most likely have much more involvement from the
private sector. Some of the lessons learned from the experience with these projects include
reliance of projects on (i) involvement of state-based finance corporations to identify and
manage urban sector investments; (ii) e-procurement and open tenders for contracts rather than
on prequalification, which can be manipulated by contractor coteries; (iii) bridging TA
consultants for initiation of advance actions; and (iv) preparation of management action plans
for urban local bodies.

C.         The Philippines

39.     ADB in the Sector. The Philippines is ADB's fourth largest borrower in the urban sector
and ADB's lending program has historically been concentrated on water supply. The first urban
sector project in the Philippines was approved in 1976. Consequently, it has a much older urban
sector program than India and the PRC. ADB's involvement consisted of 2 water supply projects
in the second half of the 1970s, 4 in the 1980s (and a first sewerage project), and 6 more water
supply projects in the period 1990­1995.

40.     In the last 10 years, the program has diversified significantly. ADB's first multisector
project was approved in 1995: the Regional Municipal Project.16 Since then, 4 more water
supply projects were started, 3 integrated urban development projects, 2 environmental
management projects, 1 project for shelter and poverty reduction, and 1 project for private
sector finance (Figure A7.3).




16
     Loan 1367-PHI, for P30.0 million, approved 30 August 1995.
100     Appendix 7



                      Figure A7.3: Urban Sector Lending in the Philippines




 Note: 1970 (year of approval) completed projects: Loan 190-PHI: Manila Water Supply Project, for $51.3 million,
       approved 28 August 1974; Loan 351-PHI: Second Manila Water Supply Project, for $49.0 million, approved
       7 September 1978; 1970 (year of approval) completed multi-location project: Loan 251-PHI: Provincial
       Cities Water Supply Project, for $16.8 million, approved 16 December 1975; 1980 (year of approval)
       completed multi-location project: Loan 545-PHI: Water Supply Sector Project, for $46.0 million, approved
       25 November 1981; 1980 (year of approval) completed projects: Loan 457-PHI: Manila Sewerage Project,
       for $42.8 million, approved 24 June 1980; Loan 645-PHI: Manila Water Supply Rehabilitation Project,
       $39.3 million, approved 27 October 1983; Loan 947-PHI: Second Manila Water Supply Rehabilitation
       Project, for $26.4 million, approved 24 January 1989; Loan 986-PHI: Angat Water Supply Optimization
       Project, for $130.0 million, approved 14 November 1989; 1990 (year of approval) completed projects:
       Loans 1056-PHI and 1057-PHI: Metropolitan Cebu Water Supply Project, for $16.0 million and $6.0 million,
       respectively, approved 29 November 1990; Loan 1150-PHI: Manila South Water Distribution Project, for
       $31.4 million, approved 19 December 1991; Loan 1599-PHI: Subic Bay Area Municipal Development
       Project, for $22.0 million, approved 9 December 1997; Loan 1663-PHI: Metro Manila Air Quality
       Improvement Sector Development Program (Policy Loan), for $200.0 million, approved 16 December 1998;
       Loan 1664-PHI: Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement Sector Development Program (Air Pollution Control
       Facility), for $25.0 million, approved 16 December 1998; 1990 (year of approval) completed multi-location
       projects: Loan 1269-PHI: Municipal Water Supply Project, for $43.2 million, approved 25 November 1993;
       Loan 1367-PHI: Regional Municipal Development Project, for $30.0 million, approved 30 August 1995;
       Loan 1472-PHI: Small Towns Water Supply Sector Project, for $50.0 million, approved 30 September
       1996; 1990 (year of approval) ongoing projects: Loan 1658-PHI: Clark Area Municipal Development
       Project, for $24.3 million, approved 15 December 1998; Loan 1665-PHI: Metro Manila Air Quality
       Improvement Sector Development Program (Investment Loan), for $71.0 million, approved 16 December
       1998; 2000 (year of approval) ongoing projects: Loan 1745-PHI: Pasig River Environmental Management
       and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program, for $100.0 million, approved 20 July 2000; Loan 1843-
       PHI: Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector Project, for $30.0 million, approved 27 September 2001; Loan
       2012-PHI: Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) New Water Source Development
       Project, for $3.26 million, approved 14 October 2003; 2000 (year of approval) completed project: Loan
       1746-PHI: Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program, for
       $75.0 million, approved 20 July 2000; 2000 (year of approval) ongoing multi-location project: Loan 2063-
       PHI: Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project, for $30.5 million, approved 18 December
       2003.
                                                                                         Appendix 7    101


41.     Overall, ADB approved $1,791 million in loans to the urban sector in the Philippines from
1975 to 2003: $66 million from 1975 to 1979, $285 million from 1980 to 1989, $905 million from
1990 to 1999, and $239 million from 2000 to mid-2005. In addition, ADB provided a total of
33 TA grants to the Philippines urban sector from 1973 to 2005, amounting to $15.7 million.
A total of $5.5 million was provided from 1973 to 1992; $10.2 million from 1993 to 2005. From
1993 to 2002, ADB provided the Philippines with 19 grant-based TA, 7 of which were advisory
TAs and 12 project preparatory TAs.

42.      Past Experience. Over the past 6 years, ADB issued PCRs for five completed projects:
(i) Metropolitan Cebu Water Supply Project (the Cebu project);17 (ii) Municipal Water Supply
Project (MWSP);18 (iii) Manila South Water Distribution Project (the Manila project);19 (iv) Angat
Water Supply Optimization Project (the Angat project);20 and (v) one integrated urban
development project, the Subic Bay Area Municipal Development Project (the Subic project).21
The projects were approved between 1989 and 1997 and completed between 1999 and 2003.
Project duration from appraisal to completion ranged from 6 to 13 years. All projects had
significant delays. The Angat project was delayed by 7 years while the Manila project was
delayed by 6 years. For other projects, the delays were less and more similar to the overall
average for ADB-supported projects (2 years). The projects were hampered by slow action by
the Government in terms of slow approval of contracts, granting of excavation permits, approval
of variation orders, protracted signing of loan agreements, and changes in government
regulations (e.g., the Department of Public Works and Highways no longer allowed large water
pipes on existing bridges). The Cebu and Manila projects encountered delays because of
(i) land acquisition and right-of-way problems (Cebu and Manila projects), (ii) design changes
resulting from the privatization of water distribution (Manila project), and (iii) the legal dispute
over the use of fiberglass pipe materials, which lasted 6 years (Manila project). Risk
assessment and better project management could have averted the delays or at least mitigated
the negative effects. Other causes of delays were related to security issues, delayed signing of
memorandums of agreement with subdivisions for service connections, and technical factors.

43.        Thirty-three percent of the loans was cancelled, which is a significantly higher average
than for other urban loans in the last years. The Angat project had the biggest unused amount
at $48 million. The cancellations were because of (i) significant depreciation of the local
currency, (ii) deletion of project components (especially the Subic and Angat projects);
(iii) limited project outputs due to delays (the Manila Water project); and (iv) PIUs financing part
of the project from their respective funds (MWSP and Angat projects).

44.      Nevertheless, the PCRs indicated that the projects had contributed significantly to
institutional strengthening and capacity building of participating agencies, e.g., in corporate
planning, preparation of water tariff plans, computerization of billing and collection systems, and
Non Revenue Water reduction programs. The training programs conducted under the Subic
project were considered to have improved the capabilities of the local government units (LGUs)
and Department of Interior and Local Government staff participating in the project. Under the
Angat project, ADB provided an advisory TA for the institutional strengthening of Metropolitan
Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS). This consisted of the review and computerization
of the customer accounting system, computerization of the fixed asset and inventory

17
   Loans 1056-PHI and 1057-PHI: Metropolitan Cebu Water Supply Project, for $16.0 million and $6.0 million,
   respectively, approved 29 November 1990.
18
   Loan 1269-PHI: Municipal Water Supply Project, for $43.2 million, approved 25 November 1993.
19
   Loan 1150-PHI: Manila South Water Distribution Project, for $31.4 million, approved 19 December 1991.
20
   Loan 986-PHI: Angat Water Supply Optimization Project, for $130.0 million, approved 14 November 1989.
21
   Loan 1599-PHI: Subic Bay Area Municipal Development Project, for $22.0 million, approved 9 December 1997.
102     Appendix 7



management system, and preparation and implementation of a training program in technical
and financial management. However, in this case, most of the staff who were trained left and
joined the concessionaires.

45.      The PCRs noted that project design and formulation were generally sound for all the
projects, except the Subic project, which was the only project prepared through project
preparatory TA. The PCR identified a number of problems with the project environment in the
Philippines: (i) a large amount of political influence --effective measures to mitigate the
influence of a dominant political leader were not built into the project; (ii) changing development
priorities, as LGUs frequently changed their development priorities even after urban
infrastructure plans had been prepared; (iii) inability to provide counterpart funds, as LGUs and
water utilities could not provide counterpart funds when needed, and several subprojects had to
be cancelled; and (iv) LGU borrowing capacity was less than the level expected by ADB, which
limited the number and size of subprojects that could be funded. In the Subic project, there were
also design problems: (i) alternative funding sources were not identified during project
preparation, (ii) the chosen project approach did not allow for flexibility to replace cancelled
subprojects because of the LGUs' changing priorities, (iii) subprojects were poorly prepared,
and (iv) added complexity was caused by the inclusion of a water supply component which
could have been included under another ongoing ADB-funded project. This addition
necessitated the involvement of another EA, which further complicated project execution and
implementation.

46.     The PCRs rated the MWSP successful while the Angat and Cebu projects were rated
partly successful. The Manila and Subic projects were rated unsuccessful. These are the only
projects rated unsuccessful among all ADB urban projects.

47.     World Bank Experiences. Some other international financing institutions seem to be
facing fewer problems than ADB in their urban program in the Philippines. The World Bank has
funded a number of urban projects over the last 30 years, ranging from slum upgrading and
sites and services projects (such as the Tondo Foreshore and Dagat-Dagatan Projects [Urban I
and II])22 in the 1970s, to integrated urban infrastructure (such as the Metro Manila
Infrastructure, Utilities and Engineering Project [Urban III],23 Regional Cities Development
Project [Urban IV],24 and Municipal Development Project I, II, and III)25 in the 1980s and 1990s.
In 2005, the World Bank funded the Local Government Finance and Development Project,26
LGU-Urban Water and Sanitation Project,27 and the Water Districts Development Project.28 It
also launched the City Development Investment Project in partnership with the League of Cities
and the Cities Alliance.

48.     An impact evaluation report on the Municipal Development Project (MDP)
(footnote 22 [i]) model provided some conclusions that could be of interest to the design of new
ADB-supported projects: (i) MDP operations supported reforms at the local government level
and, as a result, participant LGUs increased their fiscal autonomy and mobilized more
22
   Under the (i) Manila Urban Development Project I, for $32.0 million, approved 27 May 1976; and (ii) Urban
   Development Project II, for $32.0 million, approved 21 December 1978.
23
   Under the Urban Development Project III, for $72.0 million, approved 25 March 1980.
24
   For $67.0 million, approved 31 March 1983.
25
   Municipal Development Project, for $40.0 million, approved 5 June 1984; Municipal Development Project II, for
   $40.0 million, approved 14 December 1989; Third Municipal Development Project, for $68.0 million, approved
   31 March 1992.
26
   For $100.0 million, approved 23 March 1999.
27
   For $23.3 million, approved 15 December 1998.
28
   For $56.8 million, approved 9 September 1997.
                                                                                               Appendix 7      103


resources than nonparticipants; (ii) MDP was able to attract revenue-generating projects; (iii) a
demand­driven, competitive selection process was found to be more efficient and effective than
a top-down, preselected beneficiary approach; (iv) subproject investment packages should be
limited to what can be prepared, completed, and evaluated over a 3-year period--the term of
local officials (mayors); (v) subprojects should address the most basic needs first, and should be
on a scale compatible with the technical capacity and financial resources of the LGUs; (vi) LGU
applicants should be required to show a development plan and asked to explain how the
proposed subproject would contribute to the development plan; (vii) LGUs with completed
projects should be required to set aside agreed amounts for maintenance; and (viii) covenants
regarding institutional and fiscal reforms should be a prerequisite for subsequent, larger loans.

49.    Experiences with Ongoing ADB-Supported Projects. ADB currently administers
loans for six urban sector projects: 2 multisector LGU development projects (Clark Area
Municipal Development Project29 and Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector Project30); 2 urban
environmental projects (Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement Sector Development Project31
and Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Project32);
1 water supply project (MWSS New Water Source Development Project33); and 1 shelter and
poverty reduction project (Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project34). The
Pasig River Project, Metro Manila Air Quality Project, and Development of Poor Urban
Communities are the first of their kind in the Philippines.35

50.    The total estimated cost of the six ongoing projects amounts to $393.8 million, of which
$238.4 million is funded through ADB loans. An additional $300 million in policy loans have
been conditionally offered to the Government of the Philippines as part of two projects: the
Manila Air Quality Project and the Pasig River project. In contrast, especially with projects in the
PRC, progress with four out of the six projects has been disappointing, as illustrated in
Box A7.3.

     Box A7.3: Disappointing Progress with ADB-Supported Projects in the Philippines

Clark Area Municipal Development Project experienced a significant decrease in project scope and
loan amount, with three loan cancellations over the project period. Over 80% of the original loan amount
has been cancelled because of the withdrawal of half the target beneficiaries and the reduction in the
number of subprojects from 24 to 7.

The Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement Sector Development Program was extended for 3 years
(2003­2006) to allow the completion of the subprojects of several implementing agencies, but cumulative
commitments to date are only 32%, with disbursements of 24%.

The Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Project was
scheduled to be completed in July 2005. As of end February 2006, cumulative contract awards and

29
   Loan 1658-PHI: Clark Area Municipal Development Project, for $24.3 million, approved 15 December 1998.
30
   Loan 1843-PHI: Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector Project, for $30.0 million, approved 27 September 2001.
31
   Loan 1663-PHI: Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement Sector Development Program (Policy Loan), for
   $200.0 million, approved 16 December 1998.
32
   Loan 1745-PHI: Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation Sector Development Program, for
   $100.0 million, approved 20 July 2000.
33
   Loan 2012-PHI: Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) New Water Source Development
   Project, for $3.26 million, approved 14 October 2003.
34
   Loan 2063-PHI: Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project, for $30.5 million, approved
   18 December 2003.
35
   Though the World Bank has financed shelter projects in the 70s to the 80s, these were largely national government
   led projects with minimal LGU and community support and participation.
104      Appendix 7



disbursements were only 24% and 16% of the net loan amount, respectively. Contract awards and
disbursements are expected to improve with the construction of the Sewage Treatment Plant, increase in
number of Environmental Preservation Areas, and possible implementation of an Urban Renewal Area.

The Mindanao Basic Urban Services Sector Development Project was hampered by a slow start.
Projected cumulative commitments for 2005 are 25%; disbursements are 18%. Commitments and
disbursements may pick up as the local government unit pipeline gathers pace, and implementation of
subprojects starts. By July 2005, 6 subprojects had been completed, 7 were ongoing, 5 were going
through bidding for civil works, and 5 had subloan agreements approved. Executing agencies and the
Asian Development Bank expect that only 68% of the loan may be utilized by the loan closing date.

MWSS New Water Source Development Project has cumulative commitments of 18% and cumulative
disbursements of 1%, but this is a small technical assistance loan which is expected to disburse the loan
proceeds without much difficulty in 3 years. Projected cumulative commitments for 2005 are 55% and
disbursements are 40%.

The Development of Poor Urban Communities Sector Project became effective by April 2004. It has a
robust and promising pipeline which is currently in various stages of processing and preparation. The
estimated cost of the pipeline projects exceeds the loan proceeds. If the pipeline materializes into actual
projects, the loan proceeds could easily be disbursed before the loan closing date.

MWSS = Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System.
Source: Special evaluation study field visits in the Philippines, July­September 2005.

51.      Client Views on Added Value and Costs of ADB Involvement. Discussions with
officials and staff of the EAs and implementing agencies (IAs) of these 6 projects likewise
provided this study with a mixed picture regarding ADB involvement in their projects.

52.     Five of the six EAs saw ADB's primary contribution in the field of support for
infrastructure provision, which it was deemed in a good position to do because it could package
TA with the loans. Three EAs acknowledged that ADB projects were generally better designed
than locally prepared projects, although they were sometimes too optimistic about project inputs
and outcomes.

53.     Views on Institutional Arrangements. A main issue was ADB's failure to identify the
appropriate organizations and institutional arrangements for the projects. Five EAs argued that,
although ADB's approach was innovative, ADB was insufficiently familiar with the bureaucracy
of the Philippines, and overestimated the Government's capacity to apply the approach. Four of
the six project managers believed that the projects were conceptualized and driven by the ADB
agenda, instead of their respective agencies. Paradoxically, despite the close proximity of ADB
to most of the projects, ADB was not viewed as sufficiently receptive to ideas from government
agencies, and not flexible enough to support changes in project design and scope. The
requirement to adhere to pre-set targets from country strategies was considered a factor
explaining this.

54.     Three project agencies pointed to ADB's tendency to make institutional arrangements
complex. One EA stated that its project was prepared for implementation by another line agency
but ADB had insisted on a different arrangement, so a new interagency institution was
established. This subsequently made management too complex.

55.   Three agencies also viewed the projects as having too many components. They
suggested that ADB should simplify projects rather than complicate them with multiple
components. In the Philippines, multicomponent projects are often difficult to plan, coordinate,
                                                                                   Appendix 7    105


and move within a common implementation schedule. They also suggested that projects should
be unbundled and sequenced rather than simultaneously implemented.

56.     Officers from one project suggested that ADB should be more careful in choosing or
inviting financial intermediaries. The financial intermediary for this project was not suited for the
project since it had limited grassroots presence and no incentive for its branches to work on
small development projects. The intermediary's focus on huge commercial operations was
viewed as a constraint. LGU officials agreed that government financial institutions (GFIs) were
primarily banks, and could not be assumed to have the inclination and capability to support
protracted and costly project preparation processes and intensive capacity building exercises.
They observed that GFIs do not differentiate between commercial clients and LGUs or
communities, which puts LGUs and communities at a disadvantage with respect to stringent
collateral requirements and fee structures.

57.     Officials and staff from three EAs suggested that innovative but untested project
concepts should be implemented as a pilot rather than a full-scale project. In a number of
projects, agencies have been slowed down by the difficulty of planning and implementing a new
project, especially when it required the involvement of a number of IAs.

58.    While many EAs and IAs agreed with the project development objectives, they readily
admitted that they often had different priorities and a divergent agenda. One EA recommended
a more intensive coordination effort as part of the project preparation process, to ensure the
commitment of EAs and IAs to the projects in future.

59.     Officials and staff from three LGU-focused projects suggested that subsequent LGU
projects should be designed to conform to the implementation experience and performance of
the intended IAs. They pointed out that projects that involve local governments and/or
communities, such as a resettlement or poverty reduction project, require a much longer
preparation time to allow for extensive consultations with stakeholders, for capacity building,
and for promoting broad and committed support for the project. They pointed to their respective
projects, which have been hampered by short pipelines that affect loan disbursement
performance. However, such projects have been designed as regular projects which are
programmed for implementation over the usual 5-year period.

60.     Administrative Complexities. Apart from issues related to design and institutional
assessments, EA representatives interviewed also criticized ADB's administrative processes.
Officials and staff of four of the six projects observed that ADB-funded projects have a lengthy
approval process, which should be shortened drastically to enable local agencies to respond
promptly. They added that the ADB's stringent safeguard policies, voluminous documentation
requirements, and lengthy processes are serious factors which affect their projects. An official of
a financial intermediary noted that an LGU withdrew a project because the resettlement plan
would cost more than the project itself.

61.     Project staff, on the other hand, suggested that there could be greater ADB presence at
project sites and the local level. They observed that this can greatly boost project promotion
among potential clients, facilitate project coordination, and promptly resolve project issues. The
significant value of ADB, as an additional source of pressure on usually supra-local decision
makers, was acknowledged.

62.    Two financial intermediaries cited the high cost of doing business with ADB, particularly
the high commitment fees, in relation to project delays. They believed they were at a
106    Appendix 7



disadvantage because the projects were slow-moving by their nature, and disbursed in small
tranches. They observed that they had not been involved in project preparation.

63.     Officials of LGUs now borrowing through GFIs suggested that ADB should lend to them
directly. The terms and conditions of a loan obtained through a GFI were viewed as exorbitant,
because of the fees and charges in addition to the interest on the loan. Aside from the Internal
Revenue Allotment intercept in case of non-repayment, they had to provide the project site and
all other revenues as collateral.

64.     LGU officials were not aware why ADB was involved in the selection of consultants for
the feasibility study and the detailed design, when these were funded from local sources. They
saw this as eroding their autonomy, although in many other countries, such ADB involvement
was seen as positive. Officials from an EA and an IA observed that their consultants did not fit
the requirements of their projects, and were more supportive of ADB than the client agencies.
These officials also observed that the consultants were not familiar with the socio-politico-
cultural environment and did not appreciate its dynamic.

65.     One project official observed that LGUs are a difficult market for ADB for the following
reasons: (i) short term of office; (ii) continuity of agreements from one local administration to
another is difficult; (iii) weak capacity of staff, which necessitates lengthy and costly capacity
building and TA support; (iv) aversion of many small LGUs to borrowing because of the
perceived political backlash it can cause; and (v) limited financial resources of most LGUs.

66.     Solutions Offered. Local governments will be increasingly at the forefront of dealing
with urban development. Respondents mentioned that if ADB wants to be relevant, it should
combine its financial support with more institutional and capacity development support. New
partnerships could be built, e.g., with the League of Cities. Since it is also a political institution
with leadership changes, as a result of local elections, it may be necessary to support the
establishment of a subsidiary institution as the technical arm of the League of Cities. This could
be set up jointly by the League of Cities and the League of Municipalities with equity
contributions from its membership. This technical arm or local development institute could (i) be
made responsible for providing capacity building and TA to local governments; (ii) build a
pipeline of local projects; (iii) channel ADB's TA grants; (iv) manage a local government data
bank; and (v) be managed professionally through a long-term contract with external institutions
such as research foundations, academic institutions, training consortia, or nongovernment
organization networks.
                                                                                               Appendix 8   107


     COMPARISON OF QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY FINDINGS IN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
                        CHINA, INDIA, AND PHILIPPINES

1.      The findings of the country studies are reinforced by the questionnaire returns received
from project directors and project implementation unit (PIU) managers. There were
10 responses from 6 projects in India, 13 from 6 projects in the Philippines, and 12 from
5 projects in the People's Republic of China (PRC).1 There was a fair amount of consensus in
client views on the perceived added value and cost of Asian Development Bank (ADB)
involvement. The responses did not often deviate significantly from those of other countries.
Most clients saw benefits of ADB involvement, and this is no different in the three case study
countries. Except perhaps for the PRC, clients saw relatively more problems with the
involvement of national systems and stakeholders in the project than ADB and its systems.

2.      Advantages of ADB Involvement. The project directors and managers in all three
countries were similar in their appreciation of the steady supply of funds that ADB involvement
means, and the good and transparent procurement processes. There was somewhat less
consensus on the quality of project design and ADB's persuasion powers vis-à-vis higher level
decision makers (India was more positive than the other two). For the Philippines, the security of
project administration and salaries, as a result of ADB loan funding, was the only advantage
mentioned less often.

3.       Capacity Development. A previous Operations Evaluation Department (OED) special
evaluation study (SES) on the Role of PIUs2 noted that the use of PIUs, and particularly the
nature of their staffing, varied between countries. Depending on whether there were internal
deputations from the parent agencies, or externally obtained staff in the PIUs, the levels of
substitution of regular agency staff and hence the degree of capacity erosion varied. Urban
sector projects in the Philippines were mostly staffed by regular agency staff and funded by the
regular government budget rather than loan proceeds. Policy decisions taken in 2003 regarding
the consolidation of PIUs may be starting to become effective, and a process of capacity
development strengthened. There were, however, more complaints in the Philippines about lack
of staff in the agencies, which may be why respondents highlighted more implementation
problems than elsewhere. Respondents from the Philippines reported (i) more cases of
underpaid, and (ii) demoralized project staff than respondents from India and the PRC. PRC
respondents mainly reported (i) lack of interest and/or incentive of staff to move to the project
area; (ii) insufficient capacity, qualifications, and experience of staff; and (iii) short tenure of
senior staff in the agency. Indian respondents mainly reported (i) lack of agency staff, (ii) high
staff turnover, and (iii) short tenure of senior staff in the project.

4.     Implementation Problems Encountered. Many more implementation problems were
mentioned by respondents from the Philippines than by those from India or the PRC. Philippine
respondents highlighted delays in government decisions, insufficient government budget made
available to the projects, and interference from politicians with decisions already taken.
Respondents also registered more problems on the ADB side, which is surprising given that
communication with ADB should in principle be easier because the projects are close to ADB
headquarters. The respondents complained, in particular, about the enforcement of the ADB
agenda (e.g., resettlement, environment, participation, etc.), which may be due in part to the
innovative and experimental nature of some of the projects in the Philippines. Delays in ADB
responses and decisions, difficult forms and procedures, and excessive paperwork were noted.

1
    The findings are tabulated in Supplementary Appendix H.
2
    ADB. 2005. Special Evaluation Study on the Role of Project Implementation Units. Manila.
108     Appendix 8



Excessive paperwork was also a serious issue for Indian respondents, apart from improper
staffing by consultants recruited for the project (a paradox given that Indian responses saw
good benefits from the involvement of consultants). The overly complex nature of projects was
emphasized in the Philippines, coupled with a lack of effective monitoring systems. Lastly, urban
projects in the Philippines seemed to engender more opposition from civil society or private
sector parties than in other places.

5.      Indian respondents highlighted the lack of effective coordination, difficult government
systems and procedures, and high and rising cost of land or other issues with acquisition of land
or right-of-way. Respondents from the PRC highlighted relatively fewer ADB-related problems
than others, although delays in ADB responses and difficult procedures and systems were
noted.

6.       Irregularities and Corruption. The survey of project directors included two questions
regarding perceptions and experience with irregularities and corruption. The answers are
summarized in Table A8. The large majority of respondents (70 out of 78) reported no
experience of irregularities or corruption. Taken at face value, this is a positive finding. However,
given the nature of the questions and the position of the respondents, some caution is needed
in interpreting the data. A small number of respondents (less than 5 out of 78) reported incidents
of irregularities or corruption, or that such situations had been dealt with. There is some
evidence that ADB's policies, procedures, and oversight are better able to guard against
corruption than nationally funded projects. About 44% of the respondents (34 out of 78)
expressed this view. This view was reported more frequently by respondents from the PRC,
India, and the Philippines (19 out of 33), which were visited for the country studies undertaken
for this evaluation, than by respondents from other countries (15 out of 45). It is important to
note that the field visits took place before the questionnaire was completed. A small number of
respondents (5) felt that, because of their size, ADB projects were more prone to attempts at
corruption than smaller, nationally funded projects. Although more detailed studies would be
required to confirm the general proposition, it is encouraging that the survey responses did
provide some evidence that ADB projects were regarded generally less prone to corruption and
irregularities than domestically funded projects. This would be an important issue to consider as
part of the broader debate about the use of country systems.

        Table A8: Affirmative Replies to Questions on Irregularities and Corruption
                                    (no. of respondents)
                                                          India   Philippines   PRC     Others    Total
 Number of valid responses                                  9          13        11       45       78
 ADB project confronted with more attempts at
                                                           0           0          2        3           5
    corruption than nationally funded projects
 ADB project better able to guard against corruption
                                                           5           7          7       15       34
    than nationally funded projects
 No experience with irregularities or corruption           7          11         11       41       70
 Project staff have suspected irregularities               0           2          0        1        3
 Project staff have witnessed attempts at corrupt
                                                           0           0          0        3           3
    practices
 Written allegations of irregularities have been made      1           1          0        3           5
 Written allegations of corruption have been made          0           0          0        2           2
 Irregularities have been dealt with                       2           1          0        1           4
 Written allegations of corruption have been dealt with    1           0          0        2           3
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Sources: Questionnaire survey response by project directors and project managers, July­October 2005;
         78 responses were given in 88 questionnaire returns.
             INNOVATION AND EFFICIENCY INITIATIVE AND OTHER POLICY AND BUSINESS PROCESS INITIATIVES,
                                WITH COMMENTS ON RELEVANCE FOR URBAN SECTOR

Innovation and Efficiency Initiative                                  Opportunity/Benefit to DMC/EA                                  Threat/Risk to DMC/EA
A. Cost Sharing and Expenditure Eligibility
Introduction of a more flexible determination of cost       Reduction in complexity of cost estimating and project        Increase in country debt and debt of local
sharing limits based on sector, client, and TA or project   financial planning.                                           governments with national governments.
characteristics. (The old policy made it possible to fund   Reduction in complexity of project administration,
all foreign exchange costs irrespective of the total cost   reimbursement, cost control, and auditing.                    Loss of intrinsic linkage of ADB loan to project's
sharing limit. Financing of local currency cost was         Opportunity for EAs to obtain additional loan finance to      foreign exchange cost reduces lending discipline
limited.)                                                   cover components of projects on a 100% direct payment         and increases pressure from EAs on Borrower
                                                            or reimbursement basis, so that dependence on erratic         (usually Ministry of Finance).
                                                            government releases or cofinancing sources is reduced
                                                            and the project can speed up implementation.                  Exposure to foreign exchange risk for local
                                                            Reduction in project delays by increased use of local         currency expenditures (if loan is not in local
                                                            currency imprest accounts.                                    currency).
Expansion of the eligible expenses ADB can finance to       Greater flexibility; more secure access to (loan) funds       Possible additional inflationary pressures on land
include land acquisition or right-of-way                    may increases speed of land purchase and thereby also         cost where loan funds used since these will be
                                                            reduce risk of land cost escalation when government           seen as an opportunity by EAs, with the
                                                            funds are not quickly or easily released.                     Borrower guaranteeing the repayment of loan.
                                                            Increases in speed of land acquisition may speed up           Inclusion of land opens ADB up to complex legal
                                                            project implementation and thereby reduce overall costs       issues, such as tenure and community rights.
                                                            and increase economic rates of return.
Expansion of the eligible expenses ADB can finance to       Reduction in complexity of reimbursement of costs on          The clause regarding the reasonableness of the
include payments for taxes and duties (to a                 which taxes are already levied.                               taxes could cause confusion. EA's advantage of
"reasonable" degree)                                        Reduction in claims for exemptions and thereby                "tax-free" cheap goods and services is
                                                            simplification of financial management tasks in projects.     terminated with this new rule. Makes ADB more
                                                                                                                          expensive and less attractive to the EA.
Expansion of the eligible expenses ADB can finance to       Simplification of financial management, accounting, and       Increased eligibility of "overhead" type of
include payments for transport, insurance, late             reimbursement control.                                        expenditures may lead to lower due diligence,
payment penalties, bank charges, food expenditures,         Increased eligibility of expenditures may remove              less prudential behavior, lower thresholds, and
leasing, interest during construction on non-ADB            practical bottlenecks to project implementation when          ultimately higher cost of project.
loans, and secondhand goods                                 funds for the items mentioned have to be obtained from        Lack of experience with leasing agreements in
                                                            other, sometimes less responsive, sources.                    many DMCs.
                                                            Leasing can be akin to a rental agreement, which may
                                                            be advantageous; currently, project cars are often
                                                            purchased and offices are specially constructed, which is




                                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 9
                                                            expensive.
Expansion of the eligible expenses ADB can finance to       Removal of practical bottlenecks in conducting                Increase in financing for resettlement costs may
include payments for resettlement assistance charges        resettlement activities, which are by their nature delicate   have reputation risks for ADB in cases where the
                                                            enough, without added financial complexities.                 process is controversial and/or not well
                                                                                                                          managed.
Retroactive financing of up to 20% of project amount        Very important measure to smoothen transition from            Project may ultimately not be approved, or
for eligible expenses incurred up to 12 months before       preparation to implementation of project, thereby             approved with conditionalities that DMC/EA does
project signing                                             speeding up the project.                                      not want.




                                                                                                                                                                               109
Innovation and Efficiency Initiative                                   Opportunity/Benefit to DMC/EA                                  Threat/Risk to DMC/EA




                                                                                                                                                                                  110
Expansion of the eligible expenses ADB can finance to        This further improves flexibility of project implementation   Funding recurrent costs beyond capital
include recurrent cost                                       phase and its transition to operational phase.                investment project is restricted by ADB's Charter.
                                                                                                                           Cost recovery and sustainability of project may
                                                                                                                           suffer when not applied prudently.




                                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 9
Financing plan to do away with foreign and local             Greater ease of project cost estimating                       None.
currency split and show only level of ADB partner            Greater emphasis on financing plan is beneficial for
finance (government, other international financial           appropriate appraisal of project.
corporation, bilateral, commercial bank).
Imprest accounts to be made available in local               Greater flexibility in project management and payment of      Imprest accounts may lead to big unspent
(convertible) currency or foreign currency                   eligible costs                                                amounts sitting idle and yielding interest accruing
                                                                                                                           to banks.
B. Pilot Financing Instruments and Modalities (approved for a period of 3 years, as from August 2005)
Establishing a multitranche debt finance facility to:      Reduce commitment fee burden                                    Annual approval of new tranches may not be
(i) target discrete components of large stand-alone        Reduce cost and time of repeat processing                       smooth by either lender or borrower. Annual
projects, (ii) tranches of sector investment programs over Positive balance sheet impact for local governments             tranches preparation process may turn out to be
a longer time frame, (iii) financial credit lines, and     (reduced commitment fees)                                       onerous.
(iv) guarantees.                                           Positive balance sheet impact for nonsovereign
Suitable mainly for sector investment projects and         borrowers so that more cofinancing funds can be
programs, and for large projects with discrete             accessed.
components.                                                The Medium Term Fiscal Framework will help counter
                                                           ADB's approval culture by shifting the focus from
                                                           processing to execution or implementation.
Provision for debt finance to subsovereign and             Direct access by local governments to ADB funds                 Risk of indebtedness of local governments,
nonsovereign public sector financing on a                  Cheaper funds with greater local control over their use         public utilities, and state-owned enterprises.
nonrecourse or limited recourse basis will allow ADB to    Stimulant to accelerating reforms at local government           Need for due diligence and independent risk
better finance projects at the provincial and municipal    level, particularly for public utilities with sound financial   assessment may cause delays.
level and of state-owned enterprises, provided that it is  management systems and good governance.                         Involvement of Credit Risk Management Unit in
accompanied or preceded by reforms                         Will provide for potential demonstration of good                ADB brings extra transaction cost.
                                                           practices.                                                      ADB crowds out other investors.
Introduction of local currency financing for public        Reduced risk to local utilities and local governments from      ADB interest conditions may be more
sector institutions                                        foreign exchange fluctuations.                                  disadvantageous compared to government
                                                                                                                           banks and other local banks.
Introduction of refinancing products to help restructure     Applicable to fundamentally sound projects with high          May only provide a palliative if applied to projects
or expand projects involving public or private sector        development impact but weak financing plans.                  where there are fundamental problems of cost
assets or assets under public-private partnerships           Useful where exchange rate fluctuation or project delays      recovery--delaying the need for hard choices on
                                                             have impacted negatively on commercial performance of         tariff.
                                                             utility.
Introduction of new forms of cofinancing through active      Leverage of additional development funds from                 None.
financial syndications and risk sharing with commercial      commercial banks
financing partners in the public and private sector
designed to take advantage of ADB's credit
enhancement instruments to develop collaboration and
risk-sharing partnerships
Review of options to provide greater flexibility in the      Reduced financial burden of projects with short               No incentive to cancel excess loan provisions or
application of the commitment fee, with a view to            implementation periods, where disbursement rate is of         speed up project implementation.
Innovation and Efficiency Initiative                                 Opportunity/Benefit to DMC/EA                                Threat/Risk to DMC/EA
reducing its burden, and the disincentive to borrow which necessity initially slow, and where implementation suffers
it currently represents                                    unavoidable delays.
C. Revisions to Procurement Guidelines (under preparation)
Streamlining: including abbreviated bidding process,       Shorter contract processing times                           In some circumstances, could increase the risk
granting greater authority to borrowers to run the bidding Shorter tender periods reducing overall implementation      of flawed tendering processes ­ greater
process and permitting ex-post review of advertisements    period                                                      opportunities for corruption.
and bidding documentation                                  Less onerous and time-consuming requirement for             In some circumstances, could reduce the quality
Harmonization: closer convergence of ADB guidelines to     contract review by ADB                                      of project implementation, especially where local
those of the World Bank                                    Opportunity for capacity development in procurement         experience is more limited, or quality of
Greater transparency through extending coverage of         Greater reliance on national competitive bidding shortens   equipment and goods is lower.
procurement guidelines and increasing award                bidding process, makes it simpler for countries in which    Need for capacity enhancement in EA and
information dissemination                                  English is not a widely spoken language.                    resident missions.
Innovation and modernization, through offering             Greater reliance on national competitive bidding will, in
borrowers a greater choice in procurement practices        the end, increase project implementation capacity of
Reduce procedural review and transfer greater              private sector. (Reliance on international competitive
responsibility for such review to regional departments     bidding had the effect of reducing the internal
and resident missions                                      competition as only a few national companies would
                                                           generally be short-listed.)
D. Revisions to Policies and Procedures on the Use of Consultants (under preparation)
Introduction of fixed budget selection of consultants for  Greater flexibility for engagement of consultants should    In some circumstances, greater flexibility could
simple assignments                                         add to greater flexibility in response to demands, and      increase the risk of flawed tendering processes ­
Introduction of least-cost selection of consultants for    greater speed in this response.                             greater opportunities for corruption.
simple and routine assignments                             Extended use of lump sum contracts will reduce work for     In some circumstances, could reduce the quality
Introduction of selection based on consultant's            the financial controllers.                                  of project implementation, especially where local
qualifications for small assignments                                                                                   experience is more limited.
Introduction of Framework Contract selection under a
two-stage engagement process; and, for longer-term                                                                     Experience with delegating TA recruitment to
frameworks, on country, theme, or sector basis with                                                                    EAs is not favorable.
drawdown for specific tasks                                                                                            Possibility of additional delays in recruitment.
Introduction of performance-based contracts under the
project performance management system
Extensive use of lump-sum contracts, where clearly
defined outputs are required
E. Policy on Supplementary Financing (approved November 2005)
Revision of the existing policy has made it simpler to     Simplifies documentation needed for new report and          Risk that cost estimate will be less detailed and
prepare for the borrowing of additional loan funds from    recommendation of the President and/or supplementary        precise.




                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix 9
ADB on account of changes in the financing plan, for       loan approval, and thereby speeds up approval of
example due to currency fluctuations which make a          supplementary financing.
larger loan necessary, or changes in cofinancing           Quick response from ADB to unforeseen currency
arrangements during project implementation.                problems
                                                           Makes it easier to get approval for loan supplement
                                                           needed on account of currency fluctuations (depreciation
                                                           of dollar, etc.), thereby reduces chances of too
                                                           conservative cost estimating with large contingencies.




                                                                                                                                                                           111
Innovation and Efficiency Initiative                                 Opportunity/Benefit to DMC/EA                                Threat/Risk to DMC/EA




                                                                                                                                                                             112
Revision of the existing policy has made it simpler to     Makes it easier to plan conservatively for components           Risk is that project will become vulnerable to
prepare for borrowing additional loan funds from ADB on    related to social issues, governance, capacity, and             political pressures for scope changes and scope
account of changes needed in the investment plan of        institutional development, for which financing is more          additions, diluting the original focus of the
the project during its implementation, such as scope       difficult to predict. Urban projects generally need             project, leading also to waste of loan funds




                                                                                                                                                                             Appendix 9
changes or the desire to replicate successful              significant soft components; sector projects and
components that are easily replicable, to increase impact  multisector projects need more flexibility than usual.
of project.                                                Policy will contribute to shift to more programmatic,
                                                           demand-driven model of project financing, responsive to
                                                           needs.
                                                           Multisector projects have more components than other
                                                           types of projects, and will benefit from flexibility in project
                                                           financing. Successful components, such as slum
                                                           improvement or road rehabilitation, could be expanded in
                                                           accordance with needs.
F. The Middle Income Country/OCR Partnership Framework and ADB reform agenda (measures under discussion within ADB)
Clean Development Mechanism                              Option to trade carbon dioxide emission rights gained
                                                         from the environmental investment (already operational)
Mainstreaming Regional Cooperation                       Simplified process and documentations for regional
                                                         cooperation
Emergency Response Facility                              Reserve of OCR headroom to permit fast response
                                                         without redeploying resources from the committed loans
Cluster TA facility                                      Single TA facility to cover multiple advisory TA activities       Less well prepared TA papers.
                                                         Timely response to advisory requirements
                                                         Substantial reduction of TA processing time
Systems for Multi Year Indicative Planning Figures
Increasing the cap on the proportion of program          This guideline, although not followed strictly so far by ADB Disbursement from program lending is slow,
loans under OCR operations (current guideline is up      (program lending has been higher than 20% in last years), especially for second and third tranches.
to 20% on 3-year rolling average)                        may promote conversion to further programmatic lending.           Effectiveness of program lending variable.
Review of graduation policy                              Plans to remove guidelines on ADB's cost-sharing ratio; if        ADB funding crowding out other funding sources.
                                                         approved, may allow larger loan share in project cost
Reclassification and Retirement of Thematic and          Greater clarity in ADB on what is allowed, not allowed,           Strategies becoming a straitjacket, reducing
Sector Policies (removal of all mandatory elements       and prioritized.                                                  flexibility.
from sector policies and integration under safeguard
policies)
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, EA = executing agency, MDG = Millennium Development Goal, OCR = ordinary capital resources,
TA = technical assistance.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.
                                                                                           Appendix 10     113


                         LESSONS FROM URBAN SECTOR EXPERIENCE

A.      Asian Development Bank Lessons Regarding Project Process

1.     Project completion reports (PCRs) and project performance audit reports (PPARs)
provide sections on issues and lessons, and these are the main source for the summary in this
appendix. The most frequently repeated key lessons as to preparation and implementation
processes are categorized in Box A10.1.

                                           Box A10.1: Lessons
Ownership. It is crucial to establish clear client and beneficiary ownership of a project if it is to be
successfully implemented and sustainably operated.

Simplicity of Implementation Arrangements. It is important to make clear and simple implementation
arrangements to facilitate smooth and timely project implementation-- minimizing the number of
executing agencies (EAs) and implementing agencies (IAs).

Weak Implementing Agencies. For weak implementing agencies, success is dependent on the amount
of TA support and the effectiveness of this support in building local capacity. In cases where substantial
devolution of additional responsibilities to local governments has taken place, more capacity development
is required than usual.

Resolve Issues Early. It is important to resolve difficult issues at project appraisal rather than
somewhere into project implementation--such as land acquisition.

Costing. Dealing with existing city infrastructure means that accurate costing is difficult, and higher
contingencies are needed or higher degree of flexibility in allowing scope changes.

Risks. Risk analyses and mitigation strategies should be included at the time of project design.

Cofinancing. While the use of cofinancing--particularly for "soft" components like capacity building
technical assistance (TA)--is good in supporting project sustainability, there is a need to ensure that
complete agreement and commitment by co-financiers is reached and in place prior to project
implementation. With an increasing number of projects relying on cofinancing arrangements, counterpart
funds need to be available in a timely manner.

Pacing of TA. Care must be taken to ensure that the technical assistance is paced in such a way as not
to exceed the absorptive capacity of the agencies supported. This infers a longer time frame for advisory
TA than has often been allowed.

Policy Reform. Policy reform around issues of privatization, corporatization, and commercialization take
time as they often involve the need to induce attitudinal changes or inculcate more commercialized
orientation in government employees--this takes time and needs extensive software support.

Decentralization. Local governments used to reliance of central government subventions have to be
oriented in their new role as autonomous service providers. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) should
help to wean local government officials off continued reliance on centralized government support, and
help them take responsibility for their own service provision and associated finances.

Number of Components. In countries with low investment in the urban sector, it may have high marginal
impact to include more projects components if the demand is high; in countries with complementary
investment in the urban sector, including social safety nets within cities for the poor, it may be wise to limit
the components to those absolutely necessary.
 114     Appendix 10



 Multisector Projects. A number of project completion reports (PCRs) contend that the multisector
 approach to urban development support by ADB is most suitable for medium- sized cities, i.e., those with
 populations of between 100,000 and 500,000. The rationale is that such cities are large enough to handle
 multisector projects and small enough to enable such projects to be truly integrated and make a major
 impact, e.g., on environmental improvement. In smaller cities, where urban dynamics are not so strong,
 the integrated modality is not so appropriate, while in megacities, their size makes it difficult to establish
 synergies between subcomponents. Thus, in these cases, the focus should be placed on single sector
 projects or a group of components within a specific subsector (e.g., water supply, sanitation, and waste
 management [WSSWM]; or urban transport). The institutional landscape in such megacities also lends
 itself to this type of approach (i.e., the availability of larger, more capable operating departments).

 Sector Projects. Sector projects need to pay more attention to preparation of subproject appraisal
 reports for individual towns and cities as, in the past, the success rate has been lower.
 Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

 2.      Multisector projects have not proved to be less efficient than single component projects
 per se. The decision to fund a multisector project with many components versus one with few
 components but implemented in more cities, should take into account (i) historical facts: single
 component projects tend to be easier to implement (unless they are in fact sector projects with
 many project sites); (ii) country conditions; (iii) optimal synergies between project components:
 linking underground drainage to needed urban road rehabilitation, linking water supply to
 wastewater treatment, and linking storm water drainage to solid waste disposal systems to
 avoid clogging of open drains; and (iv) demand from clients. Many multisector projects
 addressing urban problems in a comprehensive manner have advantages as they target city
 governments and can exert influence beyond the narrow physical and/or sector level.

 B.      Project Preparatory Technical Assistance (PPTA) and Advisory Technical
         Assistance (ADTA) Grants
 3.   PPTAs. Key success factors and drawbacks often identified in PCRs for PPTAs are
 summarized in Tables A10.1 and A10.2.
               Table A10.1: Factors Contributing to the Success of PPTA Projects
 No.                                           Factor
 1.    Ownership of the PPTA by the executing agency, thus, full engagement with the consultant in
       carrying out the work.
 2.    Thorough analysis of institutional and organizational factors of relevance to smooth
       implementation.
 3.    Active supervision of activities by ADB staff to ensure that outputs are in line with requirements for
       preparation of the report and recommendation of the President.
 4.    Regular donor coordination meetings to ensure convergence between expectations of clients, ADB
       and other stakeholders.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.
                                                                                           Appendix 10     115


                   Table A10.2: Factors Limiting the Success of PPTA Projects
 No.                                            Factor
 1.     ADB's PPTAs are usually short, so the scope for full and comprehensive stakeholder participation
        and demand-driven component selection is limited.
 2.     The Government often needs time to implement the PPTA's advice on institutional arrangements.
 3.     ADB staff members are often overloaded with work and do not have sufficient time for adequate
        supervision of PPTAs.
 4.     Many consultants lack the capacity to engage in meaningful institutional and organizational
        analysis (apart from the frequent lack of time available for this).
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

 4.     ADTAs. Some important factors identified for advisory (capacity building) TAs are similar
 to those applying to PPTAs (Tables A10.3 and A10.4).

               Table A10.3: Factors Contributing to the Success of ADTA Projects
 No.                                           Factor
 1.     Strong commitment of the client, ensuring full ownership, full engagement with consultant, and
        involvement of committed counterpart staff.
 2.     Maintenance of strong coordination at all stages of TA implementation with all stakeholders,
        especially coordination with state planning units, if the ADTA is designed to lead to a pipeline.
 3.     Involvement in the TA of government staff who are stable in the job, willing to learn, and paid a
        decent salary; and therefore have no compelling reason to continuously seek alternative
        employment or job transfers.
 4.     Active supervision of activities by ADB staff to ensure that activities and outputs are appropriate
        and useful, and consultants receive adequate support.
 5.     TA timing which is well synchronized with the Government's sector focus and priorities.
 6.     Provision of external training or study tours where ADTA involves identification of projects for
        investment, to ensure government staff are able to see for themselves the advantages of certain
        innovations, prior to implementation.
 7.     Good assessment of the availability and capability of the Government's counterpart staff involved in
        the TA, and prior to inviting the consultants for contract negotiations.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

                  Table A10.4: Factors Limiting the Success of ADTA Projects
 No.                                            Factor
 1.     ADB TA projects need a long time to be scheduled, achieve internal approval, and organize
        deployment of consultants.
 2.     ADTAs are usually short, so the scope for sustained capacity building is rather limited.
 3.     The recipient's absorptive capacity can be limited and response time can be long.
 4.     ADB's TA administrators lack time, continuity, and mission resources.
 5.     There is often a lack of coordination with other donors, leading to duplication of TA, cross-purpose
        TAs, or situations in which an opportunity is missed due to unavailability of funds.
 6.     Change management is complex and takes time. This applies especially to ADTAs which look at
        options for privatization, corporatization, or commercialization of municipal utilities and services.
 7.     Many government staff are low-paid. Although they benefit from an ADTA, they tend to seek
        employment opportunities elsewhere and, when they succeed, their enhanced skills are lost to
        government.
 8.     There is often a lack of sustained dialogue with clients once an ADTA is complete, to support
        continuation of the results of the TA. This is due, in turn, to ADB's frequent staff transfers and work
        overload.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ADTA = advisory technical assistance, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.
 116      Appendix 10



 C.       Asian Development Bank Lessons Regarding Various Urban Issues and
          Subsectors

 5.     Lessons on project issues from recent PCRs and PPARs are summarized in
 Table A10.5.

                            Table A10.5: Lessons from Urban Sector Projects
 Issue                                                             Lesson
 Tariff setting         (i) Tariff setting and collection of user charges is vital to system sustainability.
                        (ii) Good tariff work at national level can have strong positive implications on sector
                        performance.
                        (iii) Covenants are often vital for project sustainability but too many covenants make
                        monitoring and enforcement more difficult--often resulting in poor compliance.
 Setting up new         Institutional strengthening should be given more emphasis when working with new
 urban bodies           EAs/IAs, and in technology transfer. A strong internally staffed project office and
                        active EA are keys to a project's success and should be emphasized in future
                        projects.
 Poverty                Poverty reduction targets should be set at country level. Sometimes, they can be
 reduction targets      usefully specified in project proposals but the proposals do not need to depend on it,
 in projects            as the relation between economic progress and poverty reduction is complex.
 Crowding out of        (i) In the larger DMCs, ADB's contribution to the sector is so small that this is not a
 state or local         problem. With smaller clients, the domestic banking sector is not well established
 banks by more          and does not wish to lend to local governments.
 ADB lending            (ii) The principles for ADB lending to urban sector should be: (a) poverty reduction
                        relationship, (b) need for a substantial foreign exchange component, (c) need for
                        long-term loan that others do not wish to supply, (d) catalytic effect, and (e) no other
                        bank wants to take the lead in financing.
 The complexity         IUDPs involve the delivery of services across several subsectors, a number of levels
 of IUDPs               of government, and involvement of the private sector and community stakeholders.
                        Thus, they require well thought-out policy frameworks and clear institutional roles
                        and responsibilities. Greater integration is required between IUDP components, they
                        need to be more responsive to client needs, and make provision for operation and
                        maintenance and better use of performance indicators. They should be focused on
                        fewer subsectors to reduce the number of EAs and IAs.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, EA = executing agency, IA = implementing
agency, IUDP = integrated urban development project.
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

 6.     Some recent lessons from PCRs and PPARs regarding various urban subsectors are in
 Table A10.6.

                     Table A10.6: Lessons regarding Various Urban Subsectors
 Issue                                                          Lesson
 Water Supply        (i) Nonrevenue water reduction and financial targets for revenue-generating projects
                     should be realistic and translated into specific activities with monitoring milestones.
                     (ii) When there is lower capacity utilization on account of reduced actual demand and
                     low utility tariffs inadequate to cover operating and capital costs, the project scope and
                     corresponding costs should be scaled down accordingly.
                     (iii) Given relatively standard designs of water supply systems, varied local conditions
                     need to be factored in. It should be made mandatory for the PPTA to include the
                     collection of hydrological data for at least 2 years, before the design is proposed.
                     (iv) Potable water required in smaller quantities is better delivered when distributed in
                     bottles through public-private sector participation.
                     (v) Communal water association schemes can be an appropriate intermediate delivery
                     program for water supply to the poorer population until they are able to secure
                                                                                        Appendix 10     117


Issue                                                       Lesson
                 individual connections, hence, should be promoted more strongly.
Sanitation       (i) For water and wastewater projects, there is a need for the project population to be
                 well informed about the necessity and benefits of chlorination and for the need for
                 wastewater drainage to be juxtaposed to water supply improvements, and to assist in
                 acceptance of tariffs.
                 (ii) Wastewater treatment and disposal have often been unsustainable in countries
                 such as Pakistan and Indonesia. Clear responsibilities for wastewater management
                 and setting and collection of user charges need to be established and institutionalized.
                 (iii) Sewage treatment projects need to make sure that sewerage pipe networks are
                 sufficiently connected to households to make optimal use of the created capacity.
Solid waste      (i) It is inappropriate for the Government to borrow funds for more than 20 years to
management       finance the purchase of equipment with a life of 5 years, particularly handcarts and
                 containers. This should be done from local funds.
                 (ii) Local governments need to make appropriate provisions in their annual budgets to
                 build up reserves for the replacement of equipment.
                 (iii) Dump sites can be run in an efficient and sanitary manner, only if the city is
                 committed and staff members are sufficiently trained to manage and operate them.
                 (iv) Solid waste dump sites designed without proper environmental controls cause
                 environmental damage to the surrounding areas over the long term.
                 (v) Properly functioning systems are appropriate for greater private sector participation,
                 where collections and the management and operation of the final disposal sites could
                 easily be contracted out for improved service delivery.
Drainage and     The integrated approach was assessed as appropriate for Bangladesh, which is prone
flood control,   to frequent flooding, particularly in low-lying areas inhabited by the poor. However, the
water            flood protection works and drainage components used about 75% of project funding,
management       leaving only a small allocation for slum improvement, solid waste management, and
                 sanitation. Given the urban upgrading challenges still facing Bangladesh, a separate
                 intervention focused on these problem areas might have been appropriate.
Integrated       Pollution is responsible for both economic costs and quality of life poverty. Integrated
environmental    environmental improvement interventions which reduce both the economic costs of
improvement      pollution and quality of life poverty should be given high priority. This requires
                 institutional coordination and strengthening, as such interventions almost always
                 involve cross-sectoral and cross-border responsibilities.
Urban            (i) Urban transport improvements are important in promoting urban efficiency and offer
transport        high economic rates of return, yet ADB has had only limited involvement in the urban
                 transport subsector. Opportunities exist for ADB to work with the private sector on
                 Build-Operate-Transfer, Build-Own-Operate, and similar Public-Private-Partnership
                 approaches to provision of urban transportation facilities.
                 (ii) Urban highway investments focusing on missing links can help create opportunities,
                 reducing poverty by saving time for bus passengers in the city. They are a suitable
                 investment category for ADB, provided specific attention is paid to the poverty
                 reduction aspect. The size of the effect depends on the number of buses and vans
                 relative to the total number of vehicles on the road. Equally important are bus ticket
                 prices and the number of poor people traveling by bus.
                 (iii) The potential adverse effects of new roads on environment and traffic accidents
                 are less dependent on road expansion per se than on specific measures taken to
                 mitigate these effects.
                 (iv) To optimize the benefits of projects, primary road construction in urban areas must
                 be assessed carefully in the context of necessary supporting distributor roads and
                 comprehensive land use management.
 118       Appendix 10



 Issue                                                           Lesson
 Public              (i) Indirect housing support for the poor, by developing affordable and sustainable
 housing,            housing credit, improving land transfer mechanisms, making land use controls more
 Land                effective, and legalizing informal settlements, can play an important role in improving
 development,        access to land and shelter for the urban poor.
 urban renewal,      (ii) Low-income housing projects should allow cross-subsidization of mortgages
 housing             between lower and higher income groups for the purpose of resource generation.
 finance,            Similarly, borrowers should share a higher share of the project cost to encourage cost
 land                recovery from those willing and able to pay.
 administration/     (iii) Land acquisition systems which strain implementation can be made more flexible
 tenure/             through the approval of up-front purchase of all land and provision of funds in a lump
 regulation          sum, from central government sources, among others.
                     (iv) Housing finance projects generally disbursed before schedule, conditional upon a
                     strong housing institution, well established demand, and a well thought-out product.
                     (v) Housing finance projects need intermediaries that are able to onlend to
                     beneficiaries without imposing an excessive spread on the interest rates.
                     (vi) Direct assistance in spatial planning and land management has not been entirely
                     successful. A more effective approach would be for ADB to support the public sector in
                     its enabling role in the creation of effective urban land markets, which can facilitate the
                     private sector in providing affordable land and shelter for the urban poor.
                     (vii) Land pooling has delivered significant social and economic benefits. Proper risk
                     analysis during design and adequate community participation during implementation
                     are vital for its success.
 Slum                Comprehensive upgrading of major low-income areas in terms of slum improvement,
 improvement         sanitation, and solid waste management components can lead to significant quality of
                     life poverty reduction.
 Market              These are generally constructed by local governments as revenue-generating projects.
 development         Construction and operation of such facilities is not a core function of local government
 bus terminal,       and could be better handled by the private sector.
 slaughter-
 houses
 Urban finance,      Urban infrastructure cannot be maintained unless the local government efficiently
 municipal           collects property tax. It is important to build community awareness on the importance
 taxation            of local taxation through education campaigns.
 Institutional/      Projects implemented by local governments generally need substantial soft
 capacity            components to deal with capacity development, institutional development, public
 development,        awareness raising, and information dissemination.
 and other soft
 components
Source: Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations.

 D.        Lessons from World Bank Sector Evaluations

 7.     Three recent evaluations1 of its urban sector program by the World Bank, two published
 in 2003 and one in 2005, yield some findings and lessons of interest to ADB's urban sector
 operations.

 8.      Overall Finding. The overall performance of the World Bank's urban development
 portfolio has, for most of its life, generated performance which is above the World Bank's
 average for all sectors. Furthermore, working with the urban indicators database of the United

 1
     (i) World Bank. 2003. Improving the Lives of the Poor Through Investment in Cities. Washington DC; (ii) World
     Bank. 2003. Efficient, Sustainable Service for All? An OED Review of the World Bank's Assistance to Water Supply
     and Sanitation. Washington DC; (iii) World Bank. 2005. Thirty Years of World Bank Shelter Lending: What Have
     We Learned. Draft report. Washington DC.
                                                                                   Appendix 10   119


Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT), the World Bank determined that there
were significantly greater improvements in "livability" (service provision, improved social
indicators) in cities that had benefited from bank-financed projects, compared with those that
had not.

9.       Urban Development. The 2003 urban development evaluation concluded that key
lessons on maintaining a strong portfolio and good performance are to (i) build on previous
operations, (ii) involve beneficiaries in all stages of projects, and (iii) avoid straining borrower's
resources and implementation capacity. Like the Operations Evaluation Department's 1997
evaluation, the problem found to constrain project performance most was overestimation of the
institutional capacity of executing and implementing agencies. Correspondingly, improved
project performance and outcomes were associated with projects with strong borrower
ownership, and which were based on strong beneficiary (and borrower) involvement in project
identification, formulation, and design. One further interesting finding of the evaluation was that
projects completed in more urbanized countries (58% urban) were 81% satisfactory compared
to a satisfactory rating of only 59% in the group of countries with low urbanization rates (below
34%). Not surprisingly, as gross domestic product (GDP) is strongly correlated with
urbanization, the same relationship holds with GDP. The finding shows the importance of
greater urban development experience in determining the success of urban projects and
reinforces the argument for building on success with existing clients, already noted by ADB's
Urban Sector Strategy of 1999. However, no correlation was found between the performance of
projects preceded by economic and sector work and those without, those with cofinancing and
those without, and those with a poverty focus and those without.

10.     The evaluation recommended more systematic reporting of results from city to sector
and strategic levels, by moving towards a system that incorporates performance indicators. It
also recommends the (i) revision of the business strategy to provide specific targets against the
four strategic pillars of livability, good governance, bankability, and competitiveness; and
(ii) development of a better understanding of the competitiveness pillar (which is seen to be
performing poorly) through the preparation of operational guidelines.

11.       Water Supply, Sanitation and Waste Management. A review published in 2003
(footnote 1 [ii]) focusing on the World Bank's performance in its Water Supply and Sanitation
(WSS) sector found that portfolio performance, although improving, had remained below
average and that the World Bank has had limited success in promoting deep and lasting
regulatory and pricing reform in the sector. The study concluded that private sector participation,
where it was promoted under World Bank-supported projects, by and large showed promising
results in terms of coverage and quality of service but that it could not be the panacea to the
sector's structural problems. The study's findings pointed to the need for (i) clarifying and
consistently implementing the World Bank's pricing policy in the WSS sector, (ii) country-
focused sector strategies geared to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and
(iii) a pragmatic approach to private sector participation.

12.    Housing. Somewhat different from ADB's more recent experiences with housing
finance, the shelter study of 2005 (footnote 1 [iii]) concluded that World Bank lending for shelter
had been a very strong performer. It had one of the highest percentages of satisfactory
outcomes of any sector in the World Bank, with more than 90% of the projects undertaken in the
past decade, and 84% of total lending for the entire 34 years of lending deemed to have
achieved satisfactory outcomes. The strategy exploited opportunities by building on recent
successes and improvements in the policy environment, while simultaneously addressing the
remaining weaknesses and constraints on the sector. The review concluded that (i) the reach of
120    Appendix 10



housing finance should be cautiously expanded, (ii) there should be support toward improving
the financing and targeting of housing subsidies (ii) the World Bank should become more
responsive to its borrowers and other donors, (iii) there should be a focus on reinvigorating and
retargeting World Bank support towards for low-income housing, and (iv) the World Bank should
improve its understanding of urban land markets and slum conditions.
                                                                                               Appendix 11      121


                 LESSONS DRAWN FROM 51 PROJECT COMPLETION REPORTS
                   ISSUED BETWEEN 1998 AND 2005 IN THE URBAN SECTOR

A.        Issue: Ineffective Project Design in Multisector and/or Multicity Projects

1.     Lesson in 18 Project Completion Reports (PCRs).1 Decentralization of responsibility
and ownership, and/or participation by beneficiaries, community, and private sector participation
in project development fosters project ownership, thus ensuring adequate operation and
maintenance, which depends on both budgetary and non-budgetary factors.

2.      Lesson in 10 PCRs.2 Implementation delays and scope changes result from appraisal
cost estimates being based on poor preliminary designs, unreliable cost base data, lack of
details on design and design standards, and utilization of new technology in the country amidst
lack of experience and appropriate data. Project technical details should be thoroughly
assessed at the design stage because of their implications for actual project costs, their impact
on other components, and the possibility of mismatch with real local conditions.

3.    Lesson in 8 PCRs.3 Too diverse a geographic and subsector coverage, coupled with
inadequate project preparation, can lead to poor project performance. Project design and loan
1
    ADB. 2000. Project Completion Report on the Central Java and D.I. Yogyakarta Urban Development (Sector)
    Project in Indonesia. Manila (Loan 1198-INO); ADB. 1999. Project Completion Report on the Metropolitan Cebu
    Water Supply Project in the Philippines. Manila (Loans 1056-PHI[SF] and 1057-PHI[SF]); ADB. 1998. Project
    Completion Report on the Botabek Urban Development Project in the Philippines. Manila (Loan 1077-INO); ADB.
    1998. Project Completion Report on the Bandar Lampung Urban Development in Indonesia. Manila (Loan 1078-
    INO); ADB. 2001. Project Completion Report on the Bogor and Palembang Urban Development Project for
    Indonesia. Manila (Loan 1111-INO); ADB. 2000. Project Completion Report on the Secondary Towns Infrastructure
    Development Project in Bangladesh. Manila (Loan 1059-BAN[SF]); ADB. 2001. Project Completion Report on the
    Kathmandu Urban Development Project in Nepal. Manila (Loan 1240-NEP[SF]); ADB. 2001. Project Completion
    Report on the Urban Development Sector in Sri Lanka. Manila (Loan 1204-SRI[SF]); ADB. 2000. Project
    Completion Report on the Second Water Supply and Sanitation Project in Sri Lanka. Manila (Loan 1235-SRI[SF]);
    ADB. 2004. Project Completion Report on the Ebeye Health and Infrastructure Project in the Republic of Marshall
    Islands. Manila (Loan 1694-RMI[SF]); ADB. 2004. Project Completion Report on the Majuro Water Supply and
    Sanitation Project in the Republic of Marshall Islands. Manila (Loan 1389-RMI[SF]); ADB. 2004. Project Completion
    Report on the Fuzhou Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment Project in the People's Republic of China. Manila
    (Loan 1636-PRC); ADB. 1999. Project Completion Report on the Karachi Sewerage Project in Pakistan. Manila
    (Loans 1001-PAK[SF] and 1002-PAK[SF]); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Anhui Environmental
    Improvement Project for Municipal Wastewater Treatment. Manila (Loan 1490-PRC); ADB. 1998. Project
    Completion Report on the Dhaka Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project in Bangladesh. Manila (Loan 942-
    BAN[SF]); ADB. 1998. Project Completion Report on the Secondary Cities Urban Development (Sector) Project in
    Indonesia. Manila (Loans 983-INO[SF] and 984-INO[SF]); ADB. 2001. Project Completion Report on the
    Secondary Towns Integrated Flood Protection Project in Bangladesh. Manila (Loan 1202-BAN[SF]); and ADB.
    2000. Project Completion Report on the Dalian Water Supply Project in the People's Republic of China. Manila
    (Loan 1313-PRC).
2
    ADB. 2002. Project Completion Report on the Chonburi Water Supply Project in Thailand. Manila (Loan 1326-
    THA); ADB. 2002. Project Completion Report on the Vientiane Integrated Urban Development Project in the Lao
    People's Democratic Republic. Manila (Loan 1362-LAO[SF]); Loans 1001-PAK[SF] and 1002-PAK[SF] (footnote 1);
    Loan 1235-SRI[SF] (footnote 1); ADB. 2001. Project Completion Report on the Qingdao Environmental
    Improvement Project in the People's Republic of China. Manila (Loan 1205-PRC); Loan 1694-RMI(SF) (footnote 1);
    Loan 1389-RMI[SF] (footnote 1), ADB. 2004. Project Completion Report on the Second Water Supply and
    Sanitation Project in Bangladesh. Manila (Loan 1264-BAN[SF]), ADB. 1998. Project Completion Report on the
    Southern Provincial Towns Water Supply in the Lao People's Democratic Republic. Manila (Loan 1122-LAO[SF];
    and ADB. 2000. Project Completion Report on the Northern Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project
    in the People's Republic of China. Manila (Loan 1267-LAO[SF].
3
    Loan 1240-NEP(SF) (footnote 1); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Urban Infrastructure Project in
    Vanuatu. Manila (Loan 1448-VAN[SF]); ADB. 2004. Project Completion Report on the Subic Bay Area Municipal
    Development in the Philippines. Manila (Loan 1599-PHI); ADB. 2005. Project Completion Report on the Sumatra
    Urban Development Sector in Indonesia. Manila (Loan 1383-INO); ADB. 2005. Project Completion Report on the
122       Appendix 11



size must consider the size, capacity, and experience of the executing and implementing
agencies, as well as the population of the project area, so as not to overreach technical,
administrative, and management capabilities.

4.       Lesson in 7 PCRs.4 Unexpected complications in coordination often occur for large
projects with a large number of subprojects (multicomponent and multi-executing agency
projects). Simple implementing arrangements would facilitate successful project implementation.
This requires clear delineation of the roles and responsibilities of each participating agency to
avoid overlaps and project management conflicts (especially over maintenance of project
facilities). To mitigate political influence, some decisions should be delegated to the lower levels
of the organization, e.g., field and/or resident engineers, or through local rather than central-
level coordination.

5.       Lesson in 4 PCRs.5 At the outset, accurate and thorough demand analysis (price
elasticity of demand) and user surveys for willingness and ability to pay should be carried by the
proponent and/or implementing agencies. Delays and implementation problems are caused by
overly optimistic and/or ambitious demand estimates for multisector projects.

B.        Issue: Frequent Non-Attainment of Targets

6.       Lesson in 9 PCRs.6 Financial targets for revenue-generating projects, covenants, and
Non Revenue Water reduction in water projects should be realistic and translated into specific
activities with monitoring milestones. As financial covenants can preclude effective monitoring,
since they concern operating decisions and actions that occur after project completion,
enforcement of good financial management practices during implementation should be looked
at more closely.

7.      Lesson in 3 PCRs.7 Privatization and corporatization of public utilities which are vital to
improved financial sustainability are complicated processes and may not be influenced by one
loan project. Privatization is critical for the successful and viable operation of utilities in small
island communities.




    West Java Urban Development Sector Project in Indonesia. Manila (Loan 1384-INO); Loan 1389-RMI(SF)
    (footnote 1); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Melamchi Water Supply (Engineering) Project in Nepal.
    Manila (Loan 1640-NEP[SF]); and ADB. 2004. Project Completion Report on the Angat Water Supply Optimization
    in the Philippines. Manila (Loan 986-PHI).
4
    Loan 1599-PHI (footnote 3); Loan 1198-INO (footnote 1); Loans 1056-PHI(SF) and 1057-PHI(SF) (footnote 1);
    Loans 983­INO(SF) and 984-INO(SF) (footnote 1); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Municipal Water
    Supply Project in the Philippines. Manila (Loan 1269-PHI); ADB. 2002. Project Completion Report on the
    Rehabilitation and Upgrading of Water Supply Systems Sector Project in Malaysia. Manila (Loan 1197-MAL); and
    Loan 1202-BAN(SF) (footnote 1).
5
    Loan 1198-INO (footnote 1); Loan 1077-INO (footnote 1); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Second
    Urban Development Project in Pakistan. Manila (Loan 1004-PAK[SF]); and Loan 1267-LAO(SF) (footnote 2).
6
    Loans 1056-PHI(SF) and 1057-PHI(SF) (footnote 1); Loan 1197-MAL (footnote 4); ADB. 2004. Project Completion
    Report on the Manila South Water Distribution Project in the Philippines. Manila (Loan 1150-PHI); Loan 986-PHI
    (footnote 3); ADB. 2004. Project Completion Report on the Ho Chi Minh City Water Supply and Sanitation Project
    in Viet Nam. Manila (Loan 1273-VIE[SF]); and Loan 1384-INO (footnote 3). Financial: Loan 1202-BAN(SF)
    (footnote 1); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the Provincial Towns Basic Urban Services Project in
    Mongolia. Manila (Loan 1560-MON[SF]; and Loan 1448-VAN(SF) (footnote 3).
7
    Loan 1197-MAL (footnote 4); ADB. 1999. Project Completion Report on the Low-Income Housing Development
    Project in Sri Lanka. Manila (Loan 1096-SRI[SF]); and Loan 1694-RMI(SF) (footnote 1).
                                                                                            Appendix 11     123


C.        Issue: Inadequate Technical and Managerial Support

8.     Lesson in 5 PCRs.8 Lack of formal input of consulting services at some points in project
implementation can slow progress or cause problems in implementation. In-house capabilities of
executing agencies and implementing agencies (and procurement procedures) should be
thoroughly reviewed and the necessary assistance provided to fill skills gaps and build capacity
to prevent problems on procurement, financial performance, land acquisition, tender and bid
evaluation, etc.

D.        Issue: Lack of Public Awareness of the Project

9.     Lesson in 7 PCRs.9 There is a need to strengthen mechanisms to elicit support for
urban infrastructure provision and maintenance, by articulating the benefits. The community
needs to be made aware, through a more vigorous public campaign, of the need for operation
and maintenance to ensure an adequate and reliable urban infrastructure and services (water
supply, flood protection, drainage, and solid waste management project components).




8
    ADB. 1999. Project Completion Report on the Rehabilitation and Upgrading of Vientiane Water Supply Project in
    the Lao People's Democratic Republic. Manila (Loan 1190-LAO[SF]); ADB. 2002. Project Completion Report on
    the Dhaka Integrated Flood Protection Project in Bangladesh. Manila (Loan 1124-BAN[SF]); Loan 1122-LAO(SF)
    (footnote 2); Loan 942-BAN(SF) (footnote 1); and Loan 1240-NEP(SF) (footnote 1).
9
    Loan 1202-BAN(SF) (footnote1); Loan 1235-SRI(SF) (footnote 1); ADB. 2003. Project Completion Report on the
    Third Urban Water Supply in Papua New Guinea. Manila (Loan 1211-PNG); Loan 1640-NEP(SF) (footnote 3);
    Loan 1269-PHI (footnote 4); Loan 1313-PRC (footnote 1); and Loans 1056-PHI(SF) and 1057-PHI(SF)
    (footnote 1).
            MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY
                 ON URBAN SECTOR STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS



        On 18 July 2006, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received the
following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       A.        Overall Comments

       1.      Management supports the Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
       special evaluation study (SES) that raises some important issues for urban
       sector operations in a timely manner and recommends measures for achieving
       better results in the sector. The SES finds that ADB's urban sector strategy
       (USS) has been partly successful, because, although being highly relevant, it
       was not sufficiently oriented toward operationalization and the organizational
       structure and resources did not support efficient implementation. Urban sector
       operations were rated as successful, being effective but with their sustainability in
       question because of the same organizational and resource constraints. As urban
       infrastructure is a Priority I sector in the Medium-Term Strategy II, this
       performance needs to improve to scale up ADB's assistance to urban
       development in DMCs. The SES also makes a number of specific
       recommendations as to how to increase the effectiveness of the urban sector
       and proposes several suggestions for urban strategy. In dialogue with OED
       regarding recommendations and suggestions, ADB has initiated an Urban
       Services Initiative (USI) to address them. An interdepartmental task force was
       formed in April 2006 to formulate the USI.

       B.        Comments on Recommendations (para. 176)

                 a.       Preparation of a Second Urban Sector Strategy

       2.      Management supports the SES recommendation that ADB should explore
       new approaches to assisting DMCs in addressing urban economic development
       and urban poverty. Such an initiative is needed to respond to ADB's new
       Innovation and Efficiency Initiative (IEI) measures that have changed significantly
       the options and modalities open to projects and programs in the sector. The USI
       task force will prepare a Board Information Paper for the sector in the context of
       the OED findings, the middle-income country (MIC) consultations and the IEI. It
       will also take into account lessons identified in the draft report on the Review of
       the Implementation of the USS.1 The paper will set out the proposed directions
       for development, targets, and indicators for the sector, and a business plan to
       support such development. Management will then decide whether a subsequent,
       formal, Second Urban Strategy, will be required.




       1
           RSDD has finalized the draft board information paper on the Review of the Implementation of the Urban
           Sector Strategy, and it would be submitted to Management in the 3rd quarter 2006.
       b.      The Strategy Should          Include    a   Business     Plan   for
               Implementation

3.      Management agrees with the study's observation that the difficulties
experienced in urban development reflect insufficient organizational commitment
to the sector in the past and the practical issues of implementation, particularly
staffing and knowledge resources, and product relevance. We agree that any
new strategy should explicitly deal with these issues. In this regard, an initial
scoping of required organizational and resource requirements will be addressed
by the USI Board Paper, in consultation with Management. The business plan
contained in the paper will put into place a process of prioritizing changes and
investments required to support the USI. Given that the sector is highly diverse
across countries and investments are `lumpy', it may be difficult to project
demand in a detailed business plan. Such a plan should be prepared on a
country basis.

       c.      The Strategy Should Be Results-based

4.     The USI paper will put forward indicators and a framework for
implementation. However, such tools need to be supported by a results or
monitoring matrix which can help formulate and guide remedial action, and
actions to take advantage of opportunities and build on successes. Additional
resources will be required for this purpose, and will be taken into consideration
by Management, along with other MTS-II priorities.

       d.      The Strategy Should Be Grounded in a Division of RSDD

5.      Management agrees with the recommendation. But, we would like to
emphasize the central role of ADB's regional departments (RDs) in implementing
the strategy and the Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD)
can only support and assist in knowledge dissemination and mobilizing
resources. Crucial to this effort will be energizing the Urban Community of
Practice (CoP) for which RSDD will act as the facilitator. Significant progress has
been made in this regard, with initiatives coming from RDs, but much more
needs to be done. The Water Sector CoP provides a model for such an effort.
Potential organizational impacts for recruitment, redeployment, and learning and
development are noted, and will be actioned as necessary to support the agreed
direction.

       e.      ADB should Guide Staff on Anticorruption Initiatives in the
               Urban Sector

6.     Management agrees with the recommendation. RSDD will assist RDs,
with advice from the Office of the Auditor General, to develop country level
measures, where needed.

C.     Comments on Suggestions for a New Urban Strategy (paras. 170 to
       175)

7.     The SES suggests a number of changes in ADB's strategy and
operations in the urban sector. These suggestions are valid, but Management
wishes to emphasize some key issues not covered above.

8.       In respect of the Nature of the Strategy (para. 170), the SES emphasizes
the need for (i) more effective strategic engagement with clients; (ii) more focus
on capacity development; and (iii) building stronger partnerships with a wider
range of partners. These three thrusts will be central to the USI. The IEI
modalities, particularly the multi-tranche financing facility (MFF), require more
strategic engagement with clients to prepare roadmaps. Drawing on the
conclusions of the MIC consultation, ADB's technical assistance and lending
modalities need to be more flexible and responsive to the needs of clients, and
this will require support of bilateral partners. ADB intends to focus on engaging
such partners in the USI. Office of Cofinancing (OCO) is assessing new ways of
increasing the flexibility in, and reducing the transactions cost of, cofinancing
support, including assisting in the pooling of grant funds as it has done for the
education and health sectors through sector-wide approaches (SWAPs), and
exploring blending concessional financing with the Asian Development Fund
(ADF) and the Ordinary Capital Resources (OCR) loans and guarantees to help
improve financing terms (reduce cost and extend tenors).

9.      In respect of the Substance of the New Strategy (para. 171), suggestions
for increased focus on transport, urban finance, and housing are appropriate, as
are the suggestions in respect of operationalizing sub-sovereign lending.
Finance, including sub-sovereign options and linking to/strengthening local
financial systems, will be the core of the USI--providing flexibility to respond to
the priorities of city regions and their national oversight agencies. As to focus
sectors, they need to be determined according to the needs of city regions in a
particular country together with a clear assessment of ADB's `value added' in
particular circumstances. This being said, such sectors as urban transport, urban
renewal, water and waste water are areas where ADB can add significant value.
It is not possible to argue with the suggestions for more attention to risk
mitigation, harmonization, fostering ownership, and disaster preparedness.
However, incorporating such considerations into urban strategies needs to be
achieved in the national administrative, budgetary, and political contexts and
standard provisions should not apply to all cases. Such issues are best handled,
in detail, in a national urban roadmap. The suggestion of a need for
Complimentary Country-Specific Urban Sector Strategies (para. 175) is thus
welcome.

D.     Conclusions and Follow-up Actions

10.      Management strongly supports the substance of the SES
recommendations for achieving better results in the urban sector, a sector of
central importance to ADB's DMCs. Management, through the USI, is exploring
alternative approaches to assisting DMCs in addressing urban economic
development and urban poverty. Management will also address key
organizational constraints to development of business in the sector, and, as a
priority, will formally establish the Urban CoP. The need for additional resources
will be considered, along with resource requirements for other MTS-II priorities.
                            BOARD OF DIRECTORS
                    DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE


        CHAIR'S SUMMARY OF THE COMMITTEE DISCUSSION ON 26 JULY 2006


Special Evaluation Study on Urban Sector Strategy and Operations

1.      The Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) generally agreed that an effective
urban sector strategy was necessary for effectiveness of ADB's new Medium-Term Strategy II,
which explicitly recognizes that demographic pressure and growth are driving rapid urbanization
in the region. The Committee generally agreed with the main recommendations of the special
evaluation study that ADB's urban sector strategy should: (i) be updated; (ii) include a road map
or business plan for implementation, taking into account the resource and organizational
constraints; (iii) include a results based framework with performance indicators; and (iv) be
grounded at a focal unit in the Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD) to
coordinate implementation across regional departments. While the recommendation to provide
guidance to staff on how to engage in anticorruption initiatives was also supported, DEC
members emphasized the cross-sectoral dimension of such anticorruption initiatives.

2.     At the same time, several DEC members thought that the study's concluding
recommendations were general ones dwelling on process and that the updated strategy should
pay closer attention to the more specific diagnoses in the study as well as to the documented
views and suggestions to ADB from stakeholders in the borrowing member countries surveyed.

3.      The DEC cautioned that an updated strategy would not be more effective than the
previous one in intensifying ADB's response to greatly increased demand for urban sector
assistance in the region unless the resources needed to implement the strategy are
systematically assessed and realistically budgeted, and an institutional focus on the urban
sector is regained. At the same time, sound decisions on the strategy for the urban sector and
the resources to be committed to its implementation cannot be made in isolation of overall
consideration by Management of inter-sectoral strategy and resource allocation, with such
overall planning being guided by Medium-term Strategy II. The ADB-wide urban sector strategy
should inform and help guide analysis and decision making in individual country strategies and
programs (CSPs), through complementary country-specific urban sector roadmaps. The overall
ADB strategy should not incorporate institution-level lending targets for the urban sector that
might drive and distort country-level choices. One member of the Committee thought that OED,
on its part, had to be particularly careful not to endorse or promote sector-specific targets and
activity levels in sectoral evaluations, since complex institution-level policy considerations
needed to be taken into account

4.      DEC acknowledged Management's initial plan to address the study's recommendations
and the substantive issues behind these through an interdepartmental Urban Services Initiative
that would result in a paper to the Board setting out "the proposed directions for development,
targets, and indicators for the sector, and a business plan to support such development." At the
meeting, the Committee was informed that staff work on the paper was planned to be completed
around the end of the year.

5.     DEC members emphasized that an updated urban sector strategy should be focused on
poverty reduction in cities. The challenge of managing the migration from rural to urban areas
must form part of the framework. On the organizational issue, DEC members were not certain if
the proposed formal establishment of an Urban Community of Practice would suffice as the
mechanism to lead and coordinate implementation of the strategy; this needs to be monitored.
On the issue of knowledge management, an updated urban sector strategy needs to specifically
address how the role of consultants should be balanced by the role of staff so as to improve in-
house knowledge retention and sharing.




                                            Agus Haryanto
                                            Chair, Development Effectiveness Committee

                                            2 August 2006
