                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                   Operations Evaluation Department




                         SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY


                                           ON


     ENERGY POLICY 2000 REVIEW: ENERGY EFFICIENCY FOR A
                       BETTER FUTURE




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response and the Board of
Directors' Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) Chair's summary of a discussion of the
report by DEC.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: SES: REG 2007-05
Special Evaluation Study
May 2007




Energy Policy 2000 Review:
Energy Efficiency for a Better Future




Operations Evaluation Department
                  ABBREVIATIONS

ADB     ­       Asian Development Bank
ALGAS   ­       Asia Least Cost Gas Abatement Strategy
BOT     _       build operate and transfer
btu     _       British thermal unit
DMC     ­       developing member country
DSM     ­       demand-side management
EA      ­       executing agency
EIA     ­       environmental impact assessment
GDP     ­       gross domestic product
GEF     ­       Global Environment Facility
GMS     ­       Greater Mekong Subregion
GW      ­       Gigawatt
ICB     ­       international competitive building
IPP     _       independent power producers
kVA     _       kilovolt ampere
kWh     ­       kilowatt hour
LNG     ­       liquefied natural gas
MDG     ­       millennium development goal
MW      ­       megawatt
O&M     ­       operation and maintenance
OAG     ­       Office of the Auditor General
OED     ­       Operations Evaluation Department
OEM     ­       operations evaluation mission
PPA     ­       power purchase agreement
PPAR    ­       project performance audit report
PRC     _       People's Republic of China
PREGA   ­       Promoting Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency and
                Greenhouse Gas Abatement
PSOD    ­       Private Sector Operations Department
REACH   ­       Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency and Climate Change
                Program
RETA    ­       regional technical assistance
RRP     ­        Report and Recommendations of the President to the
                 Board of Directors
RSDD    ­       Regional Sustainable Development Department
SES     ­       special evaluation study
TOU     ­       time of use
TPES    ­       total primary energy supply


                         NOTE

        In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
                                           Key Words
asia, energy, evaluation, energy policy, environment, asian development bank, poverty, energy
efficiency, clean energy, governance, corruption, private sector, reform, regional cooperation.




Director General       B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director               R. Adhikari, Operations Evaluation Division 2, OED

Team leader            R. Schenck, Evaluation Specialist, OED2
Team members           B. Palacios, Senior Evaluation Officer, OED2
                       I. Garganta, Operations Evaluation Assistant, OED2

                         Operations Evaluation Department SS-075
                                             CONTENTS
                                                                                                  Page

        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                             iii
I.      INTRODUCTION                                                                                  1
        A.   Background and Rationale                                                                 1
        B.   Evaluation Objective and Focus                                                           1
        C.   Evaluation Framework, Methodology and Data                                               1
II.     THE ENERGY POLICY CONTEXT                                                                     2
        A.   1995 and 2000 ADB Energy Policies                                                        2
        B.   The Global Context of Energy: Current Scenario and Challenges                            4
III.    ENERGY SECTOR OPERATIONS                                                                      6
        A.   Lending and Non-lending Operations                                                       6
        B.   Poverty Reduction and the Energy Sector                                                  8
        C.   Promoting Private Sector Participation                                                  11
        D.   Regional and Global Environmental Impacts                                               23
        E.   Promoting Regional Cooperation                                                          31
IV.     EVALUATION OF ADB'S ENERGY POLICY                                                            33
        A.   Relevance and Strategic Positioning                                                     33
        B.   Effectiveness                                                                           35
        C.   Efficiency                                                                              38
        D.   Sustainability                                                                          40
        E.   Overall Assessment                                                                      42
V.      CONCLUSIONS, ISSUES, LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                             42
        A.   Conclusions                                                                             42
        B.   Lessons Identified                                                                      43
        C.   Issues                                                                                  46
        D.   Recommendations                                                                         48


The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluations Department (OED) on avoiding conflict of
interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report. David Parish and
Jindra Samson were the consultants. To the knowledge of the management of OED, there were no
conflicts of interests of the persons preparing, reviewing or approving this report.
APPENDIXES

1.    Loans and Technical Assistance in the Energy Sector                       52
2.    Evaluation of Private Sector Loans                                        60
3.    Unbundling of the Electricity Sector                                      63
4.    Incentive-Based Regulations                                               66
5.    Governance and the Energy Sector                                          67
6.    Energy Initiatives Leading to Energy Efficiency and Improved              82
      Environmental Impacts
7.    Time-of-Use Pricing : Application of Long-Run Marginal Cost Pricing to    86
      Generation and Consumers
8.    Regional Cooperation                                                      91
9.    Comparison of Energy Policies and Operational Strategy of Various         95
      Funding Agencies
10.   Power Project Efficiency Evaluations                                     105
11.   Compliance with Covenants                                                110
12.   Congruence of the 2000 Energy Policy Review in the Context of            112
      Evolving National Energy Policy Strategy and Priorities in Developing
      Member Countries
13.   ADB Energy Specialists Competencies Survey                               123
14.   Future Strategic Priorities                                              124


Attachments:         Management Response
                     DEC Chair's Summary
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       The Asian Development Bank (ADB)'s 1995 Policy Initiatives for the Energy Sector
(1995 Energy Policy) emphasized sector reforms to unbundle regulated monopolies and
develop independently regulated and privatized energy markets. This was expected to lead to
more efficient use of energy, lower costs, and more private investment.

        Within the framework of the 1995 Energy Policy, the Energy 2000: Review of the Energy
Policy of the Asian Development Bank (2000 Review) underscored four operational priorities: (i)
reducing poverty; (ii) promoting private sector involvement; (iii) addressing environmental
impacts; and (iv) promoting regional cooperation. The Regional and Sustainable Development
Department requested an independent evaluation by the Operations Evaluation Department to
assess the relevance and effectiveness of the 2000 Review to provide an input for a 2007
review of the energy policy and related strategy formulation.

       This evaluation was based on the analysis of ADB's operational data, ADB publications,
and related literature, evaluation evidence in reports and databases, and country studies
covering India, the People's Republic of China and Sri Lanka. Both the 1995 Energy Policy and
2000 Review, similar to other policies developed during this time period, lacked a well-
developed design and monitoring framework with clear objectives and monitorable indicators.
This made the evaluation difficult because there were no clear criteria against which to judge
whether actual outcomes met, exceeded or fell short of expectations.

Key Findings

        ADB's operations in the energy sector are generally performing well. The major impacts
of ADB assistance include (i) financial and tariff restructuring and lower costs have reduced the
need for subsidies and public sector fiscal expenditures for the power sector; (ii) improved
quality and reliability of energy supply, a major concern for the domestic private sector and
foreign direct investment; (iii) some positive demonstration effects of energy efficiency and
renewable energy projects; (iv) some energy efficiency projects have had positive and
immediate impacts on improving environmental conditions; (v) governance is improving in the
power industry; and (vi) transfer of skills gained from technical assistance in areas such as
developing tariffs, automated billing, system planning and management reporting systems.
Overall the energy policy is rated "successful". The policy is "highly relevant" and was
responsive to changing external environment and to the changing needs of ADB's client
countries. It is sufficiently broad to cover the divergent needs in the Asia Pacific Region and is
generally consistent with the objectives of the other development partners active in the sector.
The effectiveness of the policy was assessed looking at the performance of the sector in relation
to the strategic objectives of the 2000 Review: poverty reduction, promoting private sector
participation, regional and environment impacts, and regional cooperation.

        The focus on poverty reduction as a major driver of ADB's energy sector operations,
although relevant, was over emphasized in the 2000 Review. While the evaluation found
evidence that some projects were designed to make them more pro-poor and that access to
affordable electricity improves the lives of the poor, poverty considerations did not play a major
role in project selection. Most of ADB's lending in the energy sector was not directly targeted on
the poor. The poverty reduction impact of operations in the energy sector was largely indirect
and achieved through trickle down effects of economic growth to which the power sector
development makes a significant contribution. There were few targeted interventions such as
providing electricity to poor rural households. There is evidence that suggests that interventions
iv


in sectors other than energy have a greater impact on poverty reduction. The effectiveness
rating of the poverty reduction objective is "partly effective", although the objective itself was
rated as "relevant".

       The 2000 Review is rated "highly relevant" and "highly effective" in supporting power
sector restructuring/unbundling and increasing the role of private sector in the energy sector.
ADB funded projects and programs have had considerable success in supporting the objective
of improving the enabling environment for the private sector. ADB supported sectoral reforms in
many countries helped with public sector lending and technical assistance that helped to
improve energy sector governance and the enabling environment for private sector investment.
ADB's private sector operations have been material, both in terms of catalyzing funding and
reducing concerns of both project sponsors and financiers about project risks. ADB's private
sector projects also had positive and sustainable effects on business practices, including, for
example: (i) introducing world best practice operations, (ii) exemplary safety records, and (iii)
good community relations.

          The 2000 Review stated that ADB intended to address environmental issues by
promoting energy efficiency, renewable energy, and the use of the clean development
mechanism. The evaluation found evidence that some well designed projects improved the
environment through energy efficiency and the use of cleaner technologies. However, the level
of ADB supported investment in energy efficiency was far below both the potential and the
need, and lending for renewable energy accounted for only about 3% of the portfolio. Because
low energy prices prevailed during the early part of the evaluation period and the weaknesses in
the enabling policy, legal and regulatory environment, the necessary incentives were lacking for
utilities, companies, households or governments to invest in these areas. A similar conclusion
applies to ADB efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector. ADB
assistance in these areas for most of the evaluation period was mainly focused on capacity
development. ADB's official statistics understate its contribution to improving energy efficiency.
The evaluation found evidence that policy dialogue, particularly related to adopting time of use
tariffs and advanced metering and billing technologies, and strengthening transmission and
distribution systems can have a positive impact on improving energy efficiency and reducing
system losses. Overall this element of the 2000 Review is rated "highly relevant" but the
implementation is rated "partly effective", given the low volume of lending in related areas. New
funds developed as part of the Clean Energy and Environment Program position ADB to play a
more active role in these areas. If the Clean Energy and Environment Program is successful, it
is likely that future evaluations would upgrade this rating.

        Regional cooperation has been a continuing objective of ADB in the power sector but
results have been slow to materialize, other than in the Greater Mekong Subregion. The initial
expectations appear overambitious. In some cases, ADB has been effective in ensuring
equitable negotiating positions that allowed countries to come to agreements and has provided
a venue to involve other donors. For example, ADB has facilitated energy trade between Lao
PDR and Thailand, and Viet Nam and Cambodia. ADB has also made some progress in
creating a better regional understanding of the potential benefits of energy trade. Institutional
development has been complemented by lending to support regional power projects in the
Greater Mekong Subregion. Progress in regional cooperation in the energy sector in Central
Asia and South Asia has not been material. Overall, ADB's efforts to promote regional
cooperation in electricity are rated "relevant" and "partly effective".

       The 2000 Review is rated as "effective". ADB's operations in the energy sector are
generally effective. Of the 142 energy projects that have been rated, 82% were rated as
                                                                                                   v


satisfactory or better. This was one of the best results across all sectors in which ADB operates.
The success rate for program loans for energy sector development and reforms was lower at
70%. This reflects the difficulty of planning and implementing sector reforms, a lesson that is
common throughout the Asia Pacific Region. Of the four pillars, the policy has successfully
influenced sector reform and private sector participation in energy sector. Both ADB's public and
private sector lending operations benefited from this. While there was evidence of being
`effective' in regional cooperation in energy sector in GMS, ADB has not yet been effective in
doing so in other subregions. In other pillars -- poverty reduction, and regional and
environmental impacts -- while the policy was relevant, but its performance was rated as `partly
effective' due to limited results. The evaluation noted that while ADB has recently introduced
new initiatives for energy efficiency, renewable energy and the environment, it was too early to
assess their outcomes.

        Efficiency in achieving the objectives of the 2000 Review was assessed in terms of
resource use, input efficiency, and processes including timeliness of outcomes. Energy projects
and programs overall have a high success rate in delivering expected outcomes through
efficient use of resources. Overall, the 2000 Review is rated "efficient".

        The 2000 Review is rated "highly sustainable" in the medium term due to the strong
future pipeline of energy projects (i.e., demand from ADB's clients), the value added in terms of
demonstration and replicability, and ADB's commitment to the sector as indicated in its second
medium term strategy.

Key Lessons Identified

       ADB and other development partners have been in continuous dialogue over long
periods with many countries about reform of the power sector. Developments after 2000 provide
evidence that the dialogue has contributed to improvements in sector policy and desirable
reforms. Technical assistance has contributed to sector reform and performance improvement.
Private sector principles and practices and independent regulation are providing tangible
impacts but efficiency gains can lead to further improvements.

         Policy based programs designed to support sector restructuring used tranche releases
to try to ensure that agreed policy measures and loan covenants were met. Although there were
often delays with compliance, this mechanism has proven to be useful to facilitate the
implementation of necessary, but difficult, reforms. The following lessons were common to the
program loans designed to support sector restructuring: (i) sector restructuring is a difficult, slow
process and the timetables for reform set out in loan covenants and program documents are
often too optimistic; (ii) continuity of involvement is essential if ADB is to contribute to the
success of reform efforts; (iii) introducing independent regulation at an early stage is a key part
of the restructuring process; and (iv) the distribution sector raises the most difficult issues on
restructuring and privatization.

        ADB's experience has shown that full privatization of public utilities is not necessarily the
only option. Corporatization with government ownership can also deliver good results if
commercially and financially sustainable principles are introduced to improve efficiency and the
delivery of better services to customers. ADB assistance has increased the level of governance
across the energy sector resulting in more efficient management, better use of financial
resources and reduced opportunity for corruption. Reducing the opportunities for corruption in
the sector by addressing two of its main causes, electricity shortages and a lack of good
governance, should be a continuing major initiative.
vi


         Funding and encouraging independent regulation has been a key success factor in
promoting commercial practices in the region. However, progress towards establishing
regulators that are fully independent from political intervention has been slow in some countries.
Given the region's historical experience with regulated monopolies, regulation in a competitive
market is a relatively new activity. Regulators are learning from one another and from
international experience. ADB policy dialogue with power sector regulators has been a powerful
tool in sharing and promoting best practice.

        The evaluation observed a generally good match between program, project and
technical assistance designs and the capabilities of executing agencies. ADB has supported
well thought out projects, which have been generally delivered within budget. Project designs
have benefited from incorporating the evaluation findings from earlier years. The successful
outcomes of energy projects reflect the following (i) benefits were immediate once the projects
were completed, due to existing demand; (ii) increased electricity supply facilitated economic
growth and contributed to a better quality of life; (iii) financial policy dialogue and tariff reforms
helped to mobilize more funding for investment, operation, and maintenance; and (iv) executing
agencies generally had strong project management teams that had learned lessons from
previous projects. There has been a general lack of compliance with financial covenants in the
power sector. This suggests that ADB needs to improve the quality of its financial analysis for
the power projects. Delays observed in the implementation of more recent projects were less
than the delays associated with earlier projects. This can be attributed to the better design of
projects, the results of policy dialogue, the growing capacity of executing agencies, and the
increased positive work of resident mission staff.

        The relationship between economic development and the demand for energy is well
established in the literature and by ADB's operational experience. Given that the Asia Pacific
Region is the most dynamic economic region in the world, the demand for energy can be
expected to continue growing rapidly in the future. The major strategic challenge is how to meet
this growing demand for electricity in the most cost effective and environmentally sustainable
way. Recent major reports have highlighted the importance of addressing environmental issues
related to the energy sector. Nongovernmental organizations have also raised awareness about
the importance of addressing environmental issues at both the sector and project level.

         The mix of potential energy investments spans the range from new construction, to
improved efficiency in new and existing operations, to better management of demand and
conservation. The growing demand for power can be met either by building new infrastructure
capacity, or by promoting greater efficiency in the distribution and use of electricity. From an
engineering and project planning perspective, building capacity is simpler. However, correcting
inefficiencies offers the potential for large financial returns and improved environmental
outcomes. Improving energy efficiency by examining both demand side and supply side
alternatives should be made the single highest priority in the updated energy strategy. Before
investing in new energy generation capacity, all feasible efforts should be made to decrease the
demand through energy efficiency initiatives and increases in system efficiencies. There are
three positive outcomes from using less energy (i) capital costs are reduced since energy
efficiency efforts generally half the cost of adding additional capacity; (ii) greenhouse gas
emissions and other sources of air pollution are reduced; and (iii) energy security is enhanced.
While there are many opportunities to improve energy efficiency, the increasing demand for
power in the Asia Pacific region will require significant investment in new generation capacity.
Thus, while energy efficiency initiatives should precede funding for new capacity, this should not
be at the expense of "turning off the lights". Energy efficiency programs, the development of
                                                                                                vii


renewable energy, the adoption of clean energy technologies are in their infancy in the Asia
Pacific region. They have substantial need and potential to grow.

         The recent initiatives included in the Clean Energy and Environment Program provide
ADB with a broader set of instruments and financing modalities to address energy efficiency,
renewable energy and greenhouse gas emissions. This should allow ADB to better help
address the energy environment nexus in the future. However, to effectively do so, the lessons
of the evaluation suggest that these initiatives need to be complemented by more activities in
the following three areas.

        First, it may be that ADB's greatest contribution to addressing the environment issues in
the energy sector is in the area of policy dialogue. This could include building the enabling
policy, legal and regulatory frameworks to promote energy efficiency, renewable energy and
cleaner technologies, promoting the use of market based instruments to encourage commercial
investments in this area, promoting time of use tariffs and bringing down barriers and designing
suitable instruments so that domestic banks can fund such projects in industry, buildings and
other commercial establishments as well as in the energy sector.

       Second, ADB should, as a matter of routine, reflect environmental costs and benefits in
the economic analysis undertaken for energy projects. As a result, ADB would be better able to
choose which strategies and projects to support to achieve better environmental outcomes in
the energy sector.

         Third, ADB should raise environmental assessments beyond the project level to the
sectoral level. Such assessments, if properly done, would be an appropriate vehicle to help
develop more effective strategies to address issues related to the energy/environment nexus.
ADB's attention on environmental issues in the energy sector, focusing on project level
safeguards is too narrow. Project-level environmental assessments, however well done, do not
adequately handle strategic issues. The project level approach must be complemented by a
broader, sectoral level approach to effectively address the strategic elements of the
energy/environment nexus. Broader questions include things like (i) Are the right kinds of
projects being selected for ADB support? (ii) Are policy reforms preferable to investments in
more energy infrastructure? (iii) Could energy efficiency initiatives reduce or eliminate the need
for further investment in generation capacity? (iv) What needs to be done to promote renewable
energy? (iv) Would regional cooperation in the energy sector be a way to reduce environmental
costs?

Recommendations

        The results of the evaluation suggest that ADB's support for the energy sector should be
driven by two key policy considerations (i) energy efficiency; and (ii) good governance. The
objective should be to achieve a future in which an increasing portion of the Asia Pacific region's
growing need for energy is met by improvements in energy efficiency and energy technologies
that minimize adverse impacts on the environment, and by applying governance measures
which lead to commercial- and financially-sustainable management principles.

        While the principles and objectives of the 2000 Review remain valid and relevant, there
is a need to update and fine-tune the ADB's energy strategy to better reflect current context and
development challenges and improve implementation effectiveness. There is also need to
incorporate the various initiatives and strategies in the Clean Energy and Environment Initiative.
The updated energy strategy should be designed to achieve the following outcomes: (i) improve
viii


efficiencies across the energy chain to minimize investment in new generating capacity to meet
the growing demand for energy; (ii) reflect environmental externalities in decision making in the
energy sector; (iii) pricing and resource allocation decisions take place under market forces
under an effective and credible regulatory oversight; (iv) energy subsidies are transparent and
targeted; (v) policies rely on market based incentives to promote efficiency and environmentally
friendly behavior; (vi) sector governance is improved to increase efficiency, create opportunities
for private sector participation and reduce opportunities for corruption, and (vii) ADB becomes a
more client focused institution.

        Future operations in the energy sector should be driven by key policy considerations
related to energy efficiency and addressing the energy/environment nexus; good governance;
and results-based monitoring. This emphasis will require a holistic approach to the efficient
development of the energy sector.

        Based on the findings of the evaluation, the following areas of the energy policy are
recommended for continuation with stronger client focus and more operational vigor: (i) private
sector participation including unbundling, restructuring and privatization with improved corporate
governance; (ii) mitigation of environmental impacts through promoting cleaner technologies;
and (iii) regional economic cooperation in energy sector, considering also cross-border
environmental implications. A number of suggestions are presented in Chapter V of the report
and Appendix 14.

        In addition, the evaluation puts forward the following key recommendations for
consideration by Management and also for incorporation in the ongoing review of the energy
policy and strategy formulation by the Regional and Sustainable Development Department.


                      Key Recommendations                             Responsibility    Timing
       1. Manage the Energy/Environment Nexus:                        RSDD and RDs     2007    and
                                                                                       ongoing
          (i)    Make improving energy efficiency the single
                 highest priority in the ADB's new energy strategy
                 so that all feasible efforts are made to decrease
                 demand through viable energy efficiency
                 initiatives and increases in system efficiencies
                 before investing in new energy generation
                 capacity.
          (ii)   Complement these initiatives with (a) ADB
                 becoming known as a center for excellence to
                 improve the policy, legal and regulatory
                 framework and the use of market based
                 incentives to improve the enabling framework for
                 energy efficiency, renewable energy and ways to
                 address environmental concerns in the energy
                 sector; (b) incorporating, as a matter of routine,
                 environmental costs and benefits in the economic
                 analysis undertaken for energy projects; and (c)
                 undertaking strategic environmental assessments
                 for the energy sector in those countries in which
                 the country partnership strategy envisions a
                 significant role for ADB in the energy sector.
                                                                                                ix


 2. Improve Sector Governance: Supplement ongoing                 OAG, RDs, and   2008    and
    efforts to improve governance by providing staff with more    RSDD            ongoing
    guidance on how to address governance issues to reduce
    opportunities for corruption in the energy sector.

 3. Develop an Implementation Plan for the new energy             RDs, RSDD,      2008    and
    strategy that:                                                SPD, and        ongoing
    (i)    reconciles the policy and strategic aspirations with   BPMSD
           organizational, budget, and human resources
           implications; and
    (ii)   includes a results framework with monitorable key
           indicators (for inputs, outputs and short and long
           term outcomes/results) so that implementation
           progress can be monitored and, if necessary,
           midterm corrections can be made.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, BPMSD = Budget Personnel Management System Department, OAG =
Office of the Auditor General, RDs = Regional Departments, RSDD = Regional and Sustainable
Development Department, SPD = Strategy and Policy Department.
Source: Special Evaluation Study.




                                                            Bruce Murray
                                                            Director General
                                                            Operations Evaluation Department
                                              I.       INTRODUCTION

A.         Background and Rationale

1.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB)'s Policy Initiatives for the Energy Sector (1995
Energy Policy) 1 emphasized sector reforms to unbundle regulated monopolies and develop
independently regulated and privatized energy markets. This was expected to lead to more
efficient use of energy, lower costs, and more private investment. Within the framework of the
1995 Energy Policy, the Energy 2000: Review of the Energy Policy of the Asian Development
Bank (2000 Review) emphasized four operational priorities: (i) reducing poverty; (ii) promoting
private sector involvement; (iii) addressing environmental impacts; and (iv) promoting regional
cooperation.

2.      The intent was for ADB to help create an appropriate policy and institutional environment
and capacity support to develop and extend the availability of energy resources. The 2000
Review supports a wide range of development initiatives such as poverty reduction, inclusive
social development, removal of subsidies, better governance, use of information technology,
better environmental protection, efficiency improvements, energy conservation, more co-
financing, and more capacity building.

3.     The 2000 Review calls for a review of the policy within 5 years. The Regional and
Sustainable Development Department RSDD requested an independent evaluation by the
Operations Evaluation Department (OED) to assess the relevance and effectiveness of the
2000 Review to provide an input for a 2007 review of the energy policy and the formulation of
the energy strategy.

B.         Evaluation Objective and Focus

4.         The evaluation focused on:

           (i)      Examining the specific features of the 2000 Review, including their intent as
                    directives, safeguards, and development approaches;
           (ii)     Assessing the adequacy of coverage and relevance of the 2000 Review to ADB
                    operations, taking into account subsequent global and regional developments
                    and subsequent ADB initiatives in the energy sector;
           (iii)    Examining the extent to which guidance provided in the 2000 Review has been
                    taken into account in project designs;
           (iv)     Examining the performance of ADB energy sector assistance before and after
                    the 2000 Review, and identifying trends which may be attributed to the 2000
                    Review;
           (v)      Identifying areas in the energy sector where ADB made a contribution to poverty
                    reduction; and,
           (vi)     Identifying lessons and identifying issues to be considered in the formulation of
                    the energy strategy.

C.         Evaluation Framework, Methodology and Data

5.     The evaluation framework includes a review of both the external and internal context.
The external context includes an array of international and regional commitments, conventions,

1
     ADB. 1995. The Bank's Policy Initiatives for the Energy Sector. Manila.
2


agreements and regulations, institutional priorities, capacity-building requirements, and strategic
investments over time. International and regional agreements affect both ADB and country
policies, strategies, programs, and projects. Other external factors include the global importance
of energy, growing concern about greenhouse gas emissions and global warming, trends in fuel
cost, technology innovations and applications, and energy management practices. These
contemporary issues and challenges need to be considered in a review of ADB's energy
policies and operational strategies.

6.     The key contextual areas taken into account by the study were (i) collaborative and
partnering initiatives of ADB with other international organizations and networks in mobilizing
resources and sharing expertise; (ii) the internal policy context, which includes ADB's
overarching goal of poverty reduction, the 2000 Review's intent; and (iii) the objectives of an
array of ADB policies, which have an influence on the performance of the energy sector and
ADB's operations in the energy sector.

7.     Key data and information sources included interviews and discussions with selected
ADB staff, Developing Member Countries (DMC) officials, investors and operators in the public
and private sectors, published reports of ADB, other multilateral banks and governments, and
ADB's operational data and management information system. The study supplemented the
information previous evaluations undertaken by OED, particularly power sector assistance
program evaluations in Bangladesh,2 Pakistan and the Philippines,3 and energy sector project
performance evaluation reports, with field visits in India, the Peoples Republic of China (PRC),
and Sri Lanka.

                                 II.      THE ENERGY POLICY CONTEXT

A.        1995 and 2000 Energy Policies

8.      When ADB prepared its first Energy Policy paper4 in March 1981, after the second oil
crisis of 1979 the world faced record-high crude prices and concerns about the security of
supply. ADB's policy stressed overcoming the crisis caused by oil price shocks. Its assistance
focused on energy infrastructure development, with emphasis on developing of indigenous
energy, promoting energy efficiency and building incentives to encourage foreign investments in
the energy sector.

9.      In 1995, ADB released its second Energy Policy paper.5 The paper noted that power
sectors in the Asia Pacific region were growing but were inefficiently managed. This reflected
the dual role of governments as both monopoly owners and policy makers. The 1995 Energy
Policy identified three major sectoral issues (i) defining an appropriate role for the government in
the sector; (ii) enhancing the efficiency of production, transportation, and end use of energy; and
(iii) more closely integrating environmental considerations in all energy sector activities. It
advocated recovering full costs from users, avoiding subsidies and cross-subsidies, and
establishing independent regulators to adjust electricity tariffs based on transparent tariff
principles. The paper advocated corporatizing and commercializing government-owned utilities
as a prelude to privatization. The paper also emphasized the development of energy
infrastructure and indigenous energy sources to promote efficiency and create incentives to
attract foreign investment. It outlined the operational implications of policy choices to align
2
    ADB. 2003. Sector Assistance Program Evaluation of the Bangladesh Power Sector. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2006. Sector Assistance Program Evaluation of the Philippines Power Sector. Manila.
4
    ADB. 1981. Working Paper No. 2­81. Role of the Bank in the Energy Sector in the Region. Manila.
5
    ADB. 1995. The Bank's Policy Initiatives for the Energy Sector. Manila.
                                                                                                               3


selection and pursuit of energy sector activities in each DMC with ADB's corporate strategy,
country strategy, and sector policies.

10.     Issues identified in the 1995 Energy Policy included (i) structural reform; (ii) energy
efficiency; (iii) energy pricing; (iv) energy and environment; (v) rural energy development; and
(vi) regional cooperation and energy development. The 1995 Energy Policy centered on (i)
enabling private investments in the energy sector; (ii) demand-side management (DSM); (iii)
integrated resource planning; (iv) energy efficiency; and (v) local and national environmental
considerations. Its recommendations covered power (electricity), hydrocarbons (coal, oil, and
gas), and rural energy systems (including renewable energy sources).

11.    Common themes that cut across all ADB assistance in the energy sector involved (i)
preferential allocation of ADB's resources to the countries willing to restructure their energy
sector to improve efficiency and to attract private investments to meet incremental demand; (ii)
support for private investment through build-own-operate/build-own-operate-transfer projects,
as well as joint-ventures between government utilities and private investors; (iii) emphasis on
both supply-side and demand-side energy efficiency improvements before providing assistance
for generation capacity addition; (iv) emphasis on environmental protection at all stages of the
project cycle; (v) support for the development and utilization of natural gas resources; (vi)
promotion of regional trade in energy; and (vii) promotion of rural energy supply and renewable
energy development, based on decentralized systems, internalization of environmental costs
and benefits, adoption of life-cycle costs for comparisons, private initiatives and institutional
sustainability.

12.    The 2000 Review reoriented policy goals of energy sector operations to focus on: (i)
poverty reduction, (ii) private sector participation and sector restructuring, (iii) regional and
global environmental impacts, and (iv) regional cooperation. The new operational priorities
were:
       (i)    Reducing poverty by creating energy infrastructure for sustainable growth,
              increasing access to energy for the poor, particularly in rural areas, and making
              sure that the poor account for a major portion of project beneficiaries;6
       (ii)   Promoting private sector involvement 7 by restructuring the energy sector to
              address (a) public sector monopolies; (b) hydrocarbon and power restructuring
              through unbundling, promoting competition, formulating energy policies, enacting
              of laws, implementing environment and social safeguards and promoting
              efficiency improvements taking account of the stage of economic development
              and constraints of each DMC; (c) supporting energy pricing policies, tariff reforms
              and energy management; and (d) promoting good governance in the energy
              sector.
       (iii)  Addressing regional and global environmental impacts by supporting measures
              which address acid rain problems, use clean energy, Kyoto Protocol mechanisms
              for greenhouse gas abatement, and financing renewable energy projects; and
       (iv)   Promoting regional cooperation by helping identify and implement export-
              oriented hydropower and natural gas-based generation and transmission
              projects.



6
    The emphasis on poverty reflected ADB's adoption of poverty reduction as its overarching goal in 1999.
7
    ADB formulated a comprehensive private sector development strategy in 2000 aimed at strengthening the role of
    the private sector as the engine of growth in the Asia Pacific region.
4


B.     The Global Context of Energy: Current Scenario and Challenges

13.     Since the 2000 Review, there have been a number of major global and regional
developments in the energy sector. Fuel costs have increased significantly. Concerns have
further increased about environmental issues e.g., global warming, acid rain, the social and
economic costs of pollution, and fuel security. Implementation of energy market reforms have
proven to be more difficult and slower than expected.

14.     Fuel prices have increased sharply, since 2000 driven partly by the rapidly growing
energy needs in the Asia Pacific Region and by concerns about geo-political peace and stability
in the Middle East. Oil prices more than doubled from $28 per barrel in 2000 to $66 per barrel in
2006. Coal prices rose sharply in 2004, but have since declined (Table 1). Coal prices are
expected to fall below $40 per ton, while oil prices are expected to remain above $50 per barrel
for some time (Table 2). Other factors contributing to higher prices include refinery bottlenecks,
shipping shortages and the growing importance of hedge funds and other speculative investors
in commodities markets, especially oil futures. The energy-importing countries in Asia are hit
hardest as increasing proportion of their scarce foreign exchange resources need to be used to
finance oil imports.

                       Table 1: Average Annual Prices of Coal and Oil

                             Year            Coal Price              Oil Price
                                               $/ton                 $/barrel

                            1999                 25.89                 18.07
                            2000                 26.25                 28.23
                            2004                 54.70                 37.73
                            2005                 52.00                 49.00
                            2006                 52.00                 66.17
                       Sources: Platts, World Bank, XTRADA (2005, 2006).

                                 Table 2: Forecast Energy Prices
                                      Constant 2005 Prices

                                                                2007     2008     2010
                     Coal, Australia, ($/mt)                     40       35       30
                     Crude oil, average, ($/bbl)                 54       50       43
                     Natural gas, Europe, ($/mmbtu)               7        6        5
                     Natural gas, ($/mmbtu)                       7        7        6
                    bbl = barrel, mmbtu = million British thermal unit, mt = metric ton.
                    Source: World Bank 2005 Commodity Forecasts, Washington DC.

15.    The Asia Pacific region, the most dynamic economic region in the world, is consuming a
growing share of the world's total primary energy supply. The Asia-Pacific region's share of the
world's energy supply grew from 13% in 1973 to 25% in 2003. Although energy use on a per
capita basis is low, it will increase as incomes and standards of living improve (see Figure 1).
With economic growth in the region expected to remain above 5%, the demand for electricity will
continue to grow rapidly. By 2030, regional energy use is expected to increase by 89% and
                                                                                                           5


account for 30% of total world consumption.8 The challenge is how to meet this growing demand
for energy in the most cost effective and environmentally sustainable manner.

               Figure 1: Electricity Consumption and Gross Domestic Product

             Kilowatt Hours of Electricity Per Capita vs. GDP Per Capita (Purchase Price Parity in 2000)




       GDP = gross domestic product, kWH = kilowatt hour
       Source: International Energy Agency. 2005. World Energy Outlook 2005.


16.     The Asia Pacific region is largely dependent on fossil fuels, with coal, oil, and natural gas
accounting for 41%, 25%, and 7%, respectively, of the energy used. Coal is the dominant fuel in
two of the largest economies in the Asia Pacific Region, the People's Republic of China (PRC)
and India. The reliance on fossil fuels, coupled with the increase in energy use, has led to a
corresponding growth in the Asia Pacific region's share of greenhouse gas emissions. In 1973,
the Asia Pacific region accounted for only 8.7% of global greenhouse gas emissions. By 2003
its contribution had increased to 24% and is projected to reach 30% by 2030 (footnote 8).
Globally there has been an increased concern supported by a growing body of scientific
evidence about the nexus between the energy sector and the environment. There are growing
concerns about greenhouse gas emissions and their effects on global warming, and climate
change. This has promoted a greater emphasis on the clean development mechanism (CDM),
emissions trading and energy efficiency. Emission trading has commenced world wide, but its
possible value and use in Asia is largely undeveloped.

17.     The effects of increased greenhouse gas emissions are believed to be the primary
cause of climate change. The Stern Review9 indicates that the impacts of climate change and
subsequent global warming are not evenly distributed; the poorest countries and people will
suffer earliest and most. Developing regions are at a geographic disadvantage: they are already
warmer, on average, than the more developed regions, and they also suffer from high rainfall
variability. As a result, further warming will bring poor countries high costs and few benefits.
Developing countries, in particular the poorest, are heavily dependent on agriculture, the most

8
    International Energy Agency (IEA). 2005. Key Indicators. World Energy Outlook 2005.
9
    2006. Stern Review: The Economic of Climate Change. Cambridge, U.K.
6


climate-sensitive of all economic sectors. Low incomes and vulnerabilities in DMCs make
adaptation to climate change particularly difficult. Climate change is likely to reduce the already
low incomes and increase illness and death rates in developing countries. Falling farm incomes
will increase poverty and reduce the ability of households to invest in a better future. At a
national level, climate change will cut revenues and raise spending needs, worsening public
finances.

                                  III.     ENERGY SECTOR OPERATIONS

A.            Lending and Non-lending Operations

18.      ADB's public sector lending in the energy sector over 1996-2006 amounted to $8.754
billion in 21 DMCs (Appendix 1, Table A1.1). Private sector investment assistance (equity and
loans) in the energy sector in 10 DMCs totaled $1.216 billion. Lending for energy infrastructure
peaked in 1993 and declined significantly for several years (Figure 2). ADB also provided 148
advisory technical assistance (TA) projects, totaling $81.9 million approved from January 1996
to December 2006. Most of the TA projects were to support energy sector development,
subregional power interconnection and regional power trading, energy and environment related
issues, and energy efficiency. In addition, 24 regional TA amounting to $22.1 million during the
same period financed various studies, research, capacity building workshops and seminars, and
subregional cooperation meetings.


                        Figure 2: Public Sector Power Infrastructure Lending
      1600

      1400

      1200

       1000
 $ million
       800

       600

       400

       200

         0
          1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005

                     Conventional Energy Generation   Hydropower Generation   Transmission and Distribution


         Source: Asian Development Bank database.



19.     There have been shifts in geographical distribution of ADB's energy sector projects.
Several past recipients of large energy infrastructure loans and energy sector programs (e.g.,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the PRC, and Thailand) have developed their energy sectors and capital
markets to such an extent that most energy infrastructure is now funded locally rather than with
ADB support. Although the locally developed capital markets do not offer the tenure available
from ADB loans and offer similar rates, the conditionalities associated with ADB lending and the
reduced foreign exchange risks make these more attractive to local investors. ADB's energy
sector lending to Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Sri Lanka, and Viet Nam increased in 2001--
2006, accounting for over 57% of public sector loans. (See Appendix 1 for more details).
                                                                                                7


Overall, DMCs with poor infrastructure and low technical capabilities still require significant
assistance for energy infrastructure, sector development, and capacity building.

20.     Table 3 summarizes ADB's energy sector portfolio. Total lending to the energy sector
has grown only modestly since the 2000 Review; and average annual lending in the two periods
increased by 11%. During both periods, 78% of ADB lending went to transmission and
distribution projects and sector reform programs. The share of thermal generation in the
portfolio rose from 7% to 15% because of increased private sector lending. From 1969 to 2006,
ADB financed 22 coal-fired generation plants for $2.83 billion. Since 1996, however, ADB has
funded only three coal-fired plants in the private sector and none in the public sector. However,
five coal-fired plants are in the 2007/8 pipeline totaling $1.79 billion. The other thermal plants
were gas or oil-fired. ADB support for hydropower projects declined sharply after the 2000
Review, particularly in public sector lending. Renewable energy remains a small part of ADB's
energy portfolio. ADB's private sector lending rose to 18% of total energy lending after the 2000
Review up from 5% in the 1996 to 2000 period.


                    Table 3: ADB's Energy Sector Operations 1996 to 2006
                                1996-2000    2001-2006   1996-2000    2001-2006      Change
                                                         Proportion   Proportion    Annual In
                                                         of Lending   of Lending    Average
                                                                                    Lending
                                 $ million   $ million       %             %           %
  Public Sector
  Sector Development               1,496      2,134           37           46             19
  Transmission and                 1,768      2,178           43           47              3
  Distribution
  Thermal Generation                 152        148            4            3           (19)
  Hydro Generation                   512         48           12            1           (92)
  Renewable Energy                   158        161            4            3           (15)
  Subtotal                         4,086      4,669          100          100            (5)

  Private Sector
  Transmission and                     0       215               0         21              ­
  Distribution
  Thermal Generation                 163        715           82           70            266
  Hydro Generation                    37         87           19            9             96
  Subtotal                           200      1,017          100          100            324

  All Sectors
  Sector Development               1,496      2,134           35           38             19
  Transmission &                   1,768      2,393           41           42             13
  Distribution
  Thermal Generation                 315        863            7           15           228
  Hydro Generation                   549        135           13            2           (80)
  Renewable Energy                   158        161            4            3           (15)
  Total All Sectors                4,286      5,686          100          100             11
  Source: Asian Development Bank database.
8


21.    The following sections discuss ADB lending and non-lending operations undertaken
under the operational priorities of the 2000 Review.

B.         Poverty Reduction and the Energy Sector

22.    The 2000 Review envisages multiple links between poverty reduction and energy
services, particularly electric power. Electric power ­ a major energy service ­ contributes to
income and non-income poverty reduction through various channels. At the national level, it
serves as an input to industry, transport and communications, and cross-border power trading.
At local levels, it facilitates economic development by supporting agriculture and through non-
farm economic activities. At community level, electricity improves health and education services,
and at the household level it provides basic lighting which facilitates cooking, reading,
household level economic activities, among others. Electricity can also reduce or avoid
household level pollution due to the use of coal, wood fuels, etc., and improving public health
outcomes, particularly of women, children and elderly people. Lack of alternative energy
sources can lead to public health problems and hence, energy poverty is linked with the
millennium development goals.

23.     There is evaluation evidence which demonstrates that access to electricity improves the
lives of the poor. A socioeconomic survey to assess the impact of ADB funded electrification on
rural (and some urban) users in villages across Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao (footnote 3)
reported that electricity contributes to (i) income generation, (ii) information dissemination, (iii)
reduced birth rates, (iv) longer study times for children, (v) access to entertainment, and (vi)
improved quality of life in general. A survey of electricity customers undertaken for the
Bangladesh Power SAPE (footnote 2) found that that the availability of electricity was positively
correlated with a wide range of economic and social indicators, including higher participation
rates by women in income generation, better nutrition, higher wages for the landless, and more
studying and working time during evenings. However, the survey did not find statistically
significant evidence that rural households with electricity had higher incomes than those without
electricity, as suggested by an earlier survey. This may reflect other factors at work in the
different geographic areas covered (e.g., activities of non-government organizations, distance to
a national road or urban area, population mobility).

24.    Affordability is a major issue for poor consumers; hence cost efficiency is a major
concern. There are a number of good practices implemented through ADB loans and TA which
have helped to achieve this. These include (i) following least cost strategies for generation and
transmission and distribution upgrades; (ii) ensuring a good balance between generation,
transmission and distribution capacity; and (iii) ensuring that technical and non technical losses
of power (in particular theft) are minimized. These issues are largely being addressed through
sector restructuring and the introduction of better sector governance and commercial
management principles. In addition, ADB has encouraged the use of subsidized lifeline tariffs for
the poor (e.g., Bhutan, the PRC, Nepal, and the Philippines), discouraged indiscriminate
subsidies (India), supported least cost generation through international competitive bidding
(ICB) (e.g., Bangladesh and Sri Lanka), promoted balanced sector development and helped
reduce technical and non technical losses in all DMCs.10 This is particularly reflected in lending
programs in India and the associated covenants, policy dialogue, cooperation with other
development partners and TA.

10
     Examples include the sector restructuring in India, where production costs have been significantly reduced and
     availability of supply has been increased. For detailed discussion see the ADB. 2007. India Power Sector
     Assistance Program Evaluation (forthcoming) and discussion in the following section.
                                                                                                  9



25.      Some countries have achieved greater success than others at increasing electrification
ratios. For example, Sri Lanka has done well and electrification levels surpass its near
neighbors. The electrification rate in the PRC has reached 99%. There are lessons for other
countries in the way in which Sri Lanka and the PRC have approached electrification. For
example, loans are made available to enable poor households to pay for the initial connection to
the grid. The schemes worked well with high levels of up take and subsequent repayment.
Covenants in some ADB loans also explicitly targeted increasing number of connections. In
Bangladesh, there have also been successful initiatives that have promoted power distribution
in rural areas through the Rural Electrification Board and the network of rural power
cooperatives which were developed with its support. These cooperatives have better
management records than those in other countries (e.g., the Philippines) and their example may
have potential for application elsewhere in the region. A major concern regarding rural
electrification projects is that there is a danger of making poor people poorer. This may occur
when the rural population pays for the connection charges and the related internal wiring of their
respective houses, usually on a monthly basis, and invest in household appliances that run on
electricity. However, they still have to buy the kerosene, batteries, and wood fuels for cooking as
the electricity is not provided when it is required particularly during the evening peak periods.
There is a need to ensure that there are sufficient supplies to meet the projected increased
demand.

26.     A desk review of 44 energy sector loans approved between 2001 and 2006 revealed that
only 9 of them had poverty intervention components. Of them, 2 were for rural electrification
(Lao PDR and Bhutan) and the rest had elements to connect approximately 577,000 rural
householders to the grid. Other expected indirect benefits accruing to poor people were long
term employment opportunities for local residents (3 loans) and the employment of local
persons during the construction phases. Another 2 million poor persons directly benefited from
two loans which lowered district heating tariffs as a result of the replacement of older inefficient
equipment with modern equipment. In addition, the field study of this evaluation found further
evidence that ADB helped to bring electricity to the rural poor (i) in the PRC (65,000 persons
were connected as part of a project in Yunnan Province); (ii) in Gujarat State, India, villages
were being connected with 24 hour access to power through a redistribution of power from
agricultural connections to off peak periods;11 and (iii) 78,000 new rural consumers in Assam
State in India were connected. These efforts made many projects more pro-poor by adding
components that would benefit the poor directly, but these add-ons complicated project designs
and made project management and implementation more difficult.

27.     There are still significant numbers of persons without access to power in the Asia Pacific
region and the electrification ratio varies from country to country (see Table 4). It ranges from
below 7 to 100. The provision of electricity is recognized as making a necessary contribution to
poverty reduction. The large numbers of persons without power suggests that significant funding
will be required in some countries in the future to achieve higher levels of access. The 2000
Review emphasized increasing access to energy for the poor, particularly in rural areas, and
ensuring the poor accounted for a major portion of project beneficiaries. Given this emphasis on
poverty, one would expect operations in the energy sector to be concentrated in those countries
with low electrification ratios and/or the number of projects focused on rural electrification to
increase significantly. The data indicate that neither happened (see Table 4). While about two-
thirds of the public sector lending went to countries like Bangladesh, India, Indonesia and
Pakistan during 2001--2006, the projects were not necessarily targeted at poor rural

11
     Subsequently the quality of power to both sectors improved.
10


households. This finding indicates that factors other than poverty were used to position ADB's
operations in the energy sector and to guide the selection of projects for ADB support.12 This
finding is not surprising as factors other than providing rural electrification drive strategic
decision making in the energy sector in all countries.


                            Table 4: Electricity Access of DMCs in 2005
          Country        Electrification   Population    Population     ADB's Public Sector Energy
                             Ratio          without         with            Loans (2002-2006)
                                           Electricity   Electricity

                                            (millions)    (millions)   ($ millions)    % of Total
                                                                                       lending to
                                                                                         DMC
         Afghanistan          7.0           27.0            2.0            61.5              2.8
         Bangladesh          32.0           96.2           45.3           484.9             22.3
         Bhutan                 ­              ­              ­             9.4              0.4
         Brunei              99.2              ­            0.4               ­                 ­
         Cambodia            20.1           10.9            2.7            64.3                 3
         India               55.5          487.2          607.6           400.0             18.4
         Indonesia           54.0          101.2          111.8           215.0              9.9
                   a
         Lao PDR             30.0              ­              ­            30.0              1.4
         Malaysia            97.8            0.6           24.7               ­                 ­
         Mongolia            64.1            1.0            1.8               ­                 ­
         Myanmar             11.3           45.1            5.7               ­                 ­
         Nepal               33.0           18.1            8.9               ­                 ­
         Pakistan            54.0           71.1           83.5           236.0             10.8
         Philippines         80.5           16.2           66.8            40.0              1.8
         PRC                 99.4            8.5         1302.1           135.0              6.2
         Singapore          100.0              ­            4.3               ­                 ­
         Sri Lanka           66.0            6.7           13.0               ­                 ­
         Taipei, China       99.2            0.2           22.9               ­                 ­
         Thailand            99.0            0.6           64.1            21.5              1.0
         Viet Nam            84.2           13.2           70.3           480.0             22.0
                                                                        2,177.6            100.0
     a
      2003.
     ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member countries, Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic
     Republic, PRC = People's Republic of China.
     Sources: International Energy Agency. 2005, Energy Outlook 2005, Asian Development Bank database.

28.     The majority of the pro-poor benefits of energy investments are indirect, resulting from
the increased economic activity and the resulting job creation and income activities. Access to a
reliable supply of electricity is a necessary but not sufficient condition for economic growth to
take place. While there were efforts at the project level to give ADB funded projects a sharper
poverty focus, the scope of these projects were small relative to the total investments in the
energy sectors in DMCs. Research undertaken by ADB and others13 since the 2000 Review
suggests that investments in sectors other than energy would result in greater returns in terms
of rural poverty reduction (Table 5). Energy sector investments, while important for economic
development, are not the most effective and efficient way to reduce poverty. The relative role of
energy in terms of poverty reduction was not carefully analyzed in the 2000 Review. However,
the recent change to a geographical focus may provide greater intervention effects. More

12
    Considerations did not include the investments of the concerned governments, private sector and other
   development partners.
13
   ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance for Assessing the Impact of Transport and Energy Infrastructure on Poverty
   Reduction. Manila. (TA 5947), Thorat, Sukhadeo, and Shenggen Fan. 2007. Public Investment and Poverty
   Reduction Lessons from China and India. Economic and Political Weekly.
                                                                                                 11


recently, ADB has supported geographic targeting of energy assistance to those areas which
are relatively disadvantaged, such as Gansu in the PRC, and Madhya Pradesh in India, in order
to localize direct and indirect effects in the poorer regions of DMCs.

                       Table 5: Public Investment and Poverty Reduction

                                                Ranking of Returns in Poverty Reduction

                                                PRC         India      Thailand       Viet Nam
          Agriculture Research and               2            2           2               3
          Development
          Irrigation                              6           7             5              4
          Education                               1           3             4              1
          Roads                                   3           1             3              2
          Telecommunications                      5
          Electricity                             4           8             1
          Health                                              6
          Soil and Water Conservation                         5
          Anti-poverty programs                   7           4
         PRC = People's Republic of China
         Sources: Fan, Zhang and Zhang. 2002; Fan, Hazell and Thorat. 1999; Fan, Jitsuchon and
         Methakunnavut. 2002; and Hao and Fan. 2001.

29.    The above suggests a wider analysis of the role of energy and poverty reduction should
underpin the next review of the energy policy. While opportunities should be taken to sharpen
the focus of some energy projects on the poor, the revised policy should not provide guidance to
require staff to attribute poverty reduction to most operations in the energy sector. This is
consistent with the recommendation in the enhanced poverty reduction policy to move away
from attributing poverty reduction at the project level and for ADB to focus more on monitoring
poverty at the aggregate level.

C.      Promoting Private Sector Participation

30.     ADB actively promoted private sector participation in the energy sector through (i)
private sector operations, providing equity participation, direct financing, co-financing, and loan
guarantees for private energy projects; (ii) supporting sector restructuring that typically involves
(a) creating an enabling environment for the private sector; (b) creating an independent
regulator and separating generation, transmission and distribution functions; and (c) privatizing
power companies; and (iii) enhancing standards of governance and management. In many
cases these approaches draw on best practice in the private sector, follow similar management
principles, and may involve input from private firms.

31.     Strategies and techniques have changed in the light of experience gained, demonstrated
best international practice and changing circumstances. In the early 1990s, efforts were made to
promote independent power producers (IPPs). Many countries in the region adopted the
necessary enabling legislation, sometimes with ADB support. This led to a number of IPPs, with
varying degrees of operational and financial success. More recently the focus has been on
comprehensive sector restructuring leading, eventually, to full or extensive privatization of the
sector. This is taking place in some countries, albeit slowly. Good governance, at both the
sector and project levels, has become a growing priority for ADB as it has been learned that
delays in achieving privatization and high levels of investment in the power sector reflect, in
part, problems related to governance.
12


32.     Build Operate and Transfer (BOT) schemes shift responsibility for generation projects to
the private sector, while the government and utilities remain responsible for development and
operation of the power system as a whole. Project sponsors receive a limited right of ownership
over a new facility, or concession, for 20 or 30 years, after which ownership of the project assets
reverts to the government or utility. This keeps debt off utility balance sheets, but creates large
contingent liabilities which are often not noted in the accounts of governments or utilities and
complicates the evaluation of the financial risk of the power purchase agreement (PPA) to
offtakers.

33.     The first regional IPPs were promoted by international energy groups wishing to expand
their operations to Asia, but subsequent events in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis and
the renegotiation of many contracts led to the decline of interest. Too many PPAs were based
on overly optimistic forecasts of tariff increases and demand and/or actual undersupply leading
to an oversupply of capacity. As a result, many governments were shouldered with contractual
obligations for capacity which was not needed. Some IPPs were developed without open,
transparent bidding and involved inflated costs and allegations of corruption. The foreign
currency needs to service dollar denominated loans related to PPAs placed increasing financial
burdens on affected DMCs, especially in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis. In some
cases, a 100% tariff increase was needed to cover the required foreign currency loan
repayments.

34.      In response to the oversupply in capacity, some countries, including India, Indonesia,
Pakistan, Philippines, and the PRC renegotiated PPAs. Renegotiations of PPAs have impacted
on the willingness of private investors to invest in new projects as perceived political and
country risks are now greater and hence financing costs are higher. Although these negotiations
reduced the profitability of the IPPs, the resulting lower tariffs saved consumers millions of
dollars on their power bills across the Asia Pacific region. On the other hand, the investment
value of the IPPs declined significantly. Regulatory uncertainty has also undermined the
promotion of private sector investments. Supreme Court challenges to Energy Regulatory
Commission rulings in the Philippines and lack of progress in establishing a well functioning
regulatory regime in Bangladesh and other countries continue to dampen investment in the
power sector. As a result of the uncertainty of contract enforceability, commercial lending
institutions and investors have become more risk-averse. International private sector finance for
generation infrastructure has been limited in the last six years and international banks now
require an equity contribution in the order of 50%. Previously, IPPs with government guaranteed
off-take agreements, were able to finance their plant with equity contributions as low as 20%.

35.      In 2003 OED conducted an evaluation of IPPs and PPAs.14 That evaluation concluded
that PPAs should be written to spread risks more fairly between the country and IPP. The main
concerns were (i) their relatively long duration; (ii) the fixed prices, designed to create a stable
and certain revenue stream for the IPP; (iii) lack of requirement for the IPP to assume any
market risk; (iv) contract provisions that are less demanding than detailed market rules which
are designed to promote increased efficiency and competition; and (v) failure to design them for
transition to a competitive market. PPAs used in the newer projects financed by ADB, including
Nam Theun 215 in Lao PDR and the private sector generation project in Bangladesh reflect the
recommended changes. Proposed ADB assistance for projects in Viet Nam is also designated
to ensure greater risk sharing between IPPs and DMC governments.


14
     ADB. 2003. Cost Recovery in the Power Sector. Manila.
15
     ADB. 2005. Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project. 2005. (Loan 2161).
                                                                                                     13


36.     While international interest in IPP investment has diminished, there has been increased
interest from local investors. For example in Bangladesh and Viet Nam, which have poorly
developed capital markets, local investors are willing to promote IPP projects. The Karachi
Electricity Supply Corporation (KESC) was sold to a local investor. In India the 2003 Electricity
Act and the creation of PTC India Limited (formerly the Power Trading Corporation) have given
significant impetus to IPPs. PTC now acts as an intermediary between the state electricity
boards and IPPs holding long term PPAs with both purchasers and sellers and enabling IPPs to
securitize the off-take. Power trading is growing and allowing better matching of demand
shortfalls with supply surpluses. During 2004/05, 3,949 megawatts (MW) of new IPP capacity
was added in India and there has been financial closure on 4,000 MW of new IPP capacity
since January 2006. Both ADB's public and private sector operations are participating in IPP
projects in many DMCs.

37.     The involvement of local investors can help remove some of the foreign exchange risks,
although foreign investors within the region can also mitigate this risk by designing their
financing packages accordingly. There is also some evidence of a growing interest of some
companies in the region to invest in the power sector in other DMCs. The leading Indian thermal
generator, National Thermal Power Corporation, is considering investing in Sri Lanka. An Indian
private group has been considering a group of investments in Bangladesh, including a coal fired
power station. A series of hydropower projects in Lao PDR are designed to sell power to
Thailand and the PRC companies are building power plants in Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar
and Viet Nam with plans for a plant in Mongolia. This suggests that there is considerable scope
expanded ADB involvement in this sector.

            1.       Private Sector Operations

38.      ADB has taken an active and growing role in financing private power generation
investments. From 1996 to 2000, the total ADB equity, lending, partial credit guarantees,
political risk guarantees and commercial co-financing using the complementary financing
scheme in the energy sector totaled $557 million. In the period 2001--2006, this more than
tripled to $1,722 million. Most of these projects involved new thermal generation projects (68%).
The level of private interest in generation projects and in natural gas distribution and storage
enabled ADB to continue support large scale generation and gas transmission projects despite
the sharp fall in public sector lending for such projects.

39.     OED has evaluated several private sector energy projects in Bangladesh, India, the
PRC, and Sri Lanka. All these projects were rated as successful (see Appendix 2). More recent
projects under development show a marked increase in due diligence, particularly in generation
and fuel transmission relative to earlier projects.16

40.     The benefits of ADB's involvement in private sector power projects extend beyond its
financial contributions. Its involvement has supported progress on reforms, given confidence to
other investors, encouraged the adoption of best practice and supported demonstration
projects. The investment in the Bangladesh project illustrates best practice (Box 1). In the case
of the Indian project, only a small ADB financial participation was required to help make the
project viable. This pioneering project demonstrated a replicable model. Similar projects are
now being financed without ADB support.



16
     Confidentiality provisions in ADB private sector loans preclude divulging lenders identities.
14


41.      As part of the field study of this evaluation, interviews were conducted with project
sponsors' senior executives to gain feedback of ADB's performance. Executives interviewed felt
that a major benefit of ADB's involvement was to facilitate interactions between their
corporations and the counties in which they were operating, particularly in times of difficulty.
This involved staff from both ADB headquarters and the resident missions. ADB was
instrumental in helping to settle the tariff dispute between a project and the offtaker in the PRC.
In Sri Lanka, ADB helped in (i) negotiating the Sri Lanka Government's counter-guarantee; and
(ii) resolving payment issues during an industrial accident at the project plant. One of the major
advantages of ADB's involvement is the ability of the public and private sides of ADB to work
together to resolve problems. Executives interviewed believed that there is a conflict of interest
between ADB debt and equity participation in one project (e.g., if there is a renegotiation of a
PPA). One executive expressed regret about the limitations imposed on ADB's participation in
any one project and with a single company as the sponsor wanted to increase its ADB
borrowing.17 There was a very high level of satisfaction overall expressed by all executives on
the partnership of the sponsor with ADB, and all indicated that ADB's large public sector
involvement in the countries where their projects were developed provided intangible additional
security. Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) staff interviewed during the evaluation
also noted the high level of professional assistance and country and sector knowledge provided
by resident missions in facilitating PSOD projects.

42.    Feedback from the interviews indicated that ADB funding has two major benefits
compared to other lenders (i) ADB private sector department is perceived to be superior with
respect to other multilateral agencies in its approach to contractual arrangements, and (ii) ADB's
PSOD has an advantage compared to other lenders as it interacts directly with its counterparts
in ADB's public sector operations.

43.     Successful outcomes in these projects can be attributed to (i) financially strong
sponsors; (ii) equitable sharing of risks by sponsors and offtakers; (iii) the synergy effect
between ADB private and public sector operations; (iv) the "intangible" value of ADB
participation which provides assurances to other co-financiers; (v) ADB's strong private sector
project finance experience and expertise comparable to international banks; and (vi) ADB's
willingness to respond to changing client needs.




17
     Asian Development Bank has responded to these concerns and these limits have recently been increased.
                                                                                                                         15



                                  Box 1: Generation Project in Bangladesh

  The project is an example of best practice for securing a large individual power producer contract. The project
  was the first major initiative designed to involve the private sector in improving Bangladesh's power sector.
  Asian Development Bank (ADB) was instrumental in planning and securing private sector participation by
  providing technical assistance to help the Bangladesh Power Development Board implement the project by
  developing procedures, guidelines, and documents for bidding among private sector sponsors, as well as
  evaluating their proposals. A fair and transparent international competitive bidding and evaluation process was
  carried out, resulting in the successful conclusion of a contract with Company II, a private power developer.
  The levelized 2.8 cents per kWh (at 2000 prices, with gas priced at $2.4/GJ) tariff reduced Bangladesh's
  average costs of generation. The reasons for the success of the project are:
         (i) Through an open bidding process supported with ADB technical assistance, Bangladesh secured
               competition for the concession, avoiding problems created elsewhere in Asia where acceptance of
               unsolicited bids resulted in high-cost, unsustainable contracts that were sometimes tainted with
               allegations of favoritism and corruption.
         (ii) Several closely related contracts (concession, power purchase, and energy supply) could be drawn
               up in parallel. This complex process requires specialist contract management skills, which ADB
               was able to mobilize for the benefit of the Bangladesh authorities.
         (iii) The project was structured to minimize costs by allocating risks to the parties that are best able to
               manage them: (a) the developer bears the capital cost variation risks; (b) the operator bears the
               risks of providing capacity/availability; (c) the buyer bears the market demand variation risk as it
               manages dispatch and can minimize national costs of supply using the entire supply system; (d)
               ADB helped mitigate the credit risks for the sponsors and co-financiers through its participation in
               the project as a financier; and (e) energy cost variation risk is a pass-through cost to the buyer, who
               has the potential to pass this cost on to final consumers in the retail tariff.

  Source: Operations evaluation mission.



     2.        Public-Private Participation

44.     ADB has invested in a few projects with significant public sector inputs, which are private
public partnership investments rather than IPPs. The Nam Theun 2 (Lao PDR) hydropower
plant (footnote 15) will operate as a BOT generator. Risk sharing between the operators and the
Thailand offtakers has been effectively implemented and conforms to ADB energy sector policy
and recommendations.

45.     ADB has begun promoting a public private partnership in the energy sector in Viet Nam
for the O Mon and Mong Duong projects. TA was provided to develop the necessary framework
and legal documents in preparation for the bidding for O Mon. For each project, Electricity Viet
Nam will be the anchor for the project and capacity expansion will be provided by the private
sector. ADB public sector funds will be used to finance the common infrastructure, which will
reduce the risk and costs of the private sector investors and result in lower energy prices.

     3.        Unbundling of the Electricity Sector

46.     The unbundling of the energy sector involves separating government responsibilities for
sector policy from the regulation of the industry to ensure an equitable balance between the
interests of investors and consumers (see Appendix 3). It also involves splitting power sector
monopolies into generation, transmission and distribution companies. The unbundling is an
important step on the road to corporatization and possible privatization as it enables greater
private sector involvement. Asian countries have pursued unbundling policies with varying
degrees of success and ADB has supported this type of sector reform in many DMCs. While
there has been little progress in Sri Lanka, other countries (e.g., Bangladesh, India, Pakistan
16


and the Philippines) are at different stages in the unbundling process, supported in part by ADB
sponsored reform programs. ADB also provided some TA that positively supported the
restructuring of the energy sector in the PRC, a process which was planned and managed by
the government and not by donors. Appendix 3 provides more detailed information on these
projects.

47.     Unbundling the power sector has proven to be a lengthy, difficult process in many
countries. In Pakistan, new distribution companies are being created slowly from the unbundling
the Water and Power Development Authority. In Bangladesh, the Dhaka Electricity Supply
Company has been created and given financial and managerial autonomy but it is not able to
set its own tariffs which are decided by government. In India, in Assam, Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh some progress has been made in retail unbundling but there are continuing
discussions over the number of retailers in Assam and progress towards independence is
slower in Madhya Pradesh. All three states in India maintain the same tariffs for all retailers. In
Sri Lanka, no progress has been made on unbundling. In the Philippines, the power sector is
unbundled but many of the electricity cooperatives which dominate the retail business outside
Manila are insolvent, fail to pay for power purchases and require restructuring.

48.     The outcomes from ADB's participation in the unbundling process has led to more
financially viable organizations in the power sectors in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan,
and the Philippines. Complete privatization of the power sector was the ultimate aim in the 1995
Energy Policy and the 2000 Review. However, the outcomes from the successful restructuring
indicate that some of the efficiency gains expected through privatization can also be achieved
by public sector companies.

49.     The generation and transmission sectors can be restructured, with individual power
stations or groups of stations becoming generation companies and the transmission grid
remaining as a single entity. However, distribution raises challenging issues about the way in
which it should be restructured. Common issues include deciding the number of distribution
companies, the governance structure, the degree of independence of the new companies,
policies for reducing financial and technical losses, need for financial restructuring and how to
extend electrification to rural consumers. Unbundling is still work in progress across the Asia
Pacific region and further assistance will be required to maintain the reform momentum.

         4.       Independent Regulation

50.     ADB has provided assistance to the regulator in the Philippines (i.e., Energy Regulatory
Commission) and state regulators in Assam and Gujarat in India as well as supporting the
Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) region's regulatory group. In Sri Lanka
and Pakistan the World Bank has supported the regulator as part of an agreed division of labor
in the sector with ADB. Regulations and regulatory capacity in the power sector have been
developed with ADB assistance in India and the Philippines. Fair competition18 and open access
regulations are being developed and administered by regulators. This has enabled open access
to new players and the development of rules and sanctions to enable fair competition.

51.     Independent regulators help assure the viability of the power sector, promote the
efficient use of capital and protect consumers from monopoly pricing and operations from the
18
     A good, well enforced competition law can assist the building of a market economic infrastructure by protecting fair
     competition, preventing and checking monopolistic behavior and maintaining an orderly market place. Such laws
     are designed to prohibit monopolies from wielding their market status to curb competition, fix prices, enforce
     package sales and refuse or enforce trade.
                                                                                                                   17


politicization of tariffs. They require new skills and significant technical and financial assistance.
Regulators require considerable time to understand their role in changing markets, and to
effectively make use of their discretionary powers. Evaluation indicates that institutional
strengths in a newly created regulatory framework are generally weak and that the necessary
funding may not be readily forthcoming to develop the requisite depth and independence of the
human resources.

52.    Good tariff regulation promotes the recovery of total long run cost, reduces subsidies
and removes cross subsidies within and across tariffs. The evaluation study on Cost Recovery
in the Energy Sectors (footnote 14) identified many countries which were not fully recovering
costs. However, more progress has been made since the completion of that evaluation. India is
now committed to reducing cross subsidies to no more than 20 percent of the cost of supply and
recovering the full cost of supply. The Philippines is committed to removing all subsidies. In
Pakistan, the regulator has approved tariffs intended to fully recover costs.

53.     In India, the creation of independent regulation has proven to be a significant help in
removing the politics from tariff setting and creating an environment in which the power sector
can become more commercially focused. Regulators at both central and state levels are
demonstrating clear independence and using the internet and other publicity material as
vehicles for transparency. Appointment processes are sound and regulators are moving towards
financial independence by collecting revenues from the utilities rather than through state
budgets. Considerable effort is being expended to communicate responsibilities and
independence. For instance, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission regulator and the
three state regulators visited during the evaluation study ensure that official (State or Central
Governments and their agencies) communications to, and from, their commissions are made
public through their official web sites. Consumer participation in the regulatory process was
being mentored by the regulators in for instance Assam and Gujarat states, and the regulators
take into account both supply and demand side concerns. State and Central regulators are
increasingly taking a performance based approach for setting rates, although the major
revenues portion is still established through a normative cost plus basis.19 The OEM observed
that state regulators have set agreed targets with the distribution sector for loss reductions,
collection efficiencies and merit order dispatch of State owned generation assets.

54.    In Pakistan, the regulator is also performing in an independent and more transparent
manner and is helping to create a better commercial structure for IPPs, albeit with some
disputes. However, retail tariffs still have to be confirmed by government after regulatory
approval. This has impeded moves to commercial management in the utilities.

55.     Progress in the Philippines has been more mixed with both political interference in tariff
setting and the risk of appeals to the Supreme Court diminishing the regulator's effectiveness
and subsequently create regulatory uncertainty for potential bidders for the assets due to be
privatized. Oversight of the market through the application of the competition law funded by
ADB has also been the subject of legislative oversight, with a recent inquiry being held into the
bidding behavior of market participants in response to increased fuel costs.20 The responsibility
for this lies primarily with the Philippines Electricity Regulatory Commission. However, political


19
   At present, in the cost-plus structure, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission generation regulations provide for
   recovery of full fixed charges at 80% availability and incentive payment above 85% availability, subject to actual
   dispatch. Normative financing has been set at 30:70 equity to debt ratio, and regulated assets are allowed a 14%
   return on their equity.
20
   Operations evaluation mission.
18


and judicial interventions have created regulatory uncertainty for potential bidders for the assets
due to be privatized.

56.     In Bangladesh, the appointment of a regulator took place later in the reform process than
elsewhere in the Region. This has delayed independent tariff setting and the sector faces a
continuing financial crisis. In Sri Lanka, a regulator is in place but has not yet been given
responsibility for the power sector. Most regulators have made their initial tariff decisions for a
single year and on the basis of a cost based model. However, they appreciate the potential
benefits of moving towards multi- year performance based regulation. Regulators in India are
making moves in this direction. The regulator in the Philippines21 adopted performance based
regulation (see Appendix 4).

57.     Funding and encouraging independent regulation has been a key factor in promoting
commercial practices in the region. Regulators are learning from one another and from
international best practice. In discussions during the evaluation, regulators raised issues related
to financially competitive salaries, career structures for regulatory staff, training staff, and
develop methods of achieving financial independence and means of sharing information about
best practice. ADB has promoted dialogue between power sector regulators and policy
developers through TA. Regional cooperation initiatives for regulators in the Greater Mekong
Subregion and Central Asia have also been powerful tools in sharing and promoting best
practice.

         5.       Restructuring and Privatization

58.     There have been several sales of power sector assets in the Asia Pacific region. In the
Philippines, as part of ongoing ADB supported reforms to assist restructuring and privatization,
some generating stations have been sold to private investors. The sale of the Philippines
transmission company franchise was postponed several times through failed bidding and
uncertainty over the structure of the franchise. There have also been failures in the sale of some
generating plants. In India, some shares in National Thermal Power Corporation have been sold
to the public through a stock offering, although the Government continues to be the majority
shareholder. In Pakistan, the Karachi Electric Supply Company was sold to a consortium led by
a local investor. In Bangladesh, some distribution areas have been transferred from Dhaka
Electricity Supply Authority to cooperatives. However, in general privatization has been slow
and difficult with some failures and those which have been completed taking longer than
expected.

         6.       Promoting Good Governance

59.     The term governance is used in this evaluation to describe the complex set of policy
processes and control relationships which occur between the various players in the energy
sector. Weak governance and the resulting lack of effective financial and monitoring systems in
the electricity sector resulted in poor decision-making and the proliferation of opaque
transactions can lead to power service utilities being used as an instrument for political
patronage and the exercise of public power for political gain.

60.    The lack of good governance has been one of the major impediments to energy reform
processes and is often synonymous with: (i) lack of stable political support, (ii) the lack of rule of

21
     The Philippine Transco and Distribution regulations, including competition legislation, were formulated as part of
     ADB's support for the restructuring of the Philippine electricity sector.
                                                                                                            19


law, (iii) presence of weak institutions to implement reforms, and (iv) the presence of
widespread corruption. These are some of the bottlenecks that have prevented the energy
sector from effective operation and delivery of reforms that lead to sustainable operations and
efficient delivery of electricity.22

61.     To address these issues, good corporate governance became one of ADB's major
operational priorities in the 2000 Review. Operational challenges and issues included: (i)
establishing modern financial control systems; (ii) achieving cost effective procurement of goods
and services; (iii) improving the productivity and efficiency of power systems; (iv) reducing
losses in power transmission and distribution; and (v) controlling theft and corruption. The 2000
Review states that these issues can be best addressed by ADB helping to improve governance
in the sector's operation.

62.    ADB has used covenants in loans to try to increase governance levels.23 Some projects
have included explicit courses of action related to good governance and anti-corruption
measures. 24 Most projects adopted standard ADB guidelines on use of consultants,
procurement, financial analysis, auditing, and incorporation of the social dimension. As a result
of ADB assistance, many DMCs have introduced private sector style corporate governance
measures for their energy sectors while retaining public sector ownership. The techniques
adopted include:

        (i)      Creating companies under the Companies Act rather than as public corporations
                 with the intention that they should act commercially even though they are publicly
                 owned. Examples include the creation of the Dhaka Electricity Supply Company
                 and the Power Grid Company of Bangladesh and the various successor entities
                 to State Electricity Boards in a number of Indian States. The Lanka Electricity
                 Company in Sri Lanka is a long standing example.
        (ii)     Bringing management into utilities from the private sector at senior levels, often
                 on term contracts (Gujarat State, India)
        (iii)    Appointing non executive directors with relevant private management expertise
                 to distribution companies (e.g., the newly created distribution companies in India
                 and Pakistan).
        (iv)     Basing appointments and promotions on merit rather than length of service as
                 non-performance related factors. The state government in Gujarat, India has
                 created a structure to ensure that senior power sector appointments are made on
                 merit and at arms length from the government.
        (v)      Franchising meter reading and bill collection to private companies (India).
        (vi)     Equitable risk sharing in PPA contracts (Bangladesh, Lao PDR).

63.     These measures are having positive effects, particularly in the generation and energy
distribution sectors. Competitive, transparent bidding is bringing down the cost of capital
equipment (see Box 1), and financial viability is slowly returning to the distribution sectors. In
India, the Gujarat State Electricity Board has managed to return to a profitable organization, with
reduced subsidies and no real increase in tariffs over 4 years as a result of improved
governance measures introduced as part of ADB loan requirements.


22
   Rao G.P. 2006. World Bank Energy Week.
23
   An illustrative sample of covenants is set out in Appendix 5.
24
   All the loans reviewed by the Operations Evaluation Mission included conditions to enhance transparency,
   accountability and participation. The evaluation also reviewed a random selection of 21 out of 130 technical
   assistance documents prepared in 2001--2005 and found no explicit governance and anti-corruption provisions.
20


64.      In the electricity industry, the major sources of corruption include grand scale petty theft
and smaller scale, high value procurement kickbacks and politically driven intervention (footnote
22). There are a few good practice examples of these issued being addressed in recent loans;
(i) theft of electricity is being reduced through governance measures which include matching of
feeder loads and meters (see Box 2); (ii) the unbundling of utilities which allows for comparisons
of financial performance and the disaggregation of costs and revenues by utility functions
(Bangladesh, India, the Philippines, and Sri Lanka); and (iii) the introduction of consumer
inclusivity by regulators which promote and enforce consumer interests in transparent decisions
(India, Pakistan and the Philippines). Furthermore, these measures are relatively permanent, as
they are applied at the institutional level and appeared to be having very high levels of success.

65.     Despite the application of standard governance and anti-corruption requirements in the
loan agreements for energy projects, some attempts to circumvent procurement processes have
been detected. By July 2006, ADB's Integrity Oversight Committee had imposed sanctions in 10
cases of proven fraud and corruption in the energy sector, all of which involved actions which
occurred during the procurement of goods and services, and other cases are under
investigations (Table A5.2, Appendix 5 summarizes actions taken). Attempts to ring fence ADB
projects to prevent them from being infected by corruption have not been totally successful.
Also, anti-corruption measures and monitoring of these in ADB funded projects does not ensure
that these measures will be applied to other funds used in the energy sector.

66.      The above suggests that some efforts are being made to improve governance across
the energy sector and reduce the opportunities for corruption in the energy sector. However,
these processes are slow to implement, and political resistance to changed organizational
operations and structures have caused delays. The lack of adequate information technology
and electronic billing and accounting systems, for instance, has been an impediment to a faster
roll-out of better governance measures in India. Also, independent regulators are not a feature
of all energy sectors in the region. Another impediment was noted in Madhya Pradesh State in
India, where 40,000 cases of prosecution for theft are in the courts. Delayed court decisions
may give the impression that anti-corruption measures are not implementable or are ineffective.

67.      The purpose of ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998) is to reduce the burden corruption
exacts from the governments and economies of the region. It has three objectives: (i) support
competitive markets and effective public administration, (ii) support explicit anticorruption efforts,
and (iii) ensure ADB-financed projects and its staff adhere to the highest ethical standards. The
2000 Review paid little attention to corruption, mentioning the word only twice in the context of
(i) energy shortages create opportunities for corruption; and (ii) power purchase agreements
associated with the IPPs. However, weak governance and incidence of corruption prevail in
energy sector operations in many DMCs. 25 ADB's second Governance and Anticorruption
Action Plan (2006) focuses on: (i) improved identification and management of governance and
corruption risks in country strategies and programs, and annual country portfolio review
missions; (ii) strengthened governance and anticorruption components in program and project
design; (iii) strengthened program and project administration and portfolio management; and (iv)
improved organizational structure, human resources and access to expertise. Its success will
depend upon how effectively the plan is implemented.



25
     The World Bank's recent research also underscore sector level governance risks mitigation, see Corruption in the
     Electricity Sector, A Pervasive Scourge in the Many Faces of Corruption Tacking Vulnerabilities at the Sector
     Level, in World Bank 2006, Many Faces of Corruption, Washington DC.
                                                                                                                   21


68.     Although some corruption risks are common across sectors (e.g., procurement), other
types of corruption vary by sector. Sector level governance is important and ADB's Second
Governance and Anticorruption Action Plan emphasizes this level of governance. Consistent
with this approach the energy strategy should provide staff with more guidance on how to
address corruption in the energy sector, in particular how to reduce opportunities for corruption.
Examples of types of corruption can occur at different phases of the project cycle in the energy
sector are shown in Appendix 5.

                                        Box 2: Reducing Non-technical Losses in Assam, India

          Electricity losses can have major adverse impacts on the financial performance of power utilities. Costs
          are incurred to produce and transmit the electricity but no revenue is received. It is not always clear how
          much of the losses are technical losses and how much results from the theft of electricity. Experience
          under an Asian Development Bank funded project in Assam State in India demonstrates that this
          problem can be successfully addressed. Strong leadership was provided by the regulator to enforce
          metering of feeders and set loss reduction targets. Transparency and accountability were improved by
          matching feeder data to Asian Development Bank funded computerized customer billing data. This
          allowed losses to be clearly identified as resulting from technical reasons or theft and the specific areas
          where problems were occurring. The figure below illustrates the positive impact of these initiatives in
          terms of significantly reduced losses. Because of this initiative and other measures to improve efficiency,
          the financial performance of the sector is improving, even in the absence of tariff increase. This example
          is being replicated in many other Indian state electricity boards, in Pakistan and the Philippines, and
          could be more widely adapted in other developing member countries.

                                       Results from a Pilot Loss Reduction Program in Assam


                                                               % Losses


                    80%
                    70%
                    60%
                    50%
                    40%
                    30%
                    20%
                    10%
                     0%
                              Oct-05



                                             Nov-05



                                                      Dec-05



                                                                Jan-06



                                                                          Feb-06




                                                                                            Apr-06



                                                                                                     May-06
                                                                                   Mar-06




          Source: ADB. 2007. India Energy Sector Assistance Program Evaluation (Forthcoming).


     7.       Internet and Information Technology

69.     The 2000 Review was written at the height of the Internet boom. In the circumstances it
is not surprising that it places particular emphasis on the internet and information technology. It
proposes that information technology applications could enhance transparency, reduce
transactions costs and improve customer services and suggests that ADB should "assist in
developing computer software for system operations and power exchange..." Many of these
hopes have been realized over the past five years. Regulators are using the Internet to make
their decision making more transparent. Utilities are using the Internet to communicate and
22


implementing new information technology systems to improve financial and commercial
management.

70.        The use of information technology is now commonly viewed as being fundamental in
improving corporate level as well as sector level governance. The use of the Internet and
information technology systems is now standard practice in utilities around the world. ADB has
little, if any, comparative advantage in advising on the use of information technology and still
less on the direct development of software. This can be more appropriately undertaken by
specialist firms. The particular emphasis on Internet and information technology is less relevant
in current circumstances and should therefore be reduced in ADB's revised energy policy and
these activities should be treated as part of the mainstream in managing a modern utility and/or
regulator.

     8.      Conclusions for Private Sector Participation

71.     There is clear evidence that the 2000 Review influenced ADB's private sector operations
in the energy sector. Since 2000 Review was adopted, ADB has been involved in the design of
a number of the major sector restructurings, for example, in Bangladesh, India, the Philippines,
Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Sectoral reforms helped to improve the enabling environment for
private sector investment in many DMCs. There was a two way interaction. The policy helped to
determine ADB's subsequent programs. But these programs, along with extensive discussions
with other development partners and with the World Bank in particular, led to an evolving
consensus on the desirability of power sector restructuring. This in turn, contributed to ADB's
2000 Review. The broad outlines of the 2000 Review have been translated into specific
programs tailored for the political economy of the DMCs. ADB funded projects and programs
have had considerable success in supporting the objective of enhancing private sector
involvement. Particularly for generation, a fall in public sector investment funded by ADB was
offset by a substantial increase in the number and value of private sector transactions involving
ADB. This change in the composition of ADB lending is consistent with the objectives of the
2000 Review. Progress in restructuring the power sector has been slower and more difficult
than anticipated in every country. In India, the restructuring undertaken in ADB led projects in
Assam, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh has improved the financial performance of these state
electricity boards, and in the Philippines the electricity sector as a whole returned its first profit
for many years in 2006. Overall, promoting private sector participation and principles helped to
increase efficiency in the power sector. Capital and operational efficiency provided through
private sector participation and independent regulatory control has freed public resources for
other interventions.

72.     The more recent sector reform projects (2001--2006) and accompanying TA in India
were rated as successful by the field study undertaken by the evaluation. The overall level of
success is higher than the sector reforms in the previous period in Bangladesh and the
Philippines. This indicates that lessons drawn from the previous period (1996--2000) and a shift
in strategy for greater commitment from DMCs have been effective in delivering the desired
reforms.

73.     ADB's private sector operations have been material both in terms of helping catalyze
industry reforms and public sector lending through TA to improve the enabling environment, and
through direct investment that helped reduce financiers' concerns about project risks.
Cooperation between ADB's public sector and private sector operations has facilitated private
sector investments in the energy sector. PSOD projects have had positive catalytic effect on
funding. The private sector projects reviewed in Bangladesh, India, the PRC and Sri Lanka also
                                                                                                                     23


had positive and sustainable effect on business practices. These effects include (i) world best
practice operations, (ii) exemplary safety records, and (iii) good community relations.

D.          Regional and Global Environmental Impacts

74.     One of the four strategic objectives in the 2000 Review was to help reduce adverse
regional and global environmental impacts. Since the 2000 Review, considerable work has been
undertaken on the science26 and economics (footnote 9) of GHG emissions and climate change.
ADB has implemented energy efficiency initiatives, renewable energy, and clean development
mechanisms (CDMs) initiatives, which all promote a reduction in greenhouse gases. Energy
efficiency initiatives have multiple positive effects (i) reducing input costs of capital and materials
required to produce the energy, (ii) decreasing the effect of greenhouse gas emission on the
environment, and (iii) increasing the fuel security of the energy consuming countries as imports
are reduced.

           1.       Energy Efficiency

75.     The 2000 Review maintained the objective of the 1995 Energy Policy in promoting
energy efficiency, and which cuts across various operational priorities identified in the policy.
While ADB energy policies have included these initiatives for many years, ADB's records show
that there has been little direct support for energy efficiency investments as a direct result of low
energy prices and inaccurate accounting.27

76.     Firstly the readily available and inexpensive fossil fuels and the cost of the technologies
to convert these to electricity were less expensive than the higher priced and more commercially
risky alternatives. For most of the 1990s the price of oil was $20 per barrel or less. Also, the
science and cost of externalities (e.g., anti-pollution, greenhouse gas abatement) was less well
known or ignored when options were considered for energy investments. In such circumstance
it should not be surprising that there was little demand for loans for energy efficiency or
renewable energy. ADB's initial focus in energy efficiency, clean energy and renewable energy
was on capacity building and the identification of projects suitable for these interventions, in
order to develop a pipeline of projects for funding.

77.     Secondly, ADB's accounting understates its contribution to energy efficiency. ADB has
supported many projects that contribute to energy efficiency but are not recorded as such. For
example, projects that upgrade overloaded transmission and distribution, will lead to reductions
in technical losses and a corresponding decrease in generation requirements contributing to
energy efficiency, lowering the cost of supply and leading to a subsequent lowering of
greenhouse gas emissions. This issue goes far beyond the energy sector. There are water
supply and irrigation projects that contribute to energy efficiency by using variable speed motors
or replacing a large number of inefficient lift pumps. Also projects for district heating and town
gas supply have increased energy efficiency and lowered coal use. Efforts are underway to
correct this measurement problem.



26
     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
27
     ADB's investments in energy efficiency included a $150 million credit line for Industrial Development Bank of India,
     used for large industrial energy efficiency projects (1995); a $100 million credit line to India Renewable Energy
     Development Agency used primarily for industrial bio-mass cogeneration, waste heat recovery and wind energy
     projects (1997); and equity fund investments in FondElec Global/Asia Clean Energy, Asia Clean Energy Fund
     (2003) and China Environment Fund (2003).
24


78.     The evaluation examined energy efficiency initiatives that were built into ADB operations
in the energy sector, including both supply side and demand side measures. The results
summarized below indicate that ADB has had a more positive impact on energy efficiency than
is apparent from the listing of projects that have energy efficiency in their name. ADB's energy
efficiency assistance was focused on helping DMCs in the design and implementation of
measures to improve efficiency of energy supply and use (common to the 1995 Energy Policy
supply side measure and demand side management), including reducing technical and non-
technical power losses.

79.     Supply side measures to encourage energy efficiency and conservation include (i)
encouraging utilities to rehabilitate and retrofit old generating units and substations to optimize
operational efficiency and prolong their useful lives (heat rates of many conventional thermal
power plants can be reduced from about 13,000 Btu (British thermal unit) per kWh (kilowatt
hour) to about 10,000 Btu per kWh); (ii) encouraging efficient and economic operations and
maintenance practices such as load management to shift peak demands to off-peak periods;
and (iii) promoting technologies such as cogeneration, which simultaneously improve fuel
consumption efficiency and reduce environmental emissions.

80.     The field study undertaken for the evaluation reviewed the energy efficiency implications
of two projects in the PRC: (i) Shanxi Environmental Improvement Project; and (ii) the Yunnan
Dachaoshan Power Transmission Project. Under both projects, inefficient boilers were replaced
with alternative sources of more efficient energy. Although these loans were approved before
the release of the 2000 Review, they were relevant in operationalizing the objectives and of the
policy. In both projects, significant capacity was developed by the executing agencies for better
environmental planning. In Shanxi, a large scale monitoring program has been established to
assess long term economic, social and environmental effects. The project also demonstrated
the link between better energy efficiency and reduced air pollution.

81.     The field study of the evaluation rated the PRC projects reviewed as "highly successful".
The Shanxi projects are seen as nationally important pilot project which can be replicated at
local and national levels and have contributed to national and provincial environmental policies.
In the project completion report the economic internal rate of return for the Shanxi projects was
conservatively estimated by not quantifying the environmental or health improvement benefits.
The recalculated economic internal rates of return for the three subprojects are respectively:
14.5%, compared with 23.9% at appraisal; 19.0%, compared with 14.1% at appraisal; and
16.1%, compared with 26.6% at appraisal. If the local and global environmental benefits were
considered, the rates of returns increase to 19.7%, 28.6% and 37.7% respectively. These will be
better captured once long term benefit monitoring is concluded in the region. The evaluation
estimated annual environmental benefits of the Shanxi project at $24 million (Table 6).

82.     In Yunnan ADB financed a transmission project to bring hydropower to Kunming. As part
of the project design, three coal fired power plants (Penshuidong; Kai Yuan and Xuan Wui) were
closed. Sulphurdioxide) and ash precipitation were reduced each year by 12,000 tons and
25,000 tons respectively and a large power plant was relocated from the central city. The
estimated economic benefit of the SO2 reduction is $3028 million per year. The project realized
the world's largest CDM trade at the time; however, ADB was not able to perform the
transaction.


28
      State Environment Protection Administration, estimates the net economic benefit of one ton of sulphur dioxide at
     $2,500 equivalent.
                                                                                                             25


             Table 6: Estimated Annual Benefits from Pollution Reductions in Shanxi

                                                                            Annual Value
                                               Tons         $/ton            $ millions
                    Sulphur dioxide (SO2)      8,771       2,500a                   21.93
                    Carbon dioxide (CO2)       5,840          10                     0.06
                    Methane (CH4)              7,685         250                     1.92
                    Total                                                           23.91
                a
                 Estimates of SO2 value.
                Source: Estimates of the State Environment Protection Administration, People's
                Republic of China, 2006.

83.     The PRC projects illustrate two important factors that contribute to development
success: local participation and demonstration effects. The evaluation observed a high level of
participation among the local and provincial government officials, local environmental bureaus
and the private sector, which suggests that these projects are sustainable. Based on the
evaluation mission's meetings with the local and the provincial officials, there was strong
executing agency ownership and involvement in the project in terms of decision making, local
funding and management. The projects are part of the provincial environmental master plans
and received strong support from the provincial government that will help to ensure long term
sustainability. Another important contribution of the projects is demonstrative effects. These
projects have been used as a learning experience for other interested institutions and provinces.
This is a good example of how ADB can help to achieve development results that extend well
beyond individual projects.

84.     Demand side measures include: (i) encouraging utilities to incorporate into their energy
planning models the key elements of integrated resource planning; (ii) organizing in utilities an
adequately staffed demand-side management group to plan and undertake demand-side
management activities; (iii) supporting such groups with appropriate training programs; and (iv)
using TA to prepare demand-side management master plans and components to be included in
projects. Demand side electrical and thermal energy efficiency projects are undertaken to
improve end-use energy consumption, managing energy or adopting efficient technologies or
processes. The Asia Least Cost Gas Abatement Strategy (ALGAS) project assessed the
potential for of energy efficiency improvements in some of the energy intensive sub-sectors and
concluded that energy savings from 30% to 50% are technically feasible in many industries and
many countries. Energy efficiency measures may be implemented either as "efficiency retrofits",
in which existing installations are improved through replacement with energy efficient
components or as energy efficiency investments at the design and planning stage by adopting
high performance technologies (See Appendix 6).

85.    An ADB financed study 29 completed in 2003 produced a framework for developing
demand side energy efficiency initiatives for the Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency which is
implementing the study's recommendations together with the state electricity boards and
community organizations. These included energy efficiency labeling programs, development of
accreditation of energy auditors and development of pilot projects to demonstrate the benefits of
energy efficiency. The evaluation rated the outcomes as successful and highly sustainable.




29
     ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance to India on Preparing the Energy Efficiency Enhancement Project. Manila (TA
     No. 3885).
26


86.      In the 1990s ADB financed a number of industrial demand side energy efficiency and
pollution abatement projects, mostly involving state owned enterprises in the PRC. These
projects involved replacing old, outdated production technologies with modern, energy efficient
cleaner production technologies. Of the 11 such loans, 9 were rated as successful and 2 as
partially successful upon completion. In the successful projects, energy was increased and
pollution was reduced.

87.     ADB projects have demonstrated clear links between energy efficiency initiatives and the
resulting improvement in environmental conditions. Box 3 below gives some illustrative
examples of this effect.

                   Box 3: Energy Efficiency Projects that Improved the Environment

 The People's Republic of China's energy policy objectives have progressed slowly from being production and
 distribution centered with the primary objective of facilitating rapid economic growth to promoting more
 sustainable growth, with greater concern for the environment. The Shanxi Environment Improvement project in
 PRC helped to improve the air quality of Taiyuan, Datong and Yangquan through the replacement of inefficient
 methods of energy generation. Ambient air quality improved due to the project. In Yangquan, for example, the
 district experienced Class II air quality only for 7 days in 2001. This had risen to 225 days in 2005. Similarly,
 Datong municipality Class II air quality conditions rose from 48 days in 2001 to 220 days in 2005. As a result of
 the Project, substantial reductions in air pollution have been observed.

 An Energy Conservation Project in Mongolia was designed to: (i) improve district heating reliability and reduce
 losses by rehabilitating critical sections of Ulaanbaatar's district heating systems, (ii) encourage end-use energy
 conservation through improved metering and demonstration projects, and (iii) improve operation and
 maintenance. The evaluation found that between 1999 and 2003, water flow per unit heat in the district heating
 network decreased by 13.7%.

 Examples of savings from demand-side energy efficiency projects in the PRC include for instance: (a) for a
 cement plant, electricity consumption per ton of production fell by 22% and dust emission were reduced by nearly
 7,000 tons per year; and (b) for a caustic soda factory replacing old mercury and diaphragm plants resulted in a
 36% saving in the tons of standard coal equivalent per ton of caustic soda produced.

 Source: Operations evaluation mission.



                  a.      Energy Efficiency and Tariffs

88.     Price signals can be used to encourage energy conservation and efficiency of energy
use and capital. Demand side initiatives, in particular, time of use (TOU) tariffs, have been
successful in improving resource use in several DMCs (Appendix 7). In the Indian state of
Gujarat, the State Electricity Board bifurcated all rural feeder lines. Agricultural consumers now
receive power for eight hours a day, off peak, at a concessionary rate. Rural households and
villages are supplied continuously from a separate feeder. Because agricultural power is no
longer supplied at system peak, 500 MW has been removed from the peak load and the load
curve is almost flat. This load pattern improves the efficiency of the power sector and reduces
the need to invest in peak load generation capacity. Households now have continuous supplies
while farmers appreciate the improved reliability for the eight hour connection period and have
accepted the change. In the state of Assam, an optional time of day tariff was introduced. This
moved about 7% of demand away from the system and made the load curve significantly flatter.
Consumers appreciated the new tariff and the resulting improved reliability of supply.

89.   In Hunan Province in the PRC, TOU tariffs were introduced. This encouraged a shift of
1,200 MW from peak to off-peak periods, freeing up reserves. Guanzhou and Shanghai have
                                                                                                                       27


introduced similar tariffs and report significant shifts in consumption. Fujian Province has lower
tariffs for energy efficient industries and a penalty tariff for low efficiency "sunset" industries.
KVa tariffs have been widely implemented in the PRC, and to a lesser extent in India which
encourages the use of power factor correction.30

90.     The experience gained under these projects demonstrates that TOU tariffs enhance
supply side efficiency by reducing the need for investment in additional peaking plants as load is
shifted from peak to off peak. The load shift also releases capacity in transmission and
distribution. TOU wholesale pricing (supply side TOU) encourages the development of plant to
serve peaking loads (India, the Philippines) (Appendix 7). These evaluation findings indicate
that market based signals in the form of TOU tariffs can be a powerful incentive to encourage
energy efficiency initiatives. Tariffs can be used to encourage the customers of electricity utilities
to change their behavior in ways that result in energy conservation, less capital investment and
less emission from the energy sector.

           2.        Renewable Energy and Climate Change

91.     Overall, ADB's lending for renewable energy has been very limited, accounting for about
3% of the total energy sector lending (Table 3). ADB has mobilized several donor funds to
promote renewable energy, climate change, and energy efficiency. The evaluation reviewed the
Indian Renewable Energy Development Authority (IREDA) Project that funded 318 MW of wind,
biomass cogeneration, landfill gas and solar energy projects. Renewable energy projects
avoided increases in emissions that would otherwise have been produced by fossil fueled
plants. The project has had a catalytic effect on mobilizing funding for the renewable energy
sector, and has led to sustainable private sector investment and financing of wind generation.
IREDA has become a successful source for ongoing financing of new renewable energy
projects, although competition from commercial banks, and a lack of inexpensive funds, has
limited their capacity to fund wind power projects. Expertise gained by IREDA has led to them
be recognized as the leading source for appraisal of renewable energy projects and for funding
viable cogeneration, solar and landfill gas generation projects. Both changes in investors, who
are now predominately driven by energy generation rather than (previously) fiscal incentives,
and better project appraisal skills, are reflected in the improvement of the company's balance
sheet.

92.      ADB's experience with a wind power project in the PRC demonstrates the commercial
viability challenges faced by renewable energy projects. This $58 million loan was approved in
2000 and was designed to finance 78 MW of generating capacity in wind farms in three
provinces ­ Xinjiang, Heilongjiang and Liaoning. However, the loan was cancelled and not
implemented because the tariff needed to make the wind farms commercially viable far
exceeded the cost of generating electricity from coal fired thermal plants. The lesson from this
experience is that the legal/policy/regulatory framework needs to be in place to encourage
investment in renewable energy. The PRC adopted a Renewable Energy Law in 2006. This,
together with the increased price of coal and oil and a fall in the price of wind turbines has
improved the investment climate for wind power.

93.   Increases in the cost of energy and a growing awareness of the environment/energy
nexus have contributed to an increase in ADB funding for renewable energy. Recent projects
30
     Power factor is the ratio between the KW and the kilovolt amperes (KVA) drawn by an electrical load where the KW
     is the actual load power and the KVA is the apparent load power. It is a measure of how effectively the current is
     being converted into useful work output and more particularly is a good indicator of the effect of the load current on
     the efficiency of the supply system.
28


include: (i) a $161 loan for renewable energy in Indonesia; and (iii) a $515 million Multitranche
Financing Facility for renewable energy development in Pakistan. The private sector can also
play a role in financing target renewable energy and energy efficiency projects. ADB has
invested in two equity funds [e.g., Asia Clean Energy Fund ($20 million, 2003) and the China
Environment Fund ($10 million, 2002)].

        3.       Clean Development Mechanism Projects

94.      Consistent with the objectives of the 2000 Review, ADB has supported pilot projects to
help DMCs use the CDM through the CDM Facility (CDMF)31 launched in August 2003 for a
three year pilot period. The objective of this facility is to help DMCs to benefit from the CDM in
achieving sustainable development in three ways (i) by sourcing funds for emission reductions;
(ii) by processing CDM requirements for identified projects; and (iii) by providing information and
advice on the emerging carbon markets. The facility aims to add value to projects in ADB's
lending portfolio by providing support during the project preparation stage. Projects supported
by, and marketed through, the CDMF have attracted competitive offers from buyers. There is
now greater awareness of CDM opportunities in ADB and several project-related TA projects
now incorporate assistance for CDM-specific components. However, there is still a need to fully
integrate CDM activities into ADB's project processing.

95.     The first project supported by the CDMF was the Fuxin Coal Bed Methane/Coal Mine
Methane Utilization Project (a sub-component of the Liaoning Environmental Improvement
Project) in the PRC.32 The project is expected to generate approximately 4.5 million tons of
carbon dioxide equivalent in carbon emission reductions over the first 7-year crediting period.
ADB's $70 million loan and the $15.8 million for certified emissions reduction financed half of
the $161 million cost. The carbon credits have an estimated net present value of above $40
million. The CDMF has also supported several waste management projects, including the
Shandong Hai River Basin Pollution Control Project.33 This component is reflected in the design
and financing plan and ADB will continue to assist through the marketing of the resulting
emission reduction credits.

96.     The CDM component of the Uttaranchal Hydropower Project 34 is currently at the
validation stage. The CDMF's process has been synchronized with the actual processing of the
project by ADB project teams. ADB, through the CDMF, is actively assisting the project
developer to market the expected carbon emission reductions worldwide.




31
   ADB. 2003. Clean Development Mechanism Facility. Manila (IN 192-03).
32
   ADB. 2004. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Loan to the PRC for the
   Liaoning Environmental Improvement Project. Manila (Loan 2112).
33
   ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   PRC for the Shadong Hai River Basin Pollution Control Project. Manila (Loan 2337). The original design of the
   three solid waste management sub-projects was to construct a sanitary landfill that would prevent leachate seeping
   into water bodies, therefore improving environmental conditions of the entire Basin. However, there was no
   effective control method for the landfill gas, which is both odorous and a safety hazard. Since approximately 50%
   of landfill gas consists of methane - a powerful greenhouse gas but also a valuable and clean energy source - the
   CDMF assisted feasibility studies and conducted capacity building seminars to build a gas recovery and utilization
   component into the project design.
34
    ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility to IND for the Uttaranchal Power Sector Investment Program. Manila (Loan 2309).
                                                                                                         29


        4.      New Initiatives

97.      ADB's Clean Energy and Environment Program includes the following components: (i)
the 2006 Energy Efficiency Initiative to increase energy efficiency investments to at least $1
billion a year; (ii) the Carbon Market Initiative to catalyze greater investments in clean energy;
(iii) the Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency and Climate Change program to promote clean
energy; and (iv) establishing knowledge hubs in the PRC, Thailand and India. The details of this
program are given in Appendix 6. Given the early stage of implementation, it is too early to
evaluate the success of the Clean Energy and Environment Program.

98.     Other recent initiatives in the PRC include (i) a project that aggregates industrial and
commercial customers and includes specific energy efficiency measures related to air-
conditioning, lighting and motors; and (ii) supporting an energy efficiency service company that
will implement energy efficiency projects for consumers using a $450 million revolving
guarantee to be administered by PSOD.

99.     Overall, ADB's contribution to addressing with the regional and global environmental
impacts of energy production though energy efficiency, renewable energy and CDM measures,
while limited, has provided some experience on which to build for the further development of
these initiatives. The impacts of high fuel prices and concerns about the environmental impacts
of fossil fuels and hydropower should provide greater impetus for these initiatives in the future.
ADB's lending volumes to support such initiatives are expected to increase.35

        5.      Environmental and Social Safeguards

100. In 2000, the World Commission on Dams (WCD) published its global review of dam
projects that, while recognizing the important contribution of dams, highlighted several
shortcomings including high variability in delivering predicted outcomes, impoverishment of
affected communities and limited success in dealing with environmental impacts. Many such
problems are attributed to project planning, but often there has been ineffective implementation
of mitigation measures during the operation phase. A study of four projects carried out for ADB
in 2002 similarly concluded that many problems were associated with project planning and
attributed them to weak public participation, inadequate attention to environmental protection
measures and monitoring, and lack of attention to livelihood restoration.36 Post-evaluation of the
Nam Leuk hydropower project in Lao PDR raised a number of issues that go beyond the
physical implementation timetable of a project, including how to replace lost fisheries and to
provide clean water supplies to affected communities.37

101. Many of the lessons learnt are reflected in ADB's framework of social, environmental
and sector policies, in particular related to the identification of project specific and cumulative
impacts and design of mitigation measures. Recommendations from project evaluations have
been incorporated into subsequent projects and resulted in improvements in the design and
delivery of more sustainable social and environmental mitigation programs in hydropower
projects, including the development of baseline data against which to monitor impacts. The
design of the Nam Theun 2 hydropower project (footnote 15), which became effective in May

35
   Indicative loan pipelines are in the order of $700 million for 2007 and $1.9 billion in 2008-2009.
36
   TA 5828-REG: Study on Large Dams and Recommended Practices. Final Report dated September 2002. The four
   dams studies were Nam Ngum 1 in Lao People's Democratic Republic, Victoria in Sri Lanks, Magat in the
   Philippines and Lingjintan in the People's Republic of China.
37
   ADB. 2004. Project Performance Audit Report on the Nam Leuk Hydropower Project. Manila (Loan No. 1456-LAO
   SF).
30


2005, reflected OED lessons from the difficulties experienced under the early hydropower
projects, In recent projects, extensive consultations have been undertaken and alternative
mitigation options explored with local communities. Livelihood development measures also
cover upstream and downstream communities to offset any loss of income from fisheries.
Linkages have been developed to complementary programs such as the Biodiversity
Conservation Corridors Initiative (BCCI) to provide a more integrated approach to environmental
mitigation than possible through interventions on a single project. At a policy level, longer term
support to local communities is being explored with the Government through a proposed benefit
sharing arrangement.38

102. A major NGO concern is the equitable sharing of benefits of hydropower projects.
Whereas ADB approaches large scale energy projects with a macro view of costs and benefits,
there is a debate about the need for increased equity for those who are adversely affected by
large scale projects. Hydro projects in Lao PDR, contribute significantly to its GDP, and part of
the project revenues are allocated for spending on social services which should benefit many
citizens in the country. Not all local persons affected by projects involving dams have their
livelihoods restored. In the Zhejiang Shanxi Water Supply Project 39 about 11% of 35,000
affected households have not been able to restore their 1996 income levels. The post-relocation
support plan in 2002 outlined policies, principles, measures, and a budget for a 10-year plan;
and identified institutional arrangements for plan implementation. However, OED evaluation
concluded that there were insufficient funds to implement the plan.

103. An OED evaluation documented environmental problems associated with the coal fired
Mae Moh Thermal in Thailand. ADB had supported this large project with a series of loans
approved between 1972 and 1986. NGOs raised legitimate concerns about the air and water
pollution associated with the project that adversely impacted on environment and people living
in the areas. Subsequently flue gas de-sulfurization facilities were installed in 2001/2002 and
the level of sulfur dioxide was reduced to meet national standards. OED reports on more recent
coal-fired thermal plants in the Philippines and the PRC found that the environmental
performance was better.

104. The 2000 Review does not specifically mention ADB's safeguards for the environment,
the potential displacement of indigenous people and the general resettlement safeguards
inherent to energy infrastructure development. Specific references to these policies should be
provided in the updated ADB's policy for energy sector operations.

       6.      Conclusions to Regional and Global Environmental Impacts

105. ADB energy initiatives have addressed energy efficiency, renewable energy and clean
development mechanisms. Some of the energy projects had positive impacts on the
environment but in some cases ADB's safeguard policies were not adequate to mitigate adverse
environmental and social impacts. ADB's assistance for energy efficiency and renewable energy
for most of the evaluation period was mainly focused on robust policy dialogue and capacity
development. This has had a high level of success. The expected shift of greater lending
priorities for energy efficiency as well as the performance of the new Energy Efficiency Initiative
is too recent to evaluate. However, ADB's level of investment in energy efficiency and
renewable energy has been far below both the potential and the need. Energy prices have

38
   TA 4689-VIE: Developing Benefit Sharing Mechanisms for People Adversely Affected by Power Generation
   Projects, approved in November 2005 for $150,000.
39
   ADB. 1997. Loan to PRC for Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply Project. Manila (Loan 1544).
                                                                                                  31


increased significantly since 2000. This fact, together with recent successful ADB efforts to
mobilize concessional funds to support the Clean Energy and Environment Program and the
growing awareness of the risks associated with climate change, should create more
opportunities for ADB involvement in energy efficiency and renewable energy in the future.

106. A similar conclusion applies to ADB's efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
the energy sector and, more broadly to address issues related to global warming. Although ADB
has undertaken same policy/advocacy work and has developed a mechanism to promote
trading in the framework of the CDM, it remains to be seen whether ADB will be successful in
financing a significant volume of investments in this area. Low energy prices, which prevailed
during the early part of the evaluation period, did not provide the incentives to invest in these
areas.

E.     Promoting Regional Cooperation

107. The 2000 Review identified regional cooperation as a priority operation area for ADB in
the energy sector. The inaugural meeting of the Electric Power Forum within the framework of
the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) program was held in Myanmar in 1995. Since then,
significant achievements include agreements in hydropower trade and inter-country
transmission of energy supplies. To date there have been four regional power projects in the
GMS. Two projects involve hydropower development in Lao PDR for export to neighboring
countries. The others in Cambodia involve the installation of a transmission line from the Viet
Nam border to Phnom Penh.

108. There are three ongoing TA projects and one recently completed TA that intends to open
the GMS energy sector to greater opportunities for cooperation (see Appendix 8). Under the
GMS Program, cooperation in energy focuses on the development of the regional power market
and power trade arrangements, which involves providing (i) the policy and institutional
framework to promote opportunities for cooperation in regional power trade; and (ii) essential
grid interconnection infrastructure needed for the cross-border dispatch of power. While the
GMS region has diverse energy resources to feed the growing demand for electricity, the
geographic distribution of these resources is uneven. This provides a strong rationale for
promoting regional power trade as power trade can help secure a better balance in energy
supplies.

109. Enhanced energy connectivity is steadily being achieved under the GMS program
through construction of cross-border power transmission lines. Initially these lines serve to fulfill
bilateral but one-way trade arrangements (e.g., export of power from specific hydropower
projects in a surplus country) to the grid system of a power deficient country. Even this limited
power trade currently taking place in the GMS has generated substantial benefits to the parties--
Lao PDR's export of hydropower to Thailand increased its foreign exchange earnings and
multilateral and development community is working with the government to strengthen
governance issues to ensure that these funds are used to finance development programs.

110. Ongoing projects include the GMS Transmission Project (2003) and the Second Power
Transmission and Distribution Project (2006) both from Viet Nam to Cambodia. Currently, the
tariff in Sihanoukville ranges from $0.13 to $0.20/kWh. In rural towns, the rural electric
enterprises supply electricity at tariffs as high as $0.38-$0.68/kWh. Through these projects,
electricity imported from Viet Nam will have a delivered price in Sihanoukville of around
$0.08/kWh. The lower electricity prices will benefit consumers, and rural villages and
communities close to the transmission line that are currently not served will also be supplied
32


with electricity. An additional project linking Thailand to Northern Cambodia is expected to be
approved in 2007.

111. A regional TA for Developing the GMS Energy Strategy, 40 approved in 2006 aims to
expand cooperation among the member countries to meet rising energy needs and helps
develop a robust regional energy market. The TA is expected to (i) help articulate a clear vision
for GMS cooperation in the energy sector; (ii) formulate an action plan to address sector
challenges during 2006-2020 including issues such as social and environmental sustainability,
and energy security; (iii) identify priority investment projects including those for private sector
financing to intensify energy trade and investment in the region; and (iv) draw up an operating
framework to enhance regional energy security. The expected outcome of the TA is the
adoption by GMS countries of a regional energy strategy.

112. Although these successful GMS energy cooperation initiatives are consistent with the
2000 Review, the initiation of this activity was an integral part of ADB's GMS Program, rather
than something that was driven by the 2000 Review. These activities would likely have
happened whether or not regional cooperation was included as an explicit objective of the 2000
Review.

113. The four Central Asian countries in the CAREC region have unified power systems and
have existing gas and electricity trading mechanisms. However, ADB's experience promoting
regional cooperation in the energy sector in CAREC has been less encouraging. The 2002
Regional Power Transmission Modernization Project for Uzbekistan and Tajikistan tried to build
on the existing arrangements but suitable long-term agreements could not be put in place. The
aim was to modernize the transmission systems of the two countries and enhance the power
trade between them. However, the failure of the two governments to sign the power trade
agreement resulted in the cancellation of the two loans for the project. This suggests that the
project could have benefited from additional policy discussions prior to the approval of the loan.

114. Trading/cooperation in the energy sector has not been established in the other ADB
supported regional cooperation programs although there have been some bilateral
cooperation/trade in power between neighboring countries. Noteworthy is the trade in
hydroelectric power between Bhutan and India and less so between Nepal and India (limited to
power trading along border towns). The cross border power trading between Bhutan and India
had a positive fiscal impact on Bhutan, as was the case in Lao PDR.

115. Regional cooperation has been a continuing objective of ADB in the power sector but
results have been slow to materialize in some regions. Progress in developing regional power
markets has been slow in Central Asia despite ADB's efforts and there has very little progress in
South Asia that reflects ADB's involvement. ADB has been effective in ensuring equitable
negotiating positions that allow countries to come to agreements and has provided a venue to
involve other donors. ADB has provided an institutional mechanism in its GMS initiative through
ministerial conferences, forum and working groups to develop priorities and the program itself.
In these forums ADB has provided technical and administrative support that has contributed to
the progress that is being made in developing the framework to support cross border trading.
This institutional development has been complemented by lending to support regional power
projects in the GMS. In assessing the achievement of the regional cooperation objective of the
2000 Review, the lack of progress in these regions offsets the good progress in GMS.


40
     ADB. 2006. Developing the Greater Mekong Subregion Energy Sector Strategy. Manila (TA 6301-REG).
                                                                                                  33


                      IV.     EVALUATION OF ADB'S ENERGY POLICY

A.     Relevance and Strategic Positioning

116. Relevance was examined from the viewpoint of the continuing relevance of the goals of
the 2000 Review, taking into account the external context, the changing environment and
emerging issues, and the changes in the DMCs' capacities and needs.

       1.      The External Context

117. ADB's overall operational strategy was designed to support efforts to achieve higher
sustainable economic growth, to promote employment, and to reduce poverty. Earlier
assistance was focused on improving supply-side efficiency by reducing infrastructure
bottlenecks. Subsequently the focus was changed to increase emphasis in improving the policy,
institutional, and regulatory framework of the sector and to encourage private investment. More
recently, energy efficiency and the cumulative effects of energy production and consumption on
the environment have received increasing priority.

118. ADB and other development partners, particularly the World Bank, have been in
continuous dialogue with DMC governments, at the central and to a lesser extent state levels, to
support reforms in the power sector. That dialogue contributed to improvements in sector
structure, policies and institutions. TA projects, with a few exceptions, have contributed
positively to sector reform and performance improvement.

119. ADB has progressively developed and extended its energy policy and sector operations
since the 2000 Review in the changing economic and political context. Since the 2000 Review,
ADB has developed (i) a CDM facility (2003), (ii) the Energy Efficiency Initiative (2006) including
the Clean Energy Financing Partnership Facility (2007), and (iii) the Carbon Fund (2006). There
has also been an increased focus on governance reform in the sector. These revisions and
extensions to the policy were appropriate in the changing context and have increased the
relevance of ADB's energy sector operations. There has been a shift in the composition of
energy projects financed by ADB's public and private sector operations in response to the
changing infrastructure needs (Table 3). The policy direction has also been responsive to
changing external circumstances. The reduction in public sector lending for hydropower funding
and thermal generation reflected (i) initial lack of demand following the Asian financial crisis, and
(ii) once the level of demand was restored the increased role of the private sector in generation.
The number of independently funded generation facilities supported by ADB has increased
markedly since 2000. While efforts to mobilize private sector financing for the energy sector
needs to continue, there will remain a need for public sector funded energy infrastructure
investment in many countries.

120. Policies to support for sector reform and to increase private sector participation continue
to be relevant for most DMCs. However, privatization of the entire electricity sector was
envisioned for many countries at the time of the 2000 Review. This has lost some of its
relevance in many DMCs perhaps with the exception of Pakistan and the Philippines. Full
privatization has had limited success in the region. Stalled privatization (e.g., Indonesia,
Republic of Korea, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand) and strong resistance to
privatization (e.g., India, Indonesian Constitutional challenges, and Sri Lanka) indicate that the
overall aim of full privatization may no longer be relevant as a matter of policy. Rather,
privatization may perhaps better be viewed as one of the possible means to attain a higher level
of sector governance. Further, many of the DMCs have large unmet social obligations, such as
34


rural electrification programs which are not commercially profitable in the short or medium term
but which are needed to improve people's lives and help to address various dimensions of
poverty. It is unlikely that market based private operators would focus on rural electrification
without public sector support.

121. The relevance of the policy goals varies from country to country, depending on the stage
of development of the power sector. For instance, India became the largest ADB borrower for
energy sector development in the period 2001-2006 (28% of total energy lending) followed by
Bangladesh (17%). Countries like Malaysia and Thailand had, in the 1980s and early 1990s,
borrowed significant amounts for their power sectors have now developed to the level where
ADB funds are no longer needed. The level of energy related assistance from ADB and other
funding agencies will likely continue to be low for the DMCs with well developed financial
markets and commercially oriented, financially sound power sectors that have successfully
implemented sector reforms that created an enabling environment for private investment. Some
DMCs continue to have inadequate energy infrastructure and low technical and financial
capacities. These countries will continue to require access to public sector financing for power
sector development and capacity building before they become self sustaining. However, the
number of such countries is diminishing as reform of the power sector proceeds in the Asia
Pacific Region. Some small ADB loans had a catalytic effect to promote the entry of other
donors or the private sector finance. ADB's enduring presence in Bangladesh and the Theun-
Hinboun hydropower project in Lao PDR are examples where ADB's presence has catalyzed
additional donor or private funds.

           2.      The External Context: Aid Agencies and NGOs

122. The 2000 Review is congruent with the major energy initiatives and programs of other
multi-lateral agencies active in the power sector development (Appendix 9). The ADB energy
operational priorities are similar to those of the World Bank in terms of program instruments and
operations of its energy business lines. To address poverty reduction, ADB, the World Bank,
and the UN organizations placed high priority on improving access of the poor to modern energy
services, increasing the affordability of energy and improving the quality of energy supplied to
poor households. These agencies also share common desire to support sector restructuring,
improve sector governance, and to create an enabling environment for private investment in the
energy sector. The donor community has provided assistance to help DMCs formulate energy
sector policies that will facilitate and support market reforms, unbundle existing entities to
promote competitive environments, improve social services, ensure that energy subsidies are
pro-poor, and improve governance.

123. The ADB 2000 Review is congruent with the UN-Energy initiatives. In 2004, the UN-
Energy41 was created to promote coherence in the UN system's multi-disciplinary response to
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and other global initiatives. At the 2002 Summit,
linkages between energy and poverty reduction were established, and high priority was placed
on changing the unsustainable patterns of energy consumption and production. The
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, launched at the summit, underscored the need to work
together at all levels to achieve sustainable development goals for energy.

41
     The UN-Energy is comprised of 20 UN agencies that promote coherence in the multi-disciplinary response to the
     World Summit on Sustainable Development. It serves as a gateway for sharing information, knowledge on best
     practices on energy development, and promotes joint programming, harmonization and cooperation in energy-
     related activities of the UN organizations. It also promotes the effective engagement of non-UN stakeholders in
     implementing World Summit on Sustainable Development energy-related decisions. The World Bank is an active
     member of the UN-Energy.
                                                                                                 35



124. The energy policies of ADB and the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC)
diverge on issues such as private sector involvement, governance, regional cooperation and the
strategy to promote public sector financing of generation. The JBIC policy does not cover these
issues. However, on other policy issues there is a high level of congruence between the two
institutions. Other donor agencies such as the Australian Agency for International Development,
the United States Agency for International Development, the Department for International
Development of the United Kingdom, and United Nations Development Program have more
specialized functions, but tend to support the general thrust of the ADB policy, but with a
narrower focus. In no case did the study identify major conflicting policy objectives between
ADB and the other development agencies. The jointly funded assistance modalities and the
cooperation between ADB and development agencies support this conclusion.

125. There is, however, some divergence between the ADB policy and the views of NGOs
with respect to funding hydropower and coal fired thermal generation plants. ADB has learned
some valuable lessons from the NGOs, particularly with respect to CDM, safeguards and
monitoring and has incorporated these as energy policy strategies and the design of more
recent projects. Nevertheless some differences remain that sometimes generate tensions
between ADB and some NGOs.

       3.      Rating of Relevance and Strategic Positioning

126. The 2000 Review is rated "highly relevant" and is responsive to changing external
environment and to the changing needs of the majority of ADB's client countries. It is sufficiently
broad to cover the divergent needs of the Asia Pacific region and supports and complements
the objectives of the other multilateral agencies. Some elements of the 2000 Review were rated
"highly relevant" (e.g., sector restructuring, increasing the role of the private sector). While the
elements of the strategy related to the regional and global environmental impacts were,
conceptually "highly relevant", but considering the limited lending during much of the evaluation
period for clean energy, renewable energy and clean development mechanisms the rating was
downgraded to "relevant". New funds that have been mobilized lately have largely addressed
the difficulties in operationalizing the strategy. The focus on poverty reduction as a major driver
of ADB's energy sector operations was over-emphasized. While efforts can and should be made
to make ADB operations in the energy sector pro-poor when there are opportunities to do so,
poverty reduction will not be the major strategic issue driving ADB positioning and project
selection in the energy sector. Rather, ADB should recognize the indirect impact of energy on
poverty reduction through economic growth and tailor its interventions to address the
development needs of the sector, which may vary from country to country. Changing
circumstances have diminished the need to include information technology in energy policies.

B.     Effectiveness

127. The effectiveness of the 2000 Review is assessed in terms of how the policy influenced
ADB's energy sector operations and by that achieving the underlying policy objectives such as
poverty reduction, private sector participation, the regional and global environment and regional
cooperation. The 2000 Review's overarching goal was to develop the energy sector so that it
helped to reduce poverty, by promoting private sector participation and regional cooperation and
minimizing adverse environmental effects. The policy's operational strategies to deliver the
intended impacts involved in the efficient and effective delivery of TA and lending. In terms of
project outcomes, the ADB benchmark for satisfactory outcomes is for 80% of projects to be
rated as successful by the Operations Evaluation Department. Evaluation results show that the
36


energy sector is one of ADB's best performing sectors with 82% of the energy projects rated as
successful or highly successful (Appendix 1).42 The level of success improved over time--78%
success rate for energy projects approved during the 1970s and 1980s; 87% for the 1990s. In
successful power projects (i) benefits were immediate once the projects were completed, due to
existing excess demand; (ii) increased electricity supply facilitated economic growth and
contributed to a better quality of life; (iii) financial policy dialogue and tariff reform helped to
provide more funding for investment, operation, and maintenance; and (iv) there were strong
project management teams in most executing agencies that had learned lessons from previous
projects.

           1.      Poverty Reduction

128. Given the limited impact of poverty considerations in making decisions on whether ADB
should select the energy sector as one of its focal areas in particular DMCs, the relatively weak
direct relationship between energy level investments and poverty reduction and the limited
evidence that poverty considerations drove project selection, the poverty objective of the 2000
Review is rated "partly effective". The poverty dimension of the policy was "relevant" as it was
consistent with the external context and ADB's overarching goal. These strategic concerns
override the efforts made to make some energy projects more pro-poor and the evaluation
evidence of the positive impact of access to electricity on the lives of the rural poor. For most of
ADB's energy sector operations the poverty reduction objective was to be indirectly achieved
through trickle down effects of economic growth to which the power sector development makes
a contribution.

           2.      Private Sector Participation

129. There is clear evidence that the 2000 Review influenced ADB's private sector operations
in the energy sector. Since the 2000 Review, ADB has been involved in the design of a number
of the major sector restructurings. Sectoral reforms helped to improve sector governance and
the enabling environment for private sector investment. The broad outlines of the 2000 Review
have been successfully translated into specific programs tailored to the political economy
conditions prevailing in the country.

130. ADB funded projects and programs have had considerable success in supporting the
objective of enhancing private sector involvement in the energy sector. The change in the
composition of ADB lending is consistent with the objectives of the 2000 Review. The private
sector dimensions of the policy are rated "highly relevant" and "highly effective". Overall,
promoting private sector participation and principles helped to increase efficiency in the power
sector. Capital and operational efficiency provided through private sector participation and
independent regulatory control has freed public resources for other interventions. However,
progress in restructuring the power sector has been slower and more difficult than anticipated in
every country. This suggests that ADB should be engaged in the sector for a decade or more if
it wishes to play a major role in supporting sector reform.

131. The more recent sector reform projects (2001--2006) and accompanying TA were rated
as successful and the overall level of success is higher than the sector reforms in the period


42
     Operations Evaluation Department database. The corresponding success rated for all ADB projects approved in
     the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s were 60%, 58% and 64% respectively. The transport sector is the only other sector
     for which outcomes exceed the 80% benchmark for satisfactory performance.
                                                                                                  37


1996--2000. This indicates that lessons drawn from the previous period and a greater
commitment from DMCs have been increasingly effective in delivering the desired reforms.

132. ADB's private sector operations have been material both in terms of helping catalyze
industry reforms and public sector lending through TA to improve the enabling environment, and
through direct investment that helped reduce financiers' concerns about project risks.
Cooperation between ADB's public sector and private sector operations has facilitated private
sector investments in the energy sector. ADB's support for private power generation projects
increased sharply after 2000 and there was a corresponding decline in public sector lending for
generation. ADB supported private sector energy projects have had positive catalytic effect on
mobilizing funding. Private sector partners rate ADB's performance as satisfactory and
appreciate the value added associated with ADB's involvement. The private sector projects also
had positive and sustainable effect on business practices, including (i) world best practice
operations, (ii) exemplary safety records, and (iii) good community relations. The 2000 Review
is rated "highly relevant" and "highly effective" in achieving private sector participation in energy
sector, both at the sector reform/policy level and at the individual transaction level.

       3.      Regional and Global Environmental Impacts

133. ADB's assistance for energy efficiency for most of the evaluation period was mainly
focused on policy dialogue and capacity development. ADB's level of investment in energy
efficiency was far below both the potential and the need. Low energy prices, which prevailed
during the early part of the evaluation period, and weaknesses in the policy, legal and regulatory
frameworks, did not provide the incentives for companies, households or governments to invest
in these areas. A similar conclusion applies to ADB efforts to support renewable energy, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector and, more broadly to address issues related
to global warming and other environmental issues in the energy sector.

134. Overall the energy efficiency and environmental element of the strategy is rated "highly
relevant" but its implementation is rated "partly effective", given the low volume of lending in
these areas. Consistent with the 2000 Review, ADB has developed new modalities to better
position itself to promote energy efficiency, renewable energy, clean development mechanism,
and to promote the development of cleaner technologies in order to help address the regional
and global environmental impacts. These are new initiatives so it will be several years before
evaluation evidence is available to determine how successful these initiates will be. If these
mechanisms prove to be effective, it is likely that the volume of ADB's operations addressing the
regional and global environmental impacts will increase in the future and that the "partly
effective" rating would be upgraded to "effective".

       4.      Regional Cooperation

135. Regional cooperation has been a continuing objective of ADB in the power sector but,
except in GMS where some tangible success in terms of lending and institutional strengthening
has been achieved, efforts have been limited or results slow to materialize in South and Central
Asia sub-regions. ADB has been effective in ensuring equitable negotiating positions that allow
countries to come to agreements and has provided a venue to involve other donors. Institutional
development has been complemented by lending to support regional power projects. Overall,
ADB's efforts to promote regional cooperation in electricity sector are rated "relevant" and "partly
effective," with the good progress in GMS offset by the lack of progress elsewhere (see also
para 115).
38


           5.       Rating of Effectiveness

136. Based on the foregoing, the 2000 Review is rated as "effective". Of the 142 energy
projects that have been rated, 82% were rated as satisfactory or better. This was one of the
best results across all sectors in which ADB operates. The success rate for program loans for
energy sector development and reforms was lower at 70%. This reflects the difficulty of planning
and implementing sector reforms, a lesson that is common throughout the Asia Pacific Region.
Of the four pillars, the policy has successfully influenced sector reform and private sector
participation in energy sector. Both ADB's public and private sector lending operations benefited
from this. While there was evidence of being `effective' in regional cooperation in energy sector
in GMS, ADB has not yet been effective in doing so in other subregions. In other pillars --
poverty reduction, and regional and environmental impacts -- while the policy was relevant, but
its performance was rated as `partly effective' due to limited results. The evaluation noted that
while ADB has recently introduced new initiatives for energy efficiency, renewable energy and
the environment, it was too early to assess their outcomes.

C.         Efficiency

137. Efficiency in achieving the goals of the 2000 Review was assessed in terms of resource
use (in terms of return on investment), input efficiency, and processes including timeliness of
outcomes. Energy projects and programs overall have a high success rate in delivering
expected outcomes through efficient use of resources.

           1.       Resource Use

138. The ex-ante and ex-post economic internal rates of return (EIRR) for power projects are
compared in Appendix 10. All types of power projects (e.g., thermal and hydro generation;
transmission; distribution) have performed well. The ex-post EIRRs estimated at the time of
evaluation were lower than the estimates at the time of project approval for 61% of thermal
energy generation and half of transmission and distribution projects. Hydropower projects
performed better in terms of this criterion--EIRRs for half of hydropower projects reestimated in
the project performance audit reports exceeded the initial estimates. Reasons for the
divergence between ex-ante and ex-post EIRR estimates include (i) less than expected tariff
increases, (ii) higher than expected operating costs, (iii) lower than expected demand, and (iv)
delays in implementation. Despite being lower than expected, 51 of the 68 evaluated power
projects (75%) 43 achieved EIRRs at evaluation that were greater than or equal to the 12%
benchmark. Despite the lower ex-post EIRRs, evaluation results indicate that a clear majority of
the projects was economically justified the projects represented an efficient use of capital and
that the benefits generated are likely to be sustained.

139. Information is not available to compare the financial internal rates of return (FIRRs) with
the average weighted cost of capital for all projects. In 73% of the power projects evaluated, the
ex-post FIRRs were lower than the ex-ante estimates (Appendix 10). Lower FIRRs occurred in
75% of transmission and distribution projects, 88% of hydropower projects, and 62% of thermal
projects. Reasons for this include overoptimistic sales projections, failure to adjust tariffs to the
required levels, cost overruns, and implementation delays. For hydropower projects, lower than
expected power generation was sometimes due to less-than-expected water flow.



43
     78% of thermal projects; 77% of transmission and distribution projects, and 64% of hydropower projects.
                                                                                               39


       2.      Input Efficiency

140. There has generally been a good match between program, project and TA designs and
capabilities of the executing agencies. Most executing agencies in the energy sector have had
previous experience with ADB's loan requirements and have highly qualified project
management teams which can draw on significant internal technical expertise. This high level of
technical and project management skills were instrumental in the design, implementation and
subsequent operations of the generally successful project outcomes.

141. Project designs have benefited from incorporating the lessons from earlier projects.
Lessons learned from previous hydropower projects were incorporated into subsequent
designs, and funding for environmental and social mitigation measures was identified upfront as
separate line items of the loan. Power purchase agreements supported by ADB funding
promoted a more equitable sharing of risks between the individual power producer and the
offtaker. The increased extensive due diligence of external risks of private sector projects has
increased the potential for successful projects.

142. While the energy projects were generally successful, the evaluation noted that project
designs often did not clearly set out all options, and least cost outcomes described in project
documents were rarely justified. Alternative approaches were not fully analyzed. Capacity
additions were not assessed together with energy efficiency initiatives that have the potential to
avoid or reduce the additional capacity.

       3.      Processes

143. A consultative approach and strong client ownership were key ingredients of successful
projects. For many projects there was a comprehensive policy dialogue with the executing
agencies which helped to ensure that the ADB supported initiatives were relevant, appropriate
to sector needs and matched the capabilities of the executing agencies. Where knowledge was
limited, the project designs were more extensive, supported by TA projects for both project
preparatory and capacity building to address institutional weaknesses. A key to success was the
fact that ADB was involved in the sector in most countries over many years and became a
trusted adviser to the executing agencies. In some cases there was a considerable period of
time before lending commenced. Initial lending was generally preceded by extensive policy
dialogue which was used to develop clear road maps and consensus by ADB and the
government for the expected outcomes of the assistance.

144. Lack of compliance with financial covenants continues to be problematic for many
energy projects, leading to lower than expected financial returns. Compliance with covenants,
particularly financial covenants and the timing of deliverables such as audited accounts, have
often been delayed. Executing agencies undergoing restructuring indicated that the process
itself was often delayed by the sector reform. Hence, the timetables set out in the legal
documents were often unrealistic. A more flexible approach, to interpret the spirit of the
covenants rather than imposing "the letter of the law" was suggested by several executing
agencies interviewed during the evaluation (Appendix 11). Some executing agencies criticized
ADB's policies and procedures and some unrealistic timeframes for compliance with covenants.

145. The views of some DMCs on ADB's safeguard policies were reported in recent OED
reports that are inputs into the ongoing safeguard policies updates. Similar feedback was
received from several key clients during the preparation of this evaluation. Some believed that
the transaction costs of ADB environmental and resettlement safeguard procedures were high
40


relative to both the benefits and DMCs' capabilities to bear the cost. In many cases, executing
agencies have to comply with both national and ADB procedures, causing a duplication of effort.
However, there is considerable effort now to harmonize safeguards in the region which should
lead to lowered procedural costs.

146. The evaluation noted two different experiences with ICB. In some cases ICB resulted in
considerable savings (Madhya Pradesh, $56 million). But in other instances the use of ICB was
alleged to have increased costs as the EAs were prevented from negotiating after bid closure or
costs were actually increased. ADB approval procedures were criticized by some EAs as
incurring additional costs and not being suited to local conditions. For instance, the
disbursement process of ADB was described as time consuming and complicated. One EA
raised concerns regarding the process of ICB, where a local supplier had to use an intermediary
to meet ICB requirements. Subsequently, the delivered price was higher than if the item was
procured locally due to additional commissions of the intermediary.

       4.      Rating of Efficiency

147. Based on the foregoing, the 2000 Review is thus rated "efficient", but there is scope for
improvement.

D.     Sustainability

148. Sustainability may be viewed as lasting influence in achieving long term development
results. ADB's energy portfolio has had a history of high levels of successful outcomes. The
sustainability of ADB's 2000 Review will depend on (i) demonstrating positive effects of the
policy and replicating these effects; (ii) meeting the changing needs of clients; and (iii) having
the necessary staff skills so that ADB provides value added services and financing to support
the development of the energy sector. The likelihood of the sustainability of the 2000 Review
and its continued success in delivering intended outputs and outcomes is assessed by looking
at these three indicators.

       1.      Demonstration and Replication Effects

149. The demonstration effects observed in India and Bangladesh (sector restructuring and
regulatory development), the PRC (energy efficiency and environmental improvement), India
(renewable energy), and in regional cooperation (Cambodia, Lao PDR, the PRC, , Viet Nam)
suggest that ADB is providing replicable outcomes for successful development of energy
infrastructure, capacity building and the development of energy efficiency. The 2000 Review
emphasized private sector participation. The sharp increase in ADB supported private sector
energy transactions, supported by the policy dialogue and sector restructuring undertaken by
the public side of ADB, was successful in mobilizing private sector capital and demonstrated the
viability of this approach.

       2.      Meeting the Needs of Clients

150. The disparity of access to electricity and incomes across the Asia and Pacific region
suggests that ADB will have a continuing role in providing assistance for a broad range of
requirements in the energy sector, covering infrastructure expansion and upgrades, technical
and financial management of the sector, and encouraging the efficient use of capital. ADB
assistance will continue to be required to support sector reforms, and private sector participation
in the more developed countries and for publicly owned power sector infrastructure and
                                                                                                                  41


improved operations and maintenance in the less developed countries. Although ADB has
achieved significant success in promoting sector reforms, increased private sector investment
and improving energy infrastructure, there has been little demand for its products for energy
efficiency, clean energy and renewable energy. The new funds included under the umbrella of
ADB's Clean Energy and Environment Program should help to make those elements of the
energy policy more sustainable. As long as ADB's energy policy is sufficiently flexible to meet
the diverse needs of its clients in the Asia Pacific region, it will continue to remain relevant and
sustainable.

151. As energy sectors develop and become more financially independent and as domestic
financial markets deepen, they require less support from ADB. This is a natural progression.
The aim for the energy sector in the more developed DMCs would be to make the energy
sectors self-sustaining and for ADB to gradually exit the public lending while expanding its
private sector operations. In other countries access to international capital markets and private
sector investment will be limited and there will be a continuing role for public sector assistance
from ADB. There is also a continuing need for specialized advice for policy, legal and regulatory
development, institutional capacity building and technology. The demand for lending for energy
efficiency, renewable energy and to address environmental issues should grow, if oil and coal
prices remain high and the enabling framework improves. Sustainability of lending will be
affected by the ability of both the public and private sector loans of ADB to compete with other
sources of financing and respond to DMC needs. Overall, the evaluation concludes that the
policy has been both responsive to client needs and to the changes in the external environment
(Appendix 12).

           3.       ADB Staff Skills

152. ADB staff dealing with the energy sector must have a broad range of skills to deal with
the wide ranging requirements of the energy sector in the Asia Pacific region. Staff have also
shown their capacity to develop new initiatives to support the changing external context. The
continued sustainability of ADB's operations in the energy sector will depend on successfully
matching the staff skills mix with client expectations. ADB is a service organization, and its
success depends, in part, on the quality, skills mix, and motivation of staff. The 2002 report of
the Independent Assessment Panel on the Effectiveness of the Bank's Reorganization 44
concluded that ADB had lost technical expertise and recommended that ADB should increase
the number of technical specialists by 50. During consultations with some of ADB's largest
clients (e.g., India, Indonesia, Pakistan, the PRC, and the Philippines) for the Middle Income
Country related issues, comments were made that some ADB mission leaders lacked technical
skills and experience. Some DMCs have moved past a requirement for ADB to provide simple
operational technical advice, as they have developed that capacity. Sometimes ADB missions
have lacked the skill and experience to provide the value added that is sought by clients.

153. The energy sector is identified as a Group I sector in ADB's second medium term
strategy, which indicates that ADB's operations in this area are expected to grow. With project
pipelines in the next three years of $3 to $4 billion annually, there is a sustained demand for
assistance in the energy sector. A survey of energy specialists conducted by RSDD found that
the self ratings of competencies indicate that energy staff have a moderate to high level of
expertise in the traditional supply technologies (Appendix 13). However, skills in areas such as
procurement, corporate governance, renewable energy and financial management were more
limited. Going forward, operations will require more staff with expertise in procurement

44
     See para. 61 of the Independent Assessment Panel on the Effectiveness of the Bank's Reorganization report.
42


governance and financial management in the energy sector. This may require some changes to
ADB's staffing skills mix.

       4.        Rating of Sustainability

154. The 2000 Review is rated "highly sustainable" in the medium term. This rating reflects
the strong future pipeline of energy projects (i.e., demand from ADB's clients), the value added
in terms of demonstration and replicability, and ADB's commitment to the sector as indicated in
its second medium term strategy.

E.     Overall Assessment

155. Overall the 2000 Energy Policy is rated "successful" based on an assessment of being
relevant, bordering on highly relevant, effective, efficient and highly likely to be sustainable (see
Table 7).

                  Table 7: Overall Rating of ADB's Energy Policy 2000 Review

                                                                           Weighted
                                                 Weighting      Rating      Rating
                     Relevance                     0.20          2.60        0.52
                     Effectiveness                 0.30          2.20        0.66
                     Efficiency                    0.30          2.00        0.60
                     Sustainability                0.20          2.70        0.54
                     Overall Rating                                           2.22
                    Rating scale where R = rating: highly successful when R > 2.7,
                    successful when 1.6 < R < 2.7, partly successful when 0.8 < R < 1.6,
                    and unsuccessful when R < 0.8.
                    Source: Special evaluation study ratings



            V.     CONCLUSIONS, ISSUES, LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A.      Conclusions

156. The shift in strategy, since the 2000 Review and the resulting greater focus on sector
reform was complemented by coordination between multilateral agencies, with common agreed
themes for sector restructuring and to avoid duplication of efforts. Overlapping assistance was
not observed in ADB projects and reflects good coordination between countries, ADB and other
donors. In terms of outcomes, the energy sector is one of ADB's best performing sectors. Both
loan and TA ratings exceeded ADB's benchmark of satisfactory performance. Operations were
generally designed to be consistent with the capacity of the executing agencies to absorb the
assistance. There was limited success in making significant volumes of lending to address
problems related to the energy sector and the environment. However, new instruments have
been developed that should allow ADB to play a greater role in areas related to energy
efficiency, renewable energy, greenhouse gas emissions and clean technologies.

157. Power sector reform, including promoting private sector participation, needs to be based
on a clear government commitment before ADB provides support through a mix of program,
project and TA support. Sector reform can work well when there has been a common
commitment from all concerned parties. The electrification ratio has increased in the Asia Pacific
                                                                                                    43


Region and progress has been made in extending electrification to consumers including those
living in rural areas, reducing subsidies and reducing losses through theft. As the energy sector
in the Asia Pacific region develops, becomes more financially self sufficient and private sector
investment increases, there will be less demand for traditional public sector lending in the power
sector, particularly for generation.

158. The major impacts of ADB assistance include (i) financial and tariff restructuring and
lower costs have reduced the need for subsidies and less public sector funds for the power
sector; (ii) the increased quality of energy supply has increased the reliability of the supply, a
major attraction to industries which are heavily reliant on secure supplies; (iii) the demonstration
effects of energy efficiency and renewable energy projects provide tangible evidence that some
of these sub-sectors can be self sustaining; (iv) some energy projects have had positive and
immediate impacts on improving environmental conditions; and (v) governance at the sector
level is improving in the power industry but corruption remains a problem; and (vi) the transfer of
skills gained from TA in areas such as developing tariffs, automated billing, and management
reporting systems have improved the quality and timeliness of management decisions.

B.           Lessons Identified

159. The key lessons are (i) sector reform and independent regulation are providing tangible
impacts but efficiency gains during implementation can lead to further improvements; and (ii)
energy efficient, renewable energy and clean energy programs are in their infancy, with a
substantial need and potential to increase.

           1.       Promoting Sector Reform Is Providing Tangible Results

160. ADB's efforts to support private sector investment in the energy sector have largely been
successful as a result of well targeted assistance and synergies between the public and private
sector sides of ADB. The following lessons were identified:

           (i)      Due diligence for large energy projects should include a comprehensive supply
                    side evaluation and full scale technical systems simulations. This will alert the
                    project sponsors to competitive and other supply side risks at time of project
                    appraisal.
           (ii)     Legal risks associated with private sector power projects are substantial. The
                    enforceability of even well drafted legal agreements can be difficult, particularly
                    when there is limited contractual legal experience for energy offtaker agreements
                    in a DMC.
           (iii)    Open and transparent bidding processes for capacity additions lead to the lowest
                    cost energy supply with an equitable allocation of risks and rewards between the
                    Independent Power Producer and offtaker. ADB should be cautious of becoming
                    involved in a project for which the franchise is awarded as the result of a non-
                    transparent, negotiated process.
           (iv)     ADB should be more assertive in the application of its environmental safeguard
                    policies to private sector operations in the energy sector.45

161. ADB assistance helped to improve the financial performance of some power sector
organizations (e.g., Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, and the Philippines). While
complete privatization of the power was the ultimate aim of the 1995 Energy Policy and the

45
     The ability of the Private Sector Operations Department to do so was strengthened in 2006.
44


2000 Review, the outcomes from successful projects in the public sector indicate that the
efficiency gains and improved transparency from better governance, which were thought to only
be attainable through the private sector, can also be achieved by public sector companies if
commercially and financially sustainable management principles are followed.

162. The following general lessons were common to the program loans examined during the
evaluation.

       (i)     The restructuring process involves considerable change in the balance of power
               in the power sector.
       (ii)    Authority is transferred from ministers and civil servants to regulators, customers
               and privately owned or commercially managed public companies.
       (iii)   Large centralized utilities are broken up.
       (iv)    Top managers in those utilities are generally unhappy with the loss of status
               and/or jobs.
       (v)     Some of ADB's loan covenants were overly ambitious with respect to the speed
               of implementation of reforms.
       (vi)    Sector reform programs need to recognize the political economy issues
               associated with restructuring programs and to develop strategies to address the
               concerns of those who might not support such reforms. This will not necessarily
               shorten the implementation period, but their inclusion in project designs is likely
               to result in more realistic timeframes.

163. ADB has had sustained involvement in the power sectors of many countries in which it
operates. As a result it has a detailed understanding of local policies and priorities and the key
institutions and decision makers in the power sector. Sustained engagement which results in
ADB being perceived as a trusted adviser, allows ADB to help keep sector reforms on track and,
on occasion help to put them back on track. Although there have been problems related to
power sector reforms in the Philippines, Bangladesh and Pakistan, ADB has persevered with
support for the reform efforts. It is unlikely that the same results would be obtained with an
approach which involved ADB moving in and out of the sectors depending on their short term
performance.

164. Introducing independent regulation is a key part of the power sector restructuring
process. Power sector regulation has played a significant role in promoting reform and
subsequently has led to better performance and commercial autonomy in the energy sector.
Progress has been made by regulators in most DMCs in improving transparency through web
sites and other public information mechanisms. The early appointment of regulators, together
with formulating enabling regulations, (e.g., India, Pakistan and the Philippines) has resulted in
a smoother transition to a commercial environment that in those countries where the regulatory
process is underdeveloped (e.g., Bangladesh and Sri Lanka). Better regulation is a necessary,
but not sufficient condition for a more efficient and effective power sector. It must be
complemented with better sector governance.

165. ADB has imposed a number of financial covenants on power utilities and governments
as part of its lending operations. Utilities are required to submit audited accounts by a deadline
and to achieve other financial objectives related to the management of customer receivables
and their overall financial performance. However, there have been many examples of utilities
failing to meet these objectives; lack of compliance with financial covenants (18% non
compliant; 14% partially compliant) continue to be a concern. There is a significant problem with
compliance with financial covenants (Appendix 11).
                                                                                                                       45



166. The distribution sector is the most vulnerable sector to political intervention, particularly
with respect to cost recovery. The conflict between non-profitable sectors supported by
subsidies and the need to develop sustainability through cost recovery and efficiencies
continues to be a problem for the political economy of developing nations. This discourages
private sector participation because of the high perceived risks. The process will continue to be
slow and ambitions should be tempered to reflect the political economy realities.

167. The 2000 Review recommended assistance in risk management of "regional projects
that involve private sector participation". Risk management in the trading of electricity and fuel
has been noticeably absent in the DMC electricity organizations. Electricity trading is a volatile
market and trading involves considerable risks. These include financial, operational, and
counterparty risks at the corporate level and prudential and regulatory risks at the market level.

168. In emerging markets, risk management is an essential requirement for the long term
survival of all participants. This requires the training of skilled professionals. Risk management
features, both their design and implementation, were absent in all of the restructuring plans
reviewed during the evaluation. When a market has many small participants, such as the
electricity cooperatives in the Philippines, the costs of transactions and the requirements for risk
management may be beyond the financial capabilities of the participants. In India, collective
trading through holding companies reallocates the risks between the distribution companies
circumventing the need to shift the risk away from consumers.

169. Fuel management is also an area where risk management, including hedging supplies
and managing stockpiles was not being implemented. This exposed utilities in Sri Lanka and
Philippines where the utilities pay spot prices for fuel. The price increases were not fully passed
on to consumers, and thus the utilities rapidly turned from being profitable to net negative cash
flow organizations when fuels costs increased rapidly. The most severely affected projects
involved diesel generation (e. g., Sri Lanka and the Philippines).

           2.        Energy Efficiency

170. The major challenge in developing demand side energy efficiency initiatives will be to
reduce the transaction costs46 which are an inherent part of the process. There are considerable
barriers to firms and households investing in energy efficiency and even projects with 2 or 3
year payback periods are not being implemented. Traditional ADB lending is not suitable for
these small-sized projects and ADB staff have been discouraged to design environment and
energy efficiency projects for state owned enterprises. There is significant scope to improve
energy efficiency and reduce emissions in the industrial sector, particularly enterprises, often
publicly owned, that employ outdated technology.

171. Demand side management (e. g., new technologies; better regulation; adjusting the level
tariffs and introducing TOU tariffs; encouraging the development of energy service companies;
consumer education and public advocacy) can contribute substantially to meeting the objectives
of ADB's energy policy. However, it has received limited operational attention. In general, power
retailers are conservative with their tariff structures and have made few innovations. This is in
spite of significant peaks in system demand, usually in the early evening. To meet this peak
demand, expensive peaking power infrastructure is constructed. A cheaper alternative is to use

46
     The lack of success in a project in India reflects the large transaction costs incurred by the on-lender in setting up
     the loans for third parties, and the subsequent ready availability of less expensive funds.
46


market based price signals to provide incentives to shift demand to off peak hours, i.e., charge
more for electricity used during the peak hours. Recent technological developments in metering
and computerized billing make complex tariff structures relatively straightforward to implement.
Evaluation findings indicate that TOU tariffs can be effective in shifting peak loads. A number of
utilities have undertaken tariff studies, often financed through TA that examined TOU tariffs, but
have made little or no use of the results. There are a number of reasons for this:

           (i)     A "predict and provide mentality" in staff at utilities who do not view using tariffs
                   to reduce peak demand as an element of supply strategy.
           (ii)    A tendency to focus on tariffs as a cost recovery tool rather than an instrument of
                   demand management.
           (iii)   The legacy of administered monopolies that result in power retailers maintaining
                   the same tariffs, which discourages tariff experiments and price competition.
           (iv)    Regulatory processes for tariff approvals, which encourage retailers to seek
                   across the board increases or tariff increases that are perceived to be politically
                   acceptable rather than considering structural innovations.

C.          Issues

           1.      Energy Environment Nexus

172. The major issue for the Asia Pacific region will be to successfully manage the nexus
between environment and energy sector so that the expected continued rapid economic growth
will be environmentally sustainable. There are many inherent conflicts and issues in developing
infrastructure for the energy sector (see Figure 3). For example (i) energy security and diversity
may not be the most cost effective solution in the short term; (ii) measures to stabilize the
effects of greenhouse gas are expensive, estimated to cost 1% of GDP (footnote 9); (iii)
renewable energy projects are often not commercially viable; (iv) renewable energy cannot
provide significant amounts of power to supply all markets in the short to medium term; (v)
hydropower projects sometimes have adverse impacts on the river basin environment and
affected people; (vi) thermal power, while inexpensive, externalizes environmental costs and
contributes to the emission of pollutants and greenhouse gas; and (vii) while nuclear energy has
no emissions, it has the potential to be very dangerous if there is a technical problem and waste
disposal is still contentious. Energy markets do not always function in ways which achieve an
appropriate balance between these conflicts as many of them cannot be addressed by the
power of competitive markets.

173. The new instruments developed under ADB's Clean Energy and Environment Initiative
should position ADB to help address the energy environment nexus in the future. However, to
effectively do so, the lessons of the evaluation suggest that these initiatives need to be
complemented by more activities in three areas; (i) policy dialogue to improve enabling
environment for the energy sector; (ii) reflecting environment costs and benefits in economic
analysis of power projects; and (iii) use of strategic environmental assessment (see Appendix
14).47




47
     Evaluation Cooperation Group. 2007. The Nexus between Infrastructure and Environment, a joint paper by
     Evaluation Cooperation Group and the International Financial Institutions including Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                                 47



                          Figure 3: Conflicts in the Energy Sector

                                              trade-offs between
                           The energy sector: trade-
                           three important but potentially conflicting goals
                                      Market stability
                                      and robustness           Competition


                                      Security                      Efficiency
                                 Geopolitical        Electricity
                                                                         Monopoly
                                 instability           Sector
                                                                         regulation

                                                   Environment



                                      Nature             Climate        Air
                                    Conservation         Change      pollution

                     Source: Operations Evaluation Department.


174. There is a debate about the effectiveness of emission trading. Current emissions-trading
schemes have allowed greenhouse gas emitters in the OECD to shift the burden of making
greenhouse gas cuts onto the developing world. Most European governments were
overgenerous in allocating targets to specific industries hence anticipated reductions are not
being achieved, and the price of carbon credits have collapsed.48 The Kyoto Agreement covers
only about 30% of world greenhouse gas emissions. Going forward, this coverage must be
expanded for the cap and trade approach to be successful in managing greenhouse gas
emissions. There are also concerns that emissions trading may be diverting investment from
renewable-energy technology. Recent work49 suggests that the global cost of emissions (e.g.,
carbon tax or tradable emissions permit price) should be close to the economic incentive to
stabilize global emissions. These concerns warrant further debate and research on the merits of
alternative schemes to control greenhouse gas emissions such as carbon taxes. Given the
scope of the problem, many complementary approaches will need to be developed to address
the problem of emissions and air pollution associated with the energy sector.

175. It can be expected that cost reductions in renewable energy capital equipment through
recent economies of scale and transfer of manufacturing to the PRC, together with sustained
higher energy prices and a greater awareness of the costs of greenhouse gas emissions, will
make renewable energy and clean energy initiatives more financially viable. However, the
relatively inexpensive cost of coal fired plant of around 4--5 cents per kWh, the availability of
inexpensive, but low efficiency, coal-fired generation manufacturing capacity in the PRC when
compared to some of the more expensive renewable technology (e.g., solar power at $2.00 per
kWh) remain steep barriers to overcome.

176. Some international NGOs lobby strongly against hydropower and coal-fired projects.
Reports50 prepared by NGOs on dams identified many issues that are similar to OED findings.
Several conclusions emerge about the application of safeguards to dams: (i) future ADB


48
   CantorCO2 (UK Ltd). 2007. See also, for instance: 2007 Newsweek, 12 March. Carbon Folly.
49
   Center for Global Development. 2007. Close Enough: Let's Price Carbon Emissions. Washington, DC.
50
   NGO Forum. 2000. Thee Asian Development Bank and Dams. Philippines, 2000. The Report of the World
   Commission on Dams. London.
48


involvement in projects with dams will be controversial;51 (ii) ADB will need to make special
efforts to apply its safeguard policies during project preparation, implementation and operations;
(iii) ADB needs to find a more constructive way to work with NGOs and affected people to
ensure that the hydropower and coal-fired projects that it funds do not harm people and the
environment. If ADB became involved in coal-fired projects steps must be taken to ensure such
projects meet best practice emission standards and that they use cleaner technology.

           2.       Other Issues

177. There are small island countries where alternative energy sources are either costly or
simply not available (e.g., Pacific DMCs). In the Pacific DMCs, energy efficiency, environment
sustainability and economic growth are particularly important where the cost of energy supply is
extremely expensive. They are also disproportionately affected by climate change and by
international oil prices as they rely heavily on diesel fired generation. In some countries fuel
imports account for more than 10-20% of their gross domestic product and up to 250% of the
total merchandize exports. While development of renewable resources is identified as a key aim
of polices for the energy sector, ADB faces key real constraints in these areas as there are
limited opportunities to diversify energy sources. Key problems in this regard include tribal land
issues, hydropower resources are limited, wind power is practically difficult to use (typhoons or
minimal wind), solar power and bio fuel are uneconomical. There are also small landlocked
countries which depend heavily on harnessing their hydropower resources (e.g. Bhutan, Lao
PDR, Nepal, and Tajikistan) for their export revenues. These may have the potential to disturb
water flows in neighboring countries and cross border issues are likely to arise.

D.          Recommendations

178. This section focuses on the areas of the energy policy which need continuation and the
new areas which need considering for inclusion in the new policy or strategy that will be
prepared for the future ADB operations. Appendix 14 provides further details on strategic
priorities and ensuing recommendations.

179. The evaluation of ADB's Energy Policy was a challenge because, like all other ADB
policies formulated during this period, neither the 1995 Energy Policy nor the 2000 Review was
accompanied by a design and monitoring framework that set out clear objectives and indicators
against which progress could be assessed. With this caveat, the evaluation findings indicate
that, while the principles and objectives of the 2000 Review generally remain valid and relevant,
the policy and strategies should be updated to better reflect current needs and resources within
DMCs and ADB. This would include a consolidation of the new initiatives and strategies
embodied in ADB's Clean Energy and Environment Program. The four pillars of ADB's 2000
Review emphasize different aspects of setting investment priorities. However, linkages between
the four pillars are not clearly set out. Few if any projects will contribute to all four of these
pillars. There were no clear criteria which can be used to set priorities between the four
objectives.

180. Assuming that energy efficiency initiatives are effective, significant amounts of new
generation capacity will still be needed to meet the growing demand for energy and the lights do
not go out. The International Energy Agency estimates that there will be requirement in the Asia

51
     Greenpeace International and EREC. 2007. Energy [R]Evolution: A Sustainable World Energy Outlook.
     Greenpeace criticizes ADB for supporting large hydro-electric power plants and promotes smaller `run-of-the-river
     hydropower that is said to be more environment-friendly.
                                                                                                  49


Pacific region for an additional 2,669 GW of generation to supply energy needs to 2030.52 There
are also countries which may have limited alternatives for energy supply. The results of the
evaluation suggest that ADB's support for the energy sector should be driven by two key policy
considerations (i) energy efficiency, and (ii) good governance. The objective should be to
achieve a future in which an increasing portion of the Asia Pacific region's growing need for
energy is met by improvements in energy efficiency and energy technologies that minimize
adverse impacts on the environment. A schematic representation of a business as usual
approach and an approach that embodies these principles is shown in Figure 4.

181. Implementation of the above initiatives will be time consuming, as they involve significant
organizational and regulatory changes. Hence, realistic targets for implementation should be
set. There is also a large difference in underlying capacity among DMCs. Capacity building
should precede loans; policy and organizational changes, regulations, and widespread
acceptance of the benefits need to be cultivated through policy dialogue and public awareness.
This indicates that large-scale visible changes related to energy efficiency initiatives will be slow
to materialize.

                   Figure 4: Original (business as usual) vs Energy Efficient Outcome


                       Original Demand                                Final Demand




         Source: Special Evaluation Study, Operations Evaluation Department.


182. The 2007 review should update and fine tune the existing policy (1995, 2000) for more
effective implementation in the medium to long term. The ensuing updated strategy should
achieve the following outcomes:

           (i)     Improve efficiencies across the energy chain to minimize investment in new
                   generating capacity to meet the growing demand for energy.
           (ii)    Reflect environmental externalities in decision making in the energy sector.
52
     International Energy Agency. 2006. World Energy Outlook 2006.
50


       (iii)   Pricing and resource allocation decisions take place under market forces under
               an effective and credible regulatory oversight.
       (iv)    Subsidies transparent and targeted.
       (v)     Policies rely on market based incentives to promote efficiency and
               environmentally friendly behavior.
       (vi)    Sector governance is improved to increase efficiency, create opportunities for
               private sector participation and reduce opportunities for corruption, and
       (vii)   ADB becomes a more client focused institution.

183. The following areas of the energy policy are recommended for continuation with stronger
client focus and more operational vigor: (i) private sector participation including unbundling,
restructuring and privatization with improved corporate governance; (ii) mitigation of
environmental impacts through cleaner technologies; and (iii) regional economic cooperation in
energy sector, considering also cross-border environmental implications.

184. In addition, the following directional recommendations are put forward for consideration
by Management and also for incorporation in the ongoing review of the energy policy and
strategy formulation by the Regional and Sustainable Development Department.

                     Key Recommendations                             Responsibility    Timing
     1. Manage the Energy/Environment Nexus:                         RSDD and RDs     2007    and
                                                                                      ongoing
        (i)     Make improving energy efficiency the single
                highest priority in the ADB's new energy strategy
                so that all feasible efforts are made to decrease
                demand through viable energy efficiency
                initiatives and increases in system efficiencies
                before investing in new energy generation
                capacity.
        (ii)    Complement these initiatives with (a) ADB
                becoming known as a center for excellence to
                improve the policy, legal and regulatory
                framework and the use of market based
                incentives to improve the enabling framework for
                energy efficiency, renewable energy and ways to
                address environmental concerns in the energy
                sector; (b) incorporating, as a matter of routine,
                environmental costs and benefits in the economic
                analysis undertaken for energy projects; and (c)
                undertaking strategic environmental assessments
                for the energy sector in those countries in which
                the country partnership strategy envisions a
                significant role for ADB in the energy sector.
                                                                                             51


 2. Improve Sector Governance: Supplement ongoing                 OAG, RDs, and   2008    and
    efforts to improve governance by providing staff with more    RSDD            ongoing
    guidance on how to address governance issues to reduce
    opportunities for corruption in the energy sector.

 3. Develop an Implementation Plan for the new energy             RDs, RSDD,      2008    and
    strategy that:                                                SPD, and        ongoing
    (i)    reconciles the policy and strategic aspirations with   BPMSD
           organizational, budget, and human resources
           implications; and
    (ii)   includes a results framework with monitorable key
           indicators (for inputs, outputs and short and long
           term outcomes/results) so that implementation
           progress can be monitored and, if necessary,
           midterm corrections can be made.

ADB = Asian Development Bank, BPMSD = Budget Personnel Management System Department, OAG =
Office of the Auditor General, RDs = Regional Departments, RSDD = Regional and Sustainable
Development Department, SPD = Strategy and Policy Department.
Source: Special Evaluation Study.
52   Appendix 1

                   LOANS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE IN THE ENERGY SECTOR


                          Table A1.1: Public Sector Loans in the Energy Sector

                               1996--2000                    2001--2006                       TOTAL
                                   $                              $                              $
                           No.  million   %              No.   million     %         No.      million    %

Afghanistan                  0        0.0      0.0        2       61.5     1.3         2         61.5    0.7
Bangladesh                   3      291.4      7.1        8      787.5    16.9        11      1,078.9   12.3
Bhutan                       1       10.0      0.2        1        9.4     0.2         2         19.4    0.2
Cambodia                     1       18.6      0.5        2       64.3     1.4         3         82.9    1.0
PRC                          7      746.0     18.3        7      608.4    13.0        14      1,354.4   15.5
India                        5      850.0     20.8        7     1,225.0   26.2        12      2,075.0   23.7
Indonesia                    2      400.0      9.8        3      376.0     8.0         5        776.0    8.9
Kyrgyz Republic              1       30.0      0.7        0        0.0     0.0         1         30.0    0.3
Lao PDR                      2       82.0      2.0        2       50.0     1.1         4        132.0    1.5
Maldives                     1        7.0      0.2        1        8.0     0.2         2         15.0    0.2
Mongolia                     2       50.0      1.2        0        0.0     0.0         2         50.0    0.6
Nepal                        2      210.0      5.1        0        0.0     0.0         2        210.0    2.4
Pakistan                     4      655.0     16.0        4      351.0     7.5         8      1,006.0   11.5
Philippines                  3      496.8     12.2        2      490.0    10.5         5        986.7   11.3
Samoa                        0        0.0      0.0        1        6.0     0.1         1          6.0    0.1
Sri Lanka                    0        0.0      0.0        2      130.0     2.8         2        130.0    1.5
Tajikistan                   1       34.0      0.8        1       21.5     0.5         2         55.5    0.6
Thailand                     1      100.0      2.5        0        0.0     0.0         1        100.0    1.1
Tonga                        1        4.9      0.1        0        0.0     0.0         1          4.9    0.1
Viet Nam                     1      100.0      2.5        2      480.0    10.3         3        580.0    6.6

TOTAL                       38    4,085.6    100.0       45     4,668.6   100.0       83      8,754.2   100.0

Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.



                           Table A1.2: Conventional Energy Generation Loans
                                         (other than hydropower)

                               1996--2000                    2001--2006                       TOTAL
                                   $                              $                              $
                           No.  million   %              No.   million     %         No.      million    %

Bangladesh                   0        0.0      0.0        2       72.6    49.2         2        72.6    24.2
PRC                          1        2.0      1.3        0        0.0     0.0         1         2.0     0.7
India                        1      150.0     98.7        1       75.0    50.8         2       225.0    75.1

TOTAL                        2      152.0    100.0        3      147.6    100.0        5       299.6    100.0

No. = Number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                         Appendix 1   53


                          Table A1.3: Energy Sector Development Loans

                               1996--2000                2001--2006                 TOTAL
                                   $                          $                        $
                           No.  million   %          No.   million     %      No.   million    %

Bangladesh                   0        0.0      0.0    2     230.0     10.8     2     230.0     6.3
PRC                          3      436.0     29.1    4     451.4     21.1     7     887.4    24.4
India                        0        0.0      0.0    5     750.0     35.1     5     750.0    20.7
Indonesia                    2      400.0     26.7    0       0.0      0.0     2     400.0    11.0
Maldives                     0        0.0      0.0    1       8.0      0.4     1       8.0     0.2
Pakistan                     3      355.0     23.7    2     115.0      5.4     5     470.0    12.9
Philippines                  1      300.0     20.1    1     450.0     21.1     2     750.0    20.7
Sri Lanka                    0        0.0      0.0    2     130.0      6.1     2     130.0     3.6
Tonga                        1        4.9      0.3    0       0.0      0.0     1       4.9     0.1

TOTAL                       10    1,495.9   100.0    17    2,134.4    100.0   27    3,630.3   100.0

No. = Number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.


                            Table A1.4: Hydropower Generation Loans

                               1996--2000                2001--2006                 TOTAL
                                   $                          $                        $
                           No.  million   %          No.   million     %      No.   million    %

PRC                          0        0.0      0.0    1      22.0     45.8     1      22.0     3.9
Lao PDR                      1       52.0     10.2    1      20.0     41.7     2      72.0    12.9
Nepal                        1      160.0     31.3    0       0.0      0.0     1     160.0    28.6
Pakistan                     1      300.0     58.6    0       0.0      0.0     1     300.0    53.6
Samoa                        0        0.0      0.0    1       6.0     12.5     1       6.0     1.1

TOTAL                        3      512.0   100.0     3      48.0     100.0    6     560.0    100.0

No. = Number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.



                        Table A1.5: Renewable Energy Generation Loans

                               1996--2000                2001--2006                 TOTAL
                                   $                          $                        $
                           No.  million   %          No.   million     %      No.   million    %

PRC                          1        58      36.7    0       0.0      0.0     1       58     18.2
India                        1      100.0     63.3    0       0.0      0.0     1     100.0    31.3
Indonesia                    0        0.0      0.0    1     161.0     100.0    1     161.0    50.5

TOTAL                        2      158.0   100.0     1     161.0     100.0    3     319.0    100.0

No. = Number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
54   Appendix 1



                         Table A1.6: Transmission and Distribution Loans

                                1996--2000                    2001--2006                       TOTAL
                                    $                              $                              $
                            No.  million   %              No.   million     %         No.      million    %

 Afghanistan                  0        0.0      0.0        2       61.5     2.8         2         61.5    1.6
 Bangladesh                   3      291.4     16.5        4      484.9    22.3         7        776.3   19.7
 Bhutan                       1       10.0      0.6        1        9.4     0.4         2         19.4    0.5
 Cambodia                     1       18.6      1.1        2       64.3     3.0         3         82.9    2.1
 PRC                          2      250.0     14.1        2      135.0     6.2         4        385.0    9.8
 India                        3      600.0     33.9        1      400.0    18.4         4      1,000.0   25.4
 Indonesia                    0        0.0      0.0        2      215.0     9.9         2        215.0    5.4
 Kyrgyz Republic              1       30.0      1.7        0        0.0     0.0         1         30.0    0.8
 Lao PDR                      1       30.0      1.7        1       30.0     1.4         2         60.0    1.5
 Maldives                     1        7.0      0.4        0        0.0     0.0         1          7.0    0.2
 Mongolia                     2       50.0      2.8        0        0.0     0.0         2         50.0    1.3
 Nepal                        1       50.0      2.8        0        0.0     0.0         1         50.0    1.3
 Pakistan                     0        0.0      0.0        2      236.0    10.8         2        236.0    6.0
 Philippines                  2      196.8     11.1        1       40.0     1.8         3        236.8    6.0
 Tajikistan                   1       34.0      1.9        1       21.5     1.0         2         55.5    1.4
 Thailand                     1      100.0      5.7        0        0.0     0.0         1        100.0    2.5
 Viet Nam                     1      100.0      5.7        2      480.0    22.0         3        580.0   14.7

 TOTAL                       21    1,767.8    100.0       21     2,177.6   100.0       42      3,945.4   100.0

 Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
 Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                     Appendix 1   55


                 Table A1.7: Technical Assistance Grants in the Energy Sector
                               1996--2000                    2001--2006                        TOTAL
                         No.     $ 000       %         No.      $ 000      %         No.        $ 000      %

Afghanistan                0         0.0      0.0        9     7,695.0     8.4        9        7,695.0     5.1
Azerbaijan                 0         0.0      0.0        1      700.0      0.8        1          700.0     0.5
Bangladesh                10     4,052.0      7.0        7     4,970.0     5.4       17        9,022.0     6.1
Bhutan                     3     1,700.0      2.9        5     2,700.0     2.9        8        4,400.0     2.9
Cambodia                   4       900.0      1.5        3     1,970.0     2.2        7        2,870.0     1.9
PRC                       19    11,561.7     19.9       19    10,323.0    11.3       38       21,884.7    14.6
Fiji Islands               0         0.0      0.0        2     1,050.0     1.1        2        1,050.0     0.7
India                     16     8,290.0     14.3       14     7,245.0     7.9       30       15,535.0    10.4
Indonesia                  6     3,385.0      5.8        7     4,943.0     5.4       13        8,328.0     5.6
Kyrgyz Republic            1       310.0      0.5        0        0.0      0.0        1          310.0     0.2
Lao PDR                    7     3,570.0      6.1        3     2,500.0     2.7       10        6,070.0     4.1
Maldives                   1       300.0      0.5        0        0.0      0.0        1          300.0     0.2
Mongolia                   6     2,300.0      4.0        1      400.0      0.4        7        2,700.0     1.8
Nauru                      0         0.0      0.0        1      375.0      0.4        1          375.0     0.3
Nepal                      5     2,484.0      4.3        2     1,000.0     1.1        7        3,484.0     2.3
Pakistan                   4    2,700.0       4.6       10     5,750.0     6.3       14        8,450.0     5.6
Papua New Guinea           0         0.0      0.0        2     1,700.0     1.9        2        1,700.0     1.1
Philippines                6     3,837.0      6.6        5     4,240.0     4.6       11        8,077.0     5.4
Regional                   7     5,445.0      9.4       17    16,642.8    18.2       24       22,087.8    14.8
Samoa                      1       150.0      0.3        3     1,200.0     1.3        4        1,350.0     0.9
Sri Lanka                  3     1,425.0      2.5        3     2,150.0     2.3        6        3,575.0     2.4
Tajikistan                 3     1,850.0      3.2        6     3,920.0     4.3        9        5,770.0     3.9
Thailand                   2     1,100.0      1.9        0        0.0      0.0        2        1,100.0     0.7
Timor                      0         0.0      0.0        1      400.0      0.4        1          400.0     0.3
Uzbekistan                 0         0.0      0.0        3     1,250.0     1.4        3        1,250.0     0.8
Viet Nam                   4     2,758.0      4.7       13     8,500.0     9.3       17       11,258.0     7.5

TOTAL                    108    58,117.7    100.0      137    91,623.8    100.0     245       149,741.5   100.0

Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.


              Table A1.8: Conventional Energy Generation Technical Assistance
                                   (Other than Hydropower)
                               1996--2000                    2001--2006                        TOTAL
                         No.     $ 000       %         No.      $ 000      %         No.        $ 000      %

Bangladesh                 1      600.0      15.0        0        0.0      0.0        1          600.0     6.4
India                      4    1,900.0      47.5        0        0.0      0.0        4        1,900.0    20.1
Indonesia                  1      575.0      14.4        1      490.0      9.0        2        1,065.0    11.3
Pakistan                   1      600.0      15.0        0        0.0      0.0        1          600.0     6.4
Papua New Guinea           0        0.0       0.0        1     1,000.0    18.4        1        1,000.0    10.6
Regional                   0        0.0       0.0        2     1,700.0    31.3        2        1,700.0    18.0
Sri Lanka                  1      325.0       8.1        0        0.0      0.0        1          325.0     3.4
Viet Nam                   0        0.0       0.0        3     2,250.0    41.4        3        2,250.0    23.8

TOTAL                      8    4,000.0     100.0        7     5,440.0    100.0      15        9,440.0    100.0

No. = Number.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
56   Appendix 1

                   Table A1.9: Energy Sector Development Technical Assistance
                               1996--2000                     2001--2006                       TOTAL
                         No.     $ 000        %        No.       $ 000      %         No.       $ 000      %

 Afghanistan               0         0.0       0.0       4      3,445.0     6.5        4        3,445.0    4.0
 Bangladesh                4     1,740.0       5.4       5      3,220.0     6.0        9        4,960.0    5.8
 Bhutan                    1       500.0       1.6       2      1,100.0     2.1        3        1,600.0    1.9
 Cambodia                  2       300.0       0.9       1      1,000.0     1.9        3        1,300.0    1.5
 PRC                      11     6,634.7      20.6      15      7,773.0    14.6       26       14,407.7   16.8
 India                    10     5,190.0      16.1      13      6,745.0    12.6       23       11,935.0   14.0
 Indonesia                 4     2,241.0       7.0       3      2,243.0     4.2        7        4,484.0    5.2
 Kyrgyz Republic           1       310.0       1.0       0         0.0      0.0        1          310.0    0.4
 Lao PDR                   4     2,340.0       7.3       0         0.0      0.0        4        2,340.0    2.7
 Maldives                  1       300.0       0.9       0         0.0      0.0        1          300.0    0.4
 Mongolia                  3     1,700.0       5.3       0         0.0      0.0        3        1,700.0    2.0
 Nauru                     0         0.0       0.0       1       375.0      0.7        1          375.0    0.4
 Nepal                     1       800.0       2.5       1       400.0      0.8        2        1,200.0    1.4
 Pakistan                  2     2,000.0       6.2       5      3,050.0     5.7        7        5,050.0    5.9
 Philippines               4     2,662.0       8.3       4      3,790.0     7.1        8        6,452.0    7.5
 Regional                  4     1,145.0       3.6      14     14,042.8    26.3       18       15,187.8   17.8
 Samoa                     1       150.0       0.5       1       150.0      0.3        2          300.0    0.4
 Sri Lanka                 2     1,100.0       3.4       3      2,150.0     4.0        5        3,250.0    3.8
 Tajikistan                1       850.0       2.6       2       520.0      1.0        3        1,370.0    1.6
 Thailand                  1       500.0       1.6       0         0.0      0.0        1          500.0    0.6
 Timor                     0         0.0       0.0       1       400.0      0.8        1          400.0    0.5
 Uzbekistan                0         0.0       0.0       1       600.0      1.1        1          600.0    0.7
 Viet Nam                  3     1,760.0       5.5       5      2,325.0     4.4        8        4,085.0    4.8

 TOTAL                    60    32,222.7     100.0      81    53,328.80    100.0      141      85,551.5   100.0

 Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
 Source: Asian Development Bank database.

                   Table A1.10: Hydropower Generation Technical Assistance
                               1996--2000                     2001--2006                       TOTAL
                        No.      $ 000       %          No.      $ 000      %         No.      $ 000       %

 Afghanistan              0         0.0       0.0        1       800.0     12.7         1        800.0     7.1
 PRC                      0         0.0       0.0        1       950.0     15.1         1        950.0     8.4
 India                    0         0.0       0.0        1       500.0      8.0         1        500.0     4.4
 Lao PDR                  1       140.0       2.8        2      1,700.0    27.1         3      1,840.0    16.3
 Mongolia                 1       150.0       3.0        0         0.0      0.0         1        150.0     1.3
 Nepal                    2     1,134.0      22.6        0         0.0      0.0         2      1,134.0    10.0
 Pakistan                 1       100.0       2.0        0         0.0      0.0         1        100.0     0.9
 Regional                 1     2,500.0      49.8        0         0.0      0.0         1      2,500.0    22.1
 Tajikistan               0         0.0       0.0        1       600.0      9.6         1        600.0     5.3
 Viet Nam                 1       998.0      19.9        2      1,725.0     27.5        3      2,723.0    24.1

 TOTAL                    7     5,022.0     100.0        8      6,275.0    100.0      15       11,297.0   100.0

 Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
 Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                    Appendix 1   57

               Table A1.11: Renewable Energy Generation Technical Assistance
                               1996--2000                    2001--2006                       TOTAL
                         No.     $ 000       %         No.      $ 000      %         No.       $ 000      %

Afghanistan                0        0.0       0.0        1      750.0      7.9        1         750.0     6.6
Azerbaijan                 0        0.0       0.0        1      700.0      7.3        1         700.0     6.1
PRC                        2    1,256.0      67.7        3     1,600.0    16.8        5       2,856.0    25.0
Fiji Islands               0        0.0       0.0        1      650.0      6.8        1         650.0     5.7
India                      1      600.0      32.3        0        0.0      0.0        1         600.0     5.3
Indonesia                  0        0.0       0.0        2     1,300.0    13.6        2       1,300.0    11.4
Mongolia                   0        0.0       0.0        1      400.0      4.2        1         400.0     3.5
Pakistan                   0        0.0       0.0        2      700.0      7.3        2         700.0     6.1
Philippines                0        0.0       0.0        1      450.0      4.7        1         450.0     3.9
Samoa                      0        0.0       0.0        2     1,050.0    11.0        2       1,050.0     9.2
Tajikistan                 0        0.0       0.0        2     1,300.0    13.6        2       1,300.0    11.4
Uzbekistan                 0        0.0       0.0        2      650.0      6.8        2         650.0     5.7

TOTAL                      3    1,856.0     100.0       18     9,550.0    100.0      21       11,406.0   100.0

Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.

                 Table A1.12: Transmission and Generation Technical Assistance

                               1996--2000                    2001--2006                       TOTAL
                         No.     $ 000       %         No.      $ 000      %         No.       $ 000      %

Afghanistan               0         0.0       0.0       3     2,700.0     15.9        3       2,700.0     8.4
Bangladesh                5     1,712.0      11.4       2     1,750.0     10.3        7       3,462.0    10.8
Bhutan                    2     1,200.0       8.0       3     1,600.0      9.4        5       2,800.0     8.7
Cambodia                  2       600.0       4.0       2      970.0       5.7        4       1,570.0     4.9
PRC                       6     3,671.0      24.4       0         0.0      0.0        6       3,671.0    11.5
Fiji Islands              0         0.0       0.0       1      400.0       2.3        1         400.0     1.2
India                     1       600.0       4.0       0         0.0       0.0       1         600.0     1.9
Indonesia                 1       569.0       3.8       1      910.0       5.3        2       1,479.0     4.6
Lao PDR                   2     1,090.0       7.3       1      800.0       4.7        3       1,890.0     5.9
Mongolia                  2       450.0       3.0       0        0.0       0.0        2         450.0     1.4
Nepal                     2       550.0       3.7       1      600.0       3.5        3       1,150.0     3.6
Pakistan                  0         0.0       0.0       3     2,000.0     11.7        3       2,000.0     6.2
Papua New Guinea          0         0.0       0.0       1      700.0       4.1        1         700.0     2.2
Philippines               2     1,175.0       7.8       0         0.0       0.0       2       1,175.0     3.7
Regional                  2     1,800.0      12.0       1      900.0       5.3        3       2,700.0     8.4
Tajikistan                2     1,000.0       6.7       1     1,500.0      8.8        3       2,500.0     7.8
Thailand                  1       600.0       4.0       0         0.0       0.0       1         600.0     1.9
Viet Nam                  0         0.0       0.0       3     2,200.0     12.9        3       2,200.0     6.9

TOTAL                    30    15,017.0     100.0       23    17,030.0    100.0      53       32,047.0   100.0

Lao PDR = Lao People's Democratic Republic, No. = number, PRC = People's Republic of China.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
58    Appendix 1

                             Table A1.13: Regional Technical Assistance 1996-2006

                                                                                                                 Date
  RETA No.                                     Activity                                 Type         Total     Approved
 Conventional Energy Generation (other than hydropower)
    6066       Feasibility Studies of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan Natural
               Gas Pipeline Project                                                     Study      1,000,000    6-Dec-02
    6153       Turkmenistan-Afghanistan Pakistan Natural Gas Pipeline (Phase II)        Study        700,000   18-Dec-03

 Energy Sector Development
    5695       Environmental Cooperation in Northeast Asia                             Training     495,000     1-Aug-96
    5736       India-Bangladesh Electricity Exchange                                    Study       100,000    19-May-97
               Capacity Building for Implementation of the Kyoto Protocol and the
    5861       Clean Development Mechanism                                              Others      200,000    1-Sep-99
    5865       Transboundary Environmental Cooperation in Northeast Asia                Study       350,000    13-Oct-99
               Promotion of Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, and Greenhouse
    5972       Gas Abatement Projects                                                   Study      5,000,000   4-Jan-01
               Study for a Regional Power Trade Operating Agreement in the
    6100       Greater Mekong Subregion                                                 Study       850,000    21-Apr-03
    6102       Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Program for the Pacific           Study       600,000    28-Apr-03
    6147       GMS Power Interconnection Project Phase I`                               Study       800,000    12-Dec-03
    6261       Energy Efficiency Initiative Consultation Workshop                     Conference    150,000     6-Oct-05
    6261       Energy Efficiency Initiative Consultation Workshop (Supplementary)     Conference    300,000     1-Feb-06
    6267       Establishment of the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation
               (CAREC) Members Electricity Regulators Forum                           Conference    500,000    3-Nov-05
               Establishment of the CAREC Members Electricity Regulators Forum
    6267       (Supplementary)                                                        Conference     242,800   10-Nov-06
    6301       Developing the Greater Mekong Subregion Energy Sector Strategy           Others       900,000    3-Jan-06
    6304       GMS Regional Power Trade Coordination and Development                    Others     1,200,000   16-Jan-06
    6322       Energy Sector Strategy and Development                                   Study      1,000,000   16-Jun-06
    6346       Supporting the Inception of the Energy Efficiency Initiative in
               Developing Member Countries                                              Others      600,000    2-Oct-06
    6368       Energy Sector Dialogue and South Asian Association for Regional
               Cooperation Energy Center Capacity Development                           Others     1,000,000   14-Dec-06
    6371       Mitigation of Transboundary Air Pollution from Coal-Fired Power
               Plants in North-East Asia                                                Study       900,000    18-Dec-06

 Hydropower Generation
    5697     Se Kong-Se San and Nam Theun River Basins Hydropower
             Development Study                                                          Study      2,500,000   22-Aug-96

 Transmission & Distribution
     5920       Regional Indicative Master Plan on Power Interconnection in the
                Greater Mekong Subregion                                                Study       900,000    10-Jul-00
     5960       Regional Power Transmission Modernization Project in Central Asian
                Republics                                                               Study       900,000    12-Dec-00
     6023       Regional Gas Transmission Improvement Project in the Central Asian
                Republics                                                               Study       900,000    12-Mar-02
RETA = regional technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                              Table A1.14: Project/Program Performance in the Energy Sector


                                                           No. of Rated Projects                                       Proportion (%)

                                        Highly Satisfactory/
                                                                                                       Highly Satisfactory/
                                             Generally          Partially                                                      Partially
               Subsector                                                    Unsatisfactory   Total    Generally Satisfactory/              Unsatisfactory
                                           Satisfactory/       Satisfactory                                                   Satisfactory
                                                                                                          Satisfactory
                                           Satisfactory

Projects
Conventional Energy Generation
                                                 37                 4                         41               90.2               9.8           0.0
(other thank hydropower)
Energy Sector Development and Reforms            19                 6              2          27               70.4              22.2           7.4
Hydropower                                       19                 4                         23               82.6              17.4           0.0
Transmission and Distribution                    67                15              1          83               80.7              18.1           1.2
                Subtotal                        142                29              3         174               81.6              16.7           1.7
Source: Operations Evaluation Department database.




                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 1
                                                                                                                                                            59
60    Appendix 2



                         EVALUATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR LOANS

1.     The Operations Evaluation Department (OED) of the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
has evaluated several private sector transactions in the energy sector--both as part of the field
work for this study and in stand-alone reports.

A.     Company I

2.     The Project was to (i) provide 2 x 360 megawatts (MW) of power capacity and a
minimum of 3,500 gigawatt-hours (GWh) of annual electricity output to Company I to meet
demand and reduce power shortages; (ii) improve the voltage and frequency stability of the
power distribution system by providing a technologically-advanced base load plant; (iii) increase
the availability of thermal power and reduce reliance on hydropower which depended on the
amount of rainfall; and (iv) establish one of the first wholly foreign-owned build-operate-transfer
(BOT) power projects in the People's Republic of China (PRC), financed on a limited recourse
basis. The Project was negotiated between the sponsors and provincial authorities. ADB
invested $10 million in equity, and provided $40 million in commercial cofinancing.

3.       The Project was rated "successful". It is operating efficiently, and is selling power to
PRC's eastern grid. However, in the future, the Project will face a potential risk because of
increased supply conditions from 2006 onwards. Demand in Company I is expected to grow
annually by 12% in the next 5 years. However, supply is expected to grow at a higher rate. New
generation to be commissioned includes 5,000 MW of generation by the end of 2006, and
another 3,000 MW of hydropower in Fujian Province. It will also make the Project less
competitive, as the newer plant has higher technical efficiency than the Project. However, if
exports to the PRC's eastern grid increase further and dry hydro conditions reappear, then the
plant is likely to generate at higher levels than specified in the take-or-pay agreement. The
operations at the Project indicate world best practice operation and maintenance (O&M); and
promote economic efficiencies, environmental compliance, and safe operations which counter
some of the technological disadvantages. These suggest that the Project will remain sustainable
in the near future. After construction was completed, there were disputes about the appropriate
tariff, despite carefully drafted legal agreements. Steps were taken to reduce the operational
costs and to increase the amount of power dispatched. ADB played a constructive intermediary
role during this process.

B.     Company II

       1.      Bangladesh

4.      The power project was developed under ADB technical assistance (TA) for a 450 MW
gas-fired combined cycle power plant near Dhaka, with provision for expansion in a second
phase to 900 MW. Under the TA, bidding documents and bidding and evaluation procedures
were developed. The Project has been successfully commissioned. ADB has financed the
Project through its private sector window, with a direct loan ($50 million), complementary
cofinancing ($20 million), and a partial risk guarantee of $70 million.

5.      The Project provides an example of the best practice for securing an equitable and large
(independent power producer) IPP contract. It was the first major initiative designed to involve
the private sector in improving Bangladesh's power sector. ADB played an instrumental role in
planning and securing private sector participation by providing TA to help Bangladesh Power
Development Board implement the Project by developing procedures, guidelines, and
                                                                                       Appendix 2   61


documents for bidding among private sector sponsors, as well as evaluating their proposals.
Transparent ICB and evaluation was carried out, resulting in the successful conclusion of a
contract with Company II, a private power developer, winning the concession. The levelized
tariff for power from the Project of $0.028 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) (at 2000 prices, with gas
priced at $2.40/GJ) reduced Bangladesh's average costs of generation. The reasons for the
success of the Project are as follows:
           (i)     The open bidding process under the ADB TA enabled Bangladesh to secure the
                   benefits of competition for the concession and to avoid problems suffered in
                   some other countries, where unsolicited bids were accepted and left power
                   utilities saddled with high-cost and unsustainable contracts.
           (ii)    Several closely related contracts (concession, power purchase, and energy
                   supply) could in large part be drawn up in parallel. This is a complex process,
                   requiring specialist contract management skills, which ADB was able to mobilize
                   for the benefit of the Bangladesh authorities.
           (iii)   The Project was structured to minimize costs by allocating risks to the parties
                   that are best able to manage them:

                   (a)      The developer bears the capital cost variation risks.
                   (b)      The operator bears the risks of providing capacity/availability.
                   (c)      The buyer bears the market demand variation risk--since it manages
                            dispatch and can minimize national costs of supply using the entire
                            supply system.
                   (d)      ADB helped mitigate the credit risks for the sponsors and co-financiers
                            through its participation in the project as a financier.
                   (e)      Energy cost variation risk is a pass-through cost to the buyer, who has
                            the potential to pass this cost on to final consumers in the retail tariff.

6.      Company II sold its equity1 as a result of internal financial restructuring, but commented
that the plant sale was considered highly successful as the plant and the associated power
purchase agreement (PPA) were perceived a first class investment by the international financial
community.

           2.      Sri Lanka

7.       In November 2001, Company II (Sri Lanka) commissioned the first stage (110 MW) of a
combined cycle plant, and the total capacity of 165 MW was commissioned by 2003. Since
commissioning and a subsequent fire, the plant was operated at partial load until 2005.
However, after recommissioning, the plant has run at world best practice levels of availability.
The plant supplies base load power to the Sri Lanka power grid. ADB provided equity and
political risk guarantees to the Project, and was instrumental in obtaining counter-guarantees
from the Government of Sri Lanka.

8.      Despite the financial problems of its electricity industry, the Government of Sri Lanka has
not defaulted on payments, although there are significant delays. OED considers this Project
"relevant" and "sustainable". However, OED notes that more ADB public sector involvement in
the project may have led to the choice of an alternative base load plant (e.g., coal), as the high
cost of imported diesel fuel and naphtha is now a major factor in the deteriorating financial
condition of the power sector in Sri Lanka.

1
    The plant was sold in November 2003.
62    Appendix 2




C.     Company III

9.       The project was the first step in liberalizing and commercializing the liquefied natural gas
segment of the Indian gas industry, and encouraging the use of a clean environmentally friendly
fuel. ADB made an equity investment of $9.7 million. Demand for energy in India continues to
grow rapidly and the increased availability of energy at internationally competitive prices is
critical for the development of the country. The Project has demonstrated it is possible to import
LNG successfully at competitive prices, thereby supporting the liberalization of the gas sector
and enhancing the level of private sector participation in the energy sector. Company III has
provided a demonstration of the high standards of performance that can be achieved by a
modern well-run public-private partnership managed on a commercial basis. Company III's
business success has been excellent because of lower than expected operating expenses and
interest costs. Economic sustainability was rated "excellent" because of the substantial benefits
derived from meeting unmet demand and generating cost savings for firms that can use gas
relative to naphtha. While the Project was assigned an environmental rating of category A at
project appraisal, in practice, social and environmental impacts have been minimal and the main
issues relate to the safety of the mooring facilities during the monsoon period. GDF
International, A shareholder in Company III which has more than 30 years of liquefied natural
gas experience, is providing assistance to develop and refine the mooring procedures.

10.    ADB played a critical role in facilitating the liberalization of the gas market and then
helping mitigate investor and lender concerns, in what was a new and untested product and
technology in India where there were limited skills and experience available locally. ADB
obtained a position on the board of directors and contributed to improvements in corporate
governance by heading the Company III audit committee.
                                                                                    Appendix 3    63


                        UNBUNDLING OF THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR

1.      The unbundling of the power sector involves separating government responsibilities for
power sector policy from the regulation of the industry to ensure a fair balance between the
interests of investors and consumers. It also involves splitting power sector monopolies into
generation, transmission, and distribution companies. The unbundling is an important step on
the road to corporatization or possible later privatization, in that it enables greater private
involvement. Asian countries have pursued unbundling policies with varying degrees of
success.

2.     ADB has sponsored unbundling as part of project and program loans across most
developing member countries (DMCs). There has been little progress in Sri Lanka, for example,
but Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Philippines are all at different stages in the unbundling
process, as part of reform programs sponsored by the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The
outcomes for India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka are discussed in more detail below.

A.     India

3.      In India, ADB provided program assistance to three state electricity boards (SEBs):
Gujarat, Assam and Madhya Pradesh. The overall conclusion from the operations evaluation
mission (OEM) is that ADB program assistance, to date, has generally been successful as a
result of targeting the assistance to sectors which were thoroughly committed to change. This
includes the state governments of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Assam; their respective
SEBs; non-executive employees of the SEBs; and independent state-appointed regulators. In all
three SEBs evaluated, unbundling has been achieved and new separate corporate entities with
"clean" balance sheets have been established as a result of restructuring. The restructuring
included, for instance, partial state assumption of liabilities, transparent subsidies, renegotiation
of power purchase agreements, rationalization of state-owned generation to ensure merit order
dispatch, and changed organizational structures and cultures that were refocused on service
delivery. Each of the SEBs have maintained a "shell" organization to service liabilities that were
not directly related to the assets of the unbundled corporations, and serve as a "single buyer" for
the distribution companies. The unbundled generation and transmission organizations are
assessed as having a good probability of sustaining independent operations and becoming self-
funding. All states indicated that ADB assistance was catalytic in providing the impetus to
implement the reform process.

4.       The transformation process for unbundling the distribution companies is well developed
but has not been completed. The distribution companies do not yet have complete
independence from the parent "shell" company and still rely on the shell company for some of
their strategic functions.

5.       The OEM findings suggest that more assistance may be required to maintain the
momentum created by the program loans in order to develop the distribution companies into
totally independent organizations with best practice governance and risk management policies
and procedures, and thus enable them to become self-sustaining. ADB should consider some
additional assistance with human resource development, and the procurement and
development of information technology (IT) systems that support planning and governance. In
Assam, there is a concern that the split into three distribution companies may not have been
optimal, and there are concerns that required future staff expertise and numbers, as well as
unbalanced customer mixes, may lead to at least one unsustainable distribution company. The
OEM has observed conflicting information regarding this issue, both supporting and
64     Appendix 3



contradicting the concerns, and recommends that this issue be reviewed and resolved as a
matter of urgency. To date, the reform outcomes are rated "successful". However, sustainability
depends on ongoing commitment and funding.
B.      Sri Lanka
6.        Since 1998, ADB has worked closely with the Government of Sri Lanka and power
utilities in developing a new model for the power sector. TA projects 1 have provided the
Government with support in sector restructuring. Back-to-office reports of ADB review missions
reflect continuous policy dialogue with the Government on this issue. Since 1998, a detailed
model for reform has been developed. Legislation is in place and awaits confirmation or
modification from the Government. The Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka was
established in 2002 and has a limited staff. It is ready to commence regulation of the power
sector once the necessary legislation is passed to confirm the regulator's role. Basic
documentation--such as licenses, a grid code, and implementing rules and regulations--has
been prepared. The internal structure of Ceylon Electricity Board is already unbundled into a
generation company, a transmission company, and four distribution companies. Assets and
liabilities have been identified to be associated with each business, and the accounting
separation of the business could be accomplished quickly. The human resources issues
associated with unbundling have been considered in detail, and agreement has been reached
on most points. There are plans for a ministerial advisory committee to take on the role of
recommending appointments to utility boards, thus increasing independence.
7.      The Government has been unable to take the final steps toward implementation of the
restructuring and is in effect holding back from a policy that it has endorsed publicly for almost
10 years. This is a result of a combination of opposition from power sector unions in Ceylon
Electricity Board and political opposition within the currently governing coalition.

C.      Pakistan
8.       In Pakistan, there has been significant progress in unbundling since ADB loans2 were
approved in 2000. These major program loans were designed to support reform in the energy
sector and were accompanied by TA support through loan 1809 to help the reform process. The
loan was linked to Pakistan's structural adjustment program, and arrangements were closely
coordinated with the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, which also provided
Pakistan with loans at around the same time. The loan was not linked to any power sector
projects and the Ministry of Finance was the Executing Agency (EA), with various power sector
institutions responsible for aspects of reform implementation. A wide range of loan conditions
were agreed in a six-page letter from the Government, along with an 11-page policy matrix.
These covered the institutional and financial restructuring of the Waste and Power Development
Authority and Karachi Electricity Supply Corporation (KESC), along with the development of the
role of the power regulator. The loan was structured in four tranches, including an incentive
tranche, with disbursement linked to performance on the reform process.




1
  ADB. 1998. Technical Assistance (3141) to Sri Lanka for Preparing the Power Sector Restructuring Project and
  2002. Technical Assistance (3857) to Sri Lanka for Restructuring the Power Sector. Manila.
2
  ADB. 2000. Loan 1807/1808 Proposed Loans to Pakistan for Energy Sector Restructuring Program. Manila
                                                                                 Appendix 3   65


9.      There has been significant progress with the unbundling. Pakistan has an effective
regulator; and various generations, transmission, and nine distribution companies have been
created out of the Waste and Power Development Authority. KESC has been sold through
privatization to a local investor. There is still much work to be done to complete the unbundling
process. The distribution companies are not yet fully autonomous. However, there has been
significant progress and there is optimism in the industry that the outstanding issues can be
resolved.
66      Appendix 4



                                   INCENTIVE-BASED REGULATIONS

1.      There are a number of forms of rate regulation, which are based on some form of cash
flow (or forward forecast analysis) over a predefined regulatory period, which is greater than
1 year. The primary concept is to set in place price control arrangements which guide the
regulated entity in setting rates over a defined period, with only limited ability for the regulator to
intervene in the rate-setting process.
2.      At each rate reset, the financial and operational forecasts, price control mechanisms,
and rate-setting process are all reviewed and redefined. With incentive-based price control, the
forward cash flows are used to generate an expected cash flow model (which is a form of cost
of service forecast), and this in turn is used to develop the price control equations.
3.      As the regulatory period progresses, the price control equations are used to regulate the
level of the rates charged, and the regulator's primary role is to ensure that the price control
equations are correctly applied and that the rates are set within the framework specified.
4.      Thus, the incentive is for the regulated entity to perform better than the forecasts during
the price control period. Cost reductions in all forms are encouraged by the price control
mechanism, while ensuring a reasonable rate of return to the business as a whole. Depending
on the specified price control mechanism, the efficiency gains are retained by the regulated
entity for the current regulatory period (this provides certainty to the regulated entity), and are
potentially shared between the regulated entity and its customers in the following regulatory
period(s).
5.       The primary costs and benefits of incentive-based regulation are provided in Table A4.
                Table A4: Costs and Benefits of Performance-Based Regulation
     Cost                                                                          Benefits
     Depending on the price control mechanism              Permits the regulated entity to make a higher return
     chosen, this can have a lower rate of return on its   on investment than the "benchmark" rate of return in
     investment than provided in the "benchmark"           the forward forecasts, which forms the primary
                                                           incentive mechanism to reduce costs for a specified
                                                           level of service performance
     Direct costs of regulation may be higher because      Potential to provide significant incentives to:
     of the requirement to review forecasts and            · make efficient investments;
     network performance in more detail (offset by a       · lower costs overall; and
     much lower frequency of detailed review than          · focus on managing the transmission network to
     under rate of return regulation)                         the benefit of the market.

                                                           Potential in the longer term to promote lower prices to
                                                           consumers.
                                                           Depending on the detail of the price control
                                                           mechanism chosen, can lead to smoother changes in
                                                           prices and less price volatility
                                                           Generally, is more consistent with the principle of
                                                           moving        toward      "light-handed"     regulation,
                                                           remembering that specifying the price control
                                                           framework requires more attention to detail and
                                                           written constraints than rate of return regulation. This
                                                           leads to the regulated entity taking more responsibility
                                                           for the outcomes of its rate decisions, so it operates
                                                           in an environment with less regulatory interference.
     Source: 2006: PricewaterhouseCoopers.
                                                                                           Appendix 5     67


                             GOVERNANCE AND THE ENERGY SECTOR

A.        Introduction

1.        The energy sector plays a key role in a country's development. The sector is often
characterized as vital, complex, and multidimensional. Until recently, most power sectors in
developing countries operated within large-scale capital expenditures and investments, making
them attractive and at the same time vulnerable to various public and private interests. Power
utilities in these countries have had a high level of government control and operated under state
monopolies. Many countries1 have initiated some level of reforms in their power sector, but the
achievements of reform were much slower than expected. Although most reforms have
effectively reduced severe energy shortages, little attention was paid to developing
simultaneously sustainable systems that address other equally important issues--such as the
financial inefficiency and unsustainable political support that weakens the operations of many
power utilities. The lack of financial and monitoring systems in the sector has resulted in poor
decision making and the proliferation of opaque transactions, which had encouraged power
service utilities to be used as a political instrument for political patronage and the exercise of
public power for political gain.

2.      Effective governance is most visible when it is absent. Lack of good governance is one
of the major impediments to energy reform processes and is often synonymous with (i) lack of a
stable political support; (ii) lack of rule of law; (iii) weak institutions to implement reforms; and
(iv) widespread corruption. These are some of the bottlenecks that prevent the sector from
effective operation and delivery of results-based (outcome/impact-oriented) reforms that lead to
sustainable operations and service delivery of the power.

3.       Promoting good governance has become a major focus in most development agenda of
transition and developing countries. The attention for improved governance has been increasing
consistently and has been considered an integral mechanism to deliver development effectively,
improve the impact of investment and project effectiveness, and better deliver benefits
(outcomes/impacts) to stakeholders. Addressing governance issues also strengthens signals
regarding the capabilities of governments to service its people and address poverty reduction by
equitably delivering power to poor areas at an affordable price. In essence, good governance
promotes norms of behavior that ensure governments will deliver what they promised to deliver.

4.      The challenges that surround energy sector governance are enormous. Their impact on
investment, financial stability, competitiveness, and economic development are as high as their
impact on the poor. Unstable supply caused by inefficiencies force the poor to absorb
inequitable costs of power. For example, cost recovery is one of the biggest issues facing the
energy sector in Asia. In many countries, consumer revenues do not cover the cost of the
energy supply or the environmental costs associated with energy generation and distribution.
This situation is not conducive to private sector investment because of the associated high cost
of demands from all kinds of concessions, and the high price associated for risk mitigation.
Large direct or indirect subsidies in turn create fertile ground for corruption--from petty to grand.

5.      Governance systems vary between energy subsectors, depending on the economic
conditions. The term "governance" is used to describe the complex set of policy processes and
control relationships that occur between the various players in the energy sector. Table A5.1

1
    The World Bank has conducted a power reform survey on 115 countries. The report found that all but 24 had
    initiated some level of reforms in their power sector.
68       Appendix 5


shows key energy governance players. Some important aspects of energy governance are: (i)
the process by which policy is formulated and implemented; (ii) interaction of public authorities
(both at the central and government level and between various tiers of governments); (iii) the
role of the state in owning and/or managing energy industries; (iv) enabling markets to function
competitively and efficiently; and (v) the regulatory process, where markets fail and where
externalities are not incorporated.

                               Table A5.1: Key Energy Governance Players
    Key Energy Governance Player                                 Descriptions (examples)
    Policy Maker                          ·    Parliament, the minister, and institutions empowered to govern
                                               certain activities or institutions, such as regulators or local
                                               authorities
    Energy Industries                     ·    Coal, petroleum, nuclear, electricity, or renewable energy
                                               subsectors; and the various industry owners, including the state
                                               and private shareholders
    Government Departments                ·    National, state and provincial governments, and local authorities;
    Energy Consumers                      ·    Households, agriculture, or large electricity-based industries
    Supranational bodies                  ·    Regional trade blocs
    Other Stakeholders                    ·    Organized labor, civic organizations, researchers, and energy
                                               service companies
    Source: Rao, G.P. 2006. Anti-corruption in the Power Sector - A Background paper for the World Bank Energy
            Week.

6.      The challenges that surround energy sector governance are enormous. Their impact on
investment, financial stability, competitiveness, and economic development are as high as their
impact on the poor. Unstable supply caused by inefficiencies force the poor to absorb
inequitable costs of power. For example, cost recovery is one of the biggest issues facing the
energy sector in Asia. In many countries, consumer revenues do not cover the cost of the
energy supply or the environmental costs associated with energy generation and distribution.
This situation is not conducive to private sector investment because of the associated high cost
of demands from all kinds of concessions, and the high price associated for risk mitigation.
Large direct or indirect subsidies in turn create fertile ground for corruption--from petty to grand.

           1.       Congruence Between ADB Energy and Governance Policy Initiatives

7.       The ADB energy policy identifies governance as one of its major operational priorities for
the energy sector. 2 ADB considers that building up good governance in the sector would
translate into substantial benefits that are commensurate to the large investment provided to the
sector. The energy policy considers operational challenges and issues that can be best
addressed by placing significant attention to improve governance in the sector's operation.
These include (i) financial control systems, (ii) procurement of goods and services,
(iii) improvements in productivity and efficiency of the system, (iv) occurrence of high electricity
losses in transmission and distribution, and (v) theft and corruption.




2
    ADB will undertake interventions in the energy sector that support the overarching objective of poverty reduction.
    The operational priorities relevant to the energy sector are (i) environmental protection, (ii) good governance,
    (iii) private sector development, and (iv) regional and subregional cooperation. (Source: ADB. 2000. Energy Policy.
    Manila [para 2, page 1].)
                                                                                                          Appendix 5       69


8.      Promoting good governance is a crosscutting agenda of ADB in all of its sectors and
development agenda.3 The 2000 Review includes efforts to address good governance in the
sector in its agenda and strategy. It considers that increasing private participation, transparency,
and predictability through introduction of competitive markets and profit considerations will have
beneficial effects on promoting competition among service providers. Competition will promote
the use of innovative methods to increase revenue, and provides a natural incentive to curtail
corrupt practices. As governments distance themselves from the management of the energy
sector by opening the sector for private sector initiatives, the regulator's role increases and
accountability improves. The role of the regulator is extremely important. It needs to exhibit
capability and vigilance; and be empowered to prevent, detect, and punish unscrupulous
behavior and safeguard the interest of small consumers.

9.       ADB adopted a governance policy in 1995 and anti-corruption policy in 1998. The
second Medium Term Strategy identified improving governance and preventing corruption as
one of ADB's five corporate priorities.4 ADB's Second Governance and Anti-corruption Action
Plan (GACAP II) is designed to improve ADB's performance in the implementation of
governance and anticorruption policies, with an increasing focus on the sectors which ADB is
involved. It is focused on helping ADB achieve key results in four areas: (i) improved
identification and management of governance and corruption risks in country strategies and
programs, and annual country portfolio review missions; (ii) strengthened governance and
anticorruption components in program and project design; (iii) strengthened program and project
administration and portfolio management; and (iv) improved organizational structure, human
resources, and access to expertise. Implementation of the GACAP II is expected to enable
developing member countries (DMCs), in partnership with ADB, to design and deliver better
quality projects and programs.

10.    ADB's policy on governance defines it as "the manner in which power is exercised in the
management of a country's economic and social resources for development". ADB's concept of
governance focuses on the ingredients for effective management, irrespective of the precise set
of economic policies that find favor with a government. Table A5.2 shows the relevance of the
four elements of good governance in ADB's Energy Policy. There is a high degree of
congruence.

           2.        Governance in ADB Energy Projects and Technical Assistance

11.     The Operations Evaluation Department (OED) randomly selected 30 loans and TA from
all 2000­2006 ADB energy projects to determine the extent to which governance provisions had
been integrated in the design of the projects. Nine out of the 60 energy loans and 21 out of 130
TA were selected and reviewed. Eight of the energy sector loans provided explicit stipulations
on good governance and anticorruption in their report and recommendation of the President to
the Board of Directors (RRP). General provisions ensuring that governance is taken at project
entry included: (i) briefing on ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998) with the central and local
governments and executing agencies, drawing close attention to sections on fraud and
corruption added to ADB's Procurement Guidelines (2006) and Guidelines on the Use of
Consultants (2006) which stipulate the need for bidders, suppliers, contractors, and consultants

3
    ADB's Medium-Term Strategy II aims to strengthen the impact of ADB's assistance on poverty reduction by
    focusing on five strategic priorities: (i) catalyzing investment, (ii) strengthening inclusiveness, (iii) promoting
    regional cooperation and integration, (iv) managing the environment, and (v) improving governance and preventing
    corruption.
4
    The four essential components of good governance are (i) accountability, (ii) participation, (iii) predictability, and (iv)
    transparency
 70     Appendix 5


 to observe the highest standard of ethics in the procurement and execution of contracts; (ii) use
 of an internationally oriented accounting system that has both internal and external audit
 systems; (iii) capacity building on financial management, enterprise reforms and governance,
 human resources development, performance management, environmental, and benefits
 monitoring and energy improvement activities; and (iv) inclusion of specific assurances such as
 (a) compliance with local laws and policies, (b) putting in place monitoring programs, and (c)
 establishment of an independent anticorruption commission. Some projects have included
 covenants and assurances to ensure that initiatives on good governance and anticorruption are
 given sufficient attention during project implementation. Examples based on the reviewed
 energy projects are presented in Table A5.3.

               Table A5.2: Elements of Good Governance and ADB's Energy Policy
 Element                          Description                    Areas of Action         Consistent with
                                                                                        ADB Energy Policy
 A. Accountability   ·  Making public office answerable for   · Public sector                  9
                        government behavior                      management
                    · Measure of public official              · Public enterprise              9
                        performance                              management and
                    · Evaluation of economic and financial       reform
                        performance                           · Public financial               9
                    · Effectiveness of policy formulation,       management
                        implementation, and efficiency in     · Civil service reform
                        resource use
 B. Participation   · Considers people to be agents of        · Participation of               9
                        development                              beneficiaries and
                    · Provides opportunity to beneficiaries      affected groups
                        to improve design and                 · Public-private sector          9
                        implementation of public programs        interface
                        and projects                          · Decentralization of            9
                    · Increases ownership and enhances           public and service
                        results                                  delivery functions
                    · Interface between public and private       (empowerment of
                        entities                                 local government)
                    · Bottom-up approach to economic          · Cooperation with
                        and social development                   NGOs
 C. Predictability  · Existence of laws, regulations, and     · Law and                        9
                        policies                                 development
                    · Fair and consistent application of      · Legal frameworks               9
                        rule of law                              for private sector
                    · Existence of legal frameworks to           development
                        ensure that: (i) business risk can be
                        assessed rationally, (ii) transaction
                        costs are lowered, and (iii)
                        governmental arbitrariness is
                        minimized
 D. Transparency    · Availability of information to the      · Disclosure of                  9
                        public and clarity about government      information
                        rules, regulations, and decisions
                    · Access to accurate and timely
                        information
ADB = Asian Development Bank, NGO = non-government organization.
Source: ADB Governance Policy, and the 2000 Review.
                                                                                                   Appendix 5         71


         Table A5.3: Specific Provisions on Governance and Anticorruption in ADB
                                     2000--2006 Loans

   ADB Energy Projects (2000­2006)                  Explicit Provisions for Governance and Anticorruption
   (1) L2146-PRC: Coal Mine Methane              ADB's program for the PRC includes assistance that will
   Development Project                           improve governance and provide incentives to reduce the
                                                 incidence of corruption in the longer term. Shanxi Provincial
                                                 Government SPG will take the following anticorruption actions:
                                                 (i) involve full-time officials from SPG to periodically review,
                                                 together with staff of the project management team, and the
                                                 concerned tendering companies, bidding process, delivery of
                                                 equipment and materials, and installation, construction, and
                                                 operation; (ii) introduce a dual-signing system, in which the
                                                 winning bidder for a civil works contract also signs an
                                                 anticorruption contract with the employer; and (iii) periodically
                                                 inspect civil works contractor's activities related to fund
                                                 withdrawals and settlements.
   (2) L2189-BAN: Gas Transmission and           ADB extended support to the Government by establishing an
   Development Project                           independent Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) followed by a
                                                 legislation, passed in February 2004. Through its core
                                                 governance intervention in the form of the TA supporting good
                                                 governance initiatives, ADB is working for operationalization of
                                                 ACC to foster an independent mechanism for anticorruption and
                                                 development of a national integrity strategy to provide a
                                                 strategic policy framework for anticorruption in Bangladesh. The
                                                 proposed Project incorporates several specific anticorruption
                                                 measures like: (i) strict financial management with strengthened
                                                 government monitoring and independent monitoring, (ii) strong
                                                 project supervision with appropriate consultancy input,
                                                 (iii) regular independent performance auditing to monitor project
                                                 implementation, and (iv) random and independent spot checks.
   (3) L1803-IND: Gujarat Power Sector           Governance related issues will be addressed through
   Development Project                           (i) reorganization of the sector along functional lines;
                                                 (ii) appointment of an independent regulatory commission to set
                                                 tariffs and structure competition in the sector; and (iii) gradual
                                                 replacement of appointees of the state government on the
                                                 boards of management of the sector companies with experts.
   (4) L1807-PAK: Energy Sector                  Expanding the role of the sector regulator under the Program
   Restructuring Program                         will also ensure good governance and efficient performance.
                                                 Privatization of Karachi Electricity Supply Corporation (KESC) is
                                                 also strongly a governance issue that will act to reduce political
                                                 and socioeconomic risks.
   (5) L2152-IND: Power Grid Transmission        Enhancing governance through corporatization, independence
   (Sector)                                      of boards of directors from the Government, delegation of
                                                 powers to management, computerized management information
                                                 systems, and commercialization of activities.
   ADB = Asian Development Bank, PRC = People's Republic of China, RRP = Report and Recommendation of
   the President to the Board of Directors, TA = Technical Assistance.
   Sources: ADB. 2004. Loan to the People's Republic of China for Coal Mine Methane Development Project,
             ADB. 2005. Loan to Bangladesh for Gas Transmission and Development Project, ADB. 2000. Loan
             to Pakistan on Energy Sector Restructuring Program.

12.    All loan projects under the OED review also stipulated conditions designed to enhanced
the other pillars of good governance (such as transparency, accountability, and participation) in
the project design. Table A5.4 sets out examples of the measures adopted by ADB to promote
good governance.
72     Appendix 5



                                Table A5.4: Governance Measures

Area                                                     Measures
Procurement           ·   Use of ADB guidelines on procurement and consulting services
                      ·   Use of ADB's standard bidding documents and standard request for proposal
                          documents for procurement and recruitment of consultants
                      ·   Bid specifications and packaging to be prepared to ensure maximum
                          competition under international competitive bidding procedures
                      ·   Capacity development of sector entities on e-procurement to increase
                          transparency, accountability, and efficiency in procurement
Financial             ·   Regular access to the executing agency's accounting and control systems to
Management                monitor expenditures and other financial transactions and safe custody of
and Audit                 project-financed assets
                      ·   Capacity development of sector companies in accounting and internal control
                          systems, financial management, and audit capabilities
                      ·   Expanded use of advanced information and communication technology-based
                          financial management systems to ensure efficient and accountable financial
                          management systems
                      ·   Financial statements to be audited by external auditors acceptable to ADB
                          and regularly published and reported to the shareholders
                      ·   Measurable financial performance indicators for each company to be
                          established, evaluated, and benchmarked
                      ·   Introduction of an appropriate internal audit system through the capacity
                          building program
                      ·   Implementation of an operational risk mitigation action plan, and undertaking
                          a joint operational risk assessment with development partners
Institutional/        ·   Public disclosure of operational and financial performance of sector
Corporate                 companies to improve transparency
Governance            ·   Fully functional sector regulator to ensure a level playing field among sector
                          entities and to improve sector governance
                      ·   Continued introduction of a new corporate culture through further
                          commercialization
                       ·  Appointment of independent board of directors
                       ·  Revision of Board recruitment procedures
                       ·  Development of formal code of conduct for Board of Directors
                       ·  Delegation of powers to companies' management
                       ·  Promotion of private sector participation and public-private partnership
                       ·  Expansion of computerized billing system
ADB = Asian Development Bank.
Source: ADB. 1995. Governance: Sound Development Management. Manila.

13.    Boxes A5.1 and A5.2 illustrate initiatives to integrate good governance in India's energy
reform process, and the resulting outcomes and impacts of improved state electricity board and
sector performance.
                                                                                                   Appendix 5   73




       Box A5.1: Promoting Governance in India's State Electricity Board Reform

Asian Development Bank (ADB) program assistance to India's three state electricity boards (SEBs)
(Gujarat, Assam, and Madhya Pradesh) has generally been successful, as the assistance was
targeted to sectors that were committed to change. In all three SEBs evaluated, unbundling was
achieved and new separate corporate entities with "clean" balance sheets have been established as a
result of restructuring. This sector restructuring resulted in outcomes and impacts reflecting qualities of
good governance such as the following.

Restructuring Strategy in the Reform
· Partial state assumption of liabilities
· Transparent subsidies
· Renegotiation of power purchase agreements
· Rationalization of state-owned generation to ensure merit order dispatch
· Changed organizational structures and cultures, which were refocused on service delivery and
    directly involved customers

Pillars of Good Governance
·    Increased accountability
·    Promote transparency
·    Increased predictability and
·    Increased participation

Outcomes of Reform
The state regulators have developed independence and are proactively regulating the SEBs'
generation, transmission, and distribution sectors with performance-based regulation. The regulators
have, for instance, targeted improvements in supply, service levels, and mandated reductions in non-
technical losses. Furthermore, the regulators are actively promoting consumer participation in the
reform and regulatory processes. They are gradually becoming financially independent by generating
their own revenues, and are actively participating as a group at the national level to develop their
expertise.

Impacts
The impacts of the Indian reforms have increased competitiveness and had a demonstration effect
between the states' electricity sectors as well as their regulators. This has added momentum to the
federal impetus for reform and has isolated national antireform movements.

Challenges Ahead
The least effective changes have been in the areas of human resource development and in attaining
the desired level of governance in the distribution sector, including management and accounting
practices. However, this is outweighed by the success in effective policy change which were a result of
the covenants instituted by ADB, with high "hurdles" and the conditional release of loan tranches upon
meeting covenants. These have proven to be a successful approach to meeting policy changes.

Source: ADB. 2007. Sector Assistance Program Evaluation of the Indian Power Sector. Manila.
        (forthcoming).
74    Appendix 5



                      Box A5.2: The Gujarat Power Sector Development Program

 In 2000, the Gujarat Power Sector Development Program initiated reforms to address governance-related
 issues through: (i) reorganization of the sector along functional lines; (ii) appointment of an independent
 regulatory commission to set tariffs and structure competition in the sector; and (iii) gradual replacement of
 appointees of the state government on the boards of management of the sector companies with experts. ICRA
 Limited, which carries out ratings of state power utilities, has noted significant improvements in Gujarat in recent
 years--including significant reductions in financial losses, formulation of a financial restructuring program, and
 continued government support for reform. ADB's assistance has been successful, and there may be learning
 points from the Gujarat experience that can be applied in other states. The financial and organizational
 restructuring have turned around the finances of Gujarat State Electricity Board from a loss-making enterprise to
 a profitable organization without an increase in tariffs over a four-year period. The average cost of service has
 fallen from Rs4.15 per kWh in 2003/4 to Rs3.53 in 2005/6, and average realization has increased from Rs2.84
 to Rs2.98 per unit without any increase in tariffs. Subsidies have been reduced from 19.2% of revenues to
 15.9%, and when included in annual revenues have brought the companies into a net profit situation. A number
 of factors contributed to the rapid success of the Gujarat reform program. These include the following.
 · There was already agreement between the state government and the utility on the need for restructuring
      and the approach to adopt before ADB became involved. The Gujarat state government had passed the
      necessary legislation before the federal Electricity Act, 2003, reflecting the local understanding need of the
      need for change. Government has maintained this commitment. It has, for example, encouraged the
      recruitment of professional management and avoided political appointments, taken over some of the
      sector's debt, and committed to provide continuing financial support for agricultural consumers.
 · There is a broadly commercial culture in the state of Gujarat. As a result, the need for reform has
      widespread acceptance among consumers.
 · Staff accepted reforms as a result of tripartite agreements between the state government, the utility, and
      unions. All 50,000 staff received commitments about job continuity and, in many cases, staff were promoted
      as a result of restructuring. Some 3,000 people have been recruited to replace retirees, with a three-year
      trial period. Overall, the companies have the technical and commercial skills needed to reform the utility,
      and performance has been enhanced through target setting for staff.
 · All rural feeders were bifurcated to separate power for villages from power for agricultural consumers.
      Agricultural consumers now obtain power for a predictable 8 hours per day and at a concessionary rate.
      Rural villages and households are continuously connected. Because agriculture power is not supplied at
      system peak, 500 MW of load has been removed from the peak and the system load curve is almost flat.
      Households are happy to have a continuous supply while farmers appreciate the improved reliability of
      supply during the eight-hour period and have accepted the change.
 · Metering is now compulsory for all consumers. The metering program is not yet complete, with about
      400,000 (out of 8,000,000) customers still unmetered. However, 60% of meters have been replaced and
      meters have now been placed on all feeders, enabling greatly improved monitoring of losses.
 · A growing industrial sector in Gujarat is keeping revenue buoyant.
 · There were significant opportunities for cost reduction and performance improvement. Negotiations with
      IPPs resulted in reductions in unit rates from Rs2.34 in 2003/04 to Rs2.06 in 2004/05 and Rs1.85 in
      2006/07. The load factor was improved on generation plant, and fuel management was improved. Interest
      rates on borrowings were renegotiated and reduced. As a result of better system monitoring, transmission
      and distribution losses were reduced by 6­7% over the past 2­3 years and are now around 26­27%.
      Collection efficiency was improved from 91% to 93% of billings to around 100%.
 · Tariff levels and structures have been adequate to sustain cash flow. The regulator granted increases in
      2000, including a 300% increase for agricultural consumers. The next increase was in June 2004, when
      rates rose by about 1%, and a further application was being processed at the time of the mission. Overall,
      there should be a profit across the group in 2005/06.
 · The quality of regulation has been good. The regulator has appropriate expertise and has pressed for
      improvements in performance. There are good communications with all power sector stakeholders. There is
      transparency in the regulator through publication on the Commission's website. The regulator has also
      published a future road map for the sector, covering such topics as open access and consumer choice.

 ADB = Asian Development Bank, kWh = kilowatt-hour, MW = megawatt, IPP = independent power producer.
 Sources:
 1. Rao, G.P. 2006. Anti-corruption in the Power Sector - A Background paper for the World Bank Energy Week.
 2. Operations evaluation mission.
                                                                                              Appendix 5         75



B.         Potential for Corruption in the Energy Sector
14.      Because energy is central to almost all socioeconomic activities, and power is essential
to production and operation, the energy sector is a target and source of corruption. Individuals
and institutions that control access to energy sources, transformation, and distribution of energy
hold significant power. The sector's potential of generating economic rents from energy
extraction, transformation, and use, and the large capital investments it engages, makes the
sector vulnerable to corruption. Opportunities for corruption occur at all stages--from energy
extraction to transformation and distribution. At the project level, corruption occurs during the
early stages of power project identification and formulation, project tendering, and bidding;
operation and maintenance. Corruption in the sector is difficult to prove and determine because
of the complex systems and the multidimensional scale to which they operate in the
development of a country. Corruption may occur in developing and transitional economies
because of lack of, or weak judicial and regulatory systems, and the existence of a political
culture that overlooks corrupt acts. 5 The central role of government agencies that oversee
virtually all aspects of the energy sector, whether privatized or not, make transactions and
decision making less efficient because decisions were often made in favor of political interests.
The limited prosecution of corruption cases and low conviction rates make it difficult to deter
corrupt practices in the sector. Figure A5.1 indicates the sources of corruption in the sector.

                   Figure A5.1: Potential Sources of Corruption at Different Stages
                               Of the Project Cycle for Power Projects



     Influence on needs     Disqualifying                             Frauds on quality,
                                                  Collusion among                            Bribery and fraud
       assessment and         potential                               land acquisition,
                                                      bidders                                in fuel and parts
        specification        competitors                              billing, and work in
                                                                                             procurement
                                                                      progress




     Identification and         Pre-              Tendering and        Implementation         Operations and
          Design            qualification            Bidding                                   Maintenance




        Influence on          Influence on         Influence on        Collaboration on        Solicitation of
     project formulation   inclusion of certain     selection of          fraudulent          bribes and theft
                                 bidders          winning bidders          practices



Source: Adopted from Transparency International, ADB. 2004. Sector Assistance Program Evaluation of Philippine
        Power Sector, Operations Evaluation Department, Manila.



5
    Mathias, Ruth. 2002. Corruption and the Energy Sector. Paper presented during a workshop on Sectoral
    Perspectives on Corruption sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).
    Washington, DC.
76       Appendix 5



15.     The forms and extent of corruption in the energy sector affect the demand and supply-
side of energy operations differently. At the consumer level, "petty corruption" involving minor
bribery and collusion happen because of consumers' willingness to pay for convenience (getting
new connections quickly, avoiding time-consuming paperwork) has created a supply-side
pressure that perpetuates this form of corruption. Corruption on energy transformation and
distribution is manifested through:
          (i)      non-technical system losses (e.g., falsified meter readings, altered invoices, and
                   illegal purchase);6
          (ii)     interference in the flow of funds/barter/offsets within the system and to fuel
                   suppliers;
          (iii)    manipulation of the flows of electricity to favored customers;
          (iv)     opaque uneconomic import arrangements;
          (v)      bid manipulation through "limited" specifications and/or pre-qualifications;
          (vi)     commission paid by bidders for contract awards;
          (vii)    collusion of bidders; and
          (viii)   payments for positions favorable to extracting corrupt payments.

16.    Box A5.3 illustrates potential areas where corruption occurs in different segments of the
sector and the efforts of the Government of India to combat corruption.




6
    Surveys sponsored by the World Bank as part of load management and agricultural electricity studies in India have
    shown that 20­30% of electricity attributed to unmetered agricultural consumption is appropriated by high-income
    households, industry, and large commercial establishments such as shopping malls. Such "appropriations"
    constitute corrupt behavior if those entities who receive electricity free or at reduced prices provide in return
    financial or political support to individuals who are in charge of payment collection.
                                                                                                   Appendix 5      77


                    Box A5.3: Anticorruption Efforts in the Indian Energy Sector

The Regulatory Commission in India found that the finances of the state electricity boards were unsustainable,
as a large farm sector had no metering of its power consumption and was supplied power at a nominal tariff.
There were also large transmission and commercial losses (39% in the case of Madhya Pradesh). Commercial
loss was a euphemism for theft. The Commission found that most of the corruption in the retail supply revolved
round metering and billing. The Commission considered that bringing down the commercial losses--as the
easiest and quickest to tackle, with only a small requirement of funds--should be given the highest priority. This
was among the first issues addressed in the reform process.
Forms of Theft and Actions Taken by the State Electricity Regulators
Generation. Corruption arose in cases where ownership of generating companies was in the private sector, and
the power was sold to the Licensees (public sector). Money paid by the Licensee was, in some cases, for power
not supplied. There was collusion between the generator and the person in charge of recording the supply. No
supervision of the recording of power received was made, nor was there any energy audit. This was taking
place largely in cases of smaller, unconventional energy generators. Similarly, power was purchased without
reference to the variable cost and frequency. The Commission directed the Transmission Licensee to: (i) fix
0.2 accuracy class meters at the interface points, between generation company and transmission company and
between transmission company and distribution company; (ii) conduct regular and thorough energy audits and
furnish information in the format provided by the commission; and (iii) develop a comprehensive procedure for
Merit Order dispatch in consultation with all stakeholders, and file it with the Commission for approval.
Agriculture Sector. There was often no metering in agriculture sector. Agriculture consumption was charged
based on the capacity (in horsepower) of the pump set used--the higher the horsepower, the higher the tariff.
There were about 2.3 million agricultural connections. Corruption could take place in recording the horsepower
of the pump set. Based on a number of cases, the horsepower of the pump set was higher than what was
incorporated in the records of the Licensee. There was collusion between the farmer and the lineman, or the
farmer had upgraded the capacity clandestinely. Secondly, a large number of farmers were taking power without
authorized connections. The Commission directed that billing should be based on the actual capacity of pump
sets, and that unauthorized connections must be either regularized or disconnected and all new connections
must have meters.
Domestic and Commercial Sectors. In the domestic and commercial sectors, theft arose from: (i) non-
metering because of lack of meters, resulting in arbitrary assessment of consumption; (ii) tampering of meters
(iii) incorrect recording of meter readings to keep the consumption at a lower level to escape billing at higher
rates in a non-telescopic tariff system; (iv) ad hoc billing in case of stuck and faulty meters; (v) billing without
reading meters; (vi) supply of power through fictitious connections bypassing the meter; (vii) supply of power
without bringing it to utility records; (viii) having multiple meters in the same household or commercial
establishment to keep the consumption at lower tariffs; (ix) continuing to supply power, although power supply
was disconnected on record for nonpayment of bills; (x) billing made at a lower level than the actual meter
reading in collusion with the billing staff; and (xi) some consumers used domestic premises for commercial use
to pay the domestic tariff instead of the commercial rate.
Industrial Sector. Large-scale theft was taking place, especially in power-intensive industries--with and without
collusion from the utility staff. Commercial incentives to steal electricity were high since industrial tariffs were
very high because of cross-subsidization of the domestic and agricultural sectors. Theft involved (i) simple
bypassing of the meter or tampering the meter to make it run slowly, (ii) tampering with the components within
the meter to record lower consumption, (iii) manipulating the multiplication factor on the meter in cases of high
power consumption industries (in collusion with the meter installer), and (iv) laying underground bypass cables.
Solutions include demand meters for consumers with intermediate connected load; for high tension consumers,
metering should be provided on the high tension side. There were also cases where industrial units had their
own captive generation sets and a standby connection to supply of power from the Licensee. The Licensee was
actually drawing power from the high tension connection, bypassing the meter without operating the captive
generating set. Commissions are directing utilities to launch special drives to detect theft in all cases of
industrial units with captive generation sets and intensify surprise checks in the industrial establishments with
vigilance staff and remotely monitoring their consumption.

Source: Operations Evaluation Department ADB. 2007. India Sector Assistance Program Evaluation on Energy.
        (Forthcoming).
78       Appendix 5



C.         Investigation of ADB Energy Projects (1998­2006)

17.     Despite the application of standard governance and anti-corruption requirements in the
loan agreements for energy projects, some attempts to circumvent procurement processes were
detected. As of July 2006, ADB's Integrity Division7 had identified 49 cases involving energy
projects with allegations of corruption. Of the 49 cases, 44 were loan projects and 5 were TA
grants. The cases were spread among 11 DMCs (Table A5.5). Based on the investigations,
these cases can be summarized as: (i) irregularities in the bid evaluation process, (ii)
submission of falsified certificates of consultants and performance certificates of firms, (iii)
procurement discrepancies and irregularities, (iv) collusion of consultants and contractors, (v)
collusion in the bid process, (vi) corruption of officials in procurement and administrative
matters, (vii) payoffs from participating firms to get the contract awards, and (viii) bribery.
Allegations of corruption were the most prominent (37%) complaint, followed by charges on
fraudulent practices (26%), misrepresentation (12%), abuse of position (6%), collusion (6%),
bribery and extortion (4%), and others (8%) (Table A5.6).

                      Table A5.5: Allegations of Corruption in the Energy Sector
                                          (as of 21 July 2006)
              Country                                                   No. of Cases          Percent
                                                                                                (%)
              Bangladesh                                                       24                49
              Cambodia                                                          1                 2
              People's Republic of China                                        3                 6
              India                                                             5                10
              Lao People's Democratic Republic                                  1                 2
              Nepal                                                             7                14
              Pakistan                                                          1                 2
              Philippines                                                       1                 2
              Samoa                                                             1                 2
              Sri Lanka                                                         2                 4
              Tajikistan                                                        3                 6
                       Total                                                   49                99
            Source: Asian Development Bank. Office of the Auditor General, Integrity Division.

               Table A5.6: Energy Projects Allegations of Corruption Case Category
                                       (as of 21 July 2006)
                                                                          No. of Cases           Percent
             Category                                                                              (%)
             Corruption                                                          18                  37
             Misrepresentation                                                    6                  12
             Fraudulent Practices (other than misrepresentation)                 13                 27
             Bribery/Extortion                                                    2                   4
             Collusion                                                            3                   6
             Abuse of Position                                                    3                   6
             Others                                                               4                   8
                  Total                                                          49                100
         No. = number.
         Source: Asian Development Bank. Office of the Auditor General, Integrity Division.

18.    Investigations of 32 (out of the 49) cases were closed because (i) the allegations were
found to be based more on the scope of contractual, procurement, and executing agency's
7
    Available: http://www.adb.org/Integrity
                                                                                                Appendix 5         79


management capacity issues rather than fraud and corruption (15 cases); (ii) there was lack of
credible evidence and information, or the concerns had no merit (11 cases); and
(iii) allegations/issues had been dealt with by the respective departments/government (6 cases).
The ADB Integrity Oversight Committee has sanctioned 10 project cases where fraud and
corruption were proven. Summaries of specific actions taken are in Table A5.7.
      Table A5.7: Synopsis of Confirmed Corruption Cases in ADB Energy Projects
   Project No./Title   Year          Allegation                Anticorruption Sanctions by ADB Integrity
                                                                            Oversight Committee
   Loan 1094-PAK:      2000   Alleged procurement          The firm in question was determined to have
   Second Oil and             discrepancies                submitted falsified documents to manipulate the
   Gas Development                                         award of contract to a fictitious firm, signed the
   Project                                                 contract in behalf of the bidders, and collected
                                                           payment. The equipment delivered was not in
                                                           accordance with specifications. The firm was
                                                           debarred for 5 years while the owner and manager
                                                           were declared ineligible indefinitely.
   Loan 1885-BAN:      2003   A firm alleged that Firm     The certificate of work experience submitted by
   West Zone Power            A falsified its work         Firm A was fake, and the firm's internal
   System                     experience in a previous     investigation substantiated that an employee of its
   Development                contract in Nepal as part    Bangladesh Office prepared and submitted the
   Project                    of a bid for the turnkey     falsified document. The alleged misrepresentation
                              contract under the           of work experience by Firm B was actually a
                              above project. Firm B        typographical error. Firm A's employee was
                              misrepresented its work      sanctioned for 2 years. Further action was not
                              experience in its            taken with regard to Firm A. A strong warning letter
                              proposal for the project.    was issued to Firm B indicating that such error will
                                                           not be allowed in the future and may be interpreted
                                                           as misrepresentation.
   Loan 1730-BAN       2003   Alleged submission of        The three performance certificates submitted were
   (SF): Dhaka                false performance            established to be fake. The firm claimed the
   Power System               certificates as well as      certificate had been tampered by the EA and a
   Upgrade Project            certain "arrangement"        competitor. Specific names were requested to
                              with an official of the EA   allow further investigations but the firm never
                                                           replied to further inquiries. Background checks did
                                                           not establish any ties between the firm and the
                                                           official referred to in the allegation. The firm was
                                                           sanctioned for 7 years. Its appeal was also rejected
                                                           because of lack of new information and resistance
                                                           to disclose the names of the alleged perpetrators.
   Loan 1732-NEP:      2004   Potential collusion: the     The bid price information in both bids is similar and
   Rural                      submitted bids of the        the name of the representative of one of the
   Electrification            two bidders (joint           bidders was written in the price schedule page of
   Distribution and           ventures) contained          the bid submitted by the other bidder. It was
   Transmission               similar information          concluded that the two bidders collaborated with
   Project                                                 each other and shared confidential information
                                                           prior to submission of their respective bids. A
                                                           sanction period of 3 years was imposed on each of
                                                           the lead firms of the two bidding joint ventures and
                                                           their representatives.
   Loan 1884-BAN       2004   Potential collusion          The total and per line item prices, both in local and
   (SF) and Loan              among three bidders:         foreign amounts, quoted by the three firms were
   1885-BAN (SF)              firms A, B, and C            identical. The firms admitted quoting the same
                                                           prices as they intended to jointly supply the
                                                           materials under a de facto agreement, given the
                                                           large requirement. A formal joint venture was not
                                                           initiated because of lack of knowledge of the
                                                           procedure. Two of the bidders declined to extend
                                                           their respective bid bonds and their decline letters
                                                           were verbatim. They claimed they could not extend
80      Appendix 5


     Project No./Title   Year          Allegation                  Anticorruption Sanctions by ADB Integrity
                                                                               Oversight Committee
                                                               their bid bonds because of an anticipated increase
                                                               in material prices and disclosed to have discussed
                                                               the bid security issue together and prepared a
                                                               single letter. The three firms colluded when they
                                                               prearranged to jointly supply the materials for the
                                                               contract and submitted identical bid prices. A three-
                                                               year sanction period was imposed on each of the
                                                               three firms, considering that they cooperated
                                                               during the investigation. The decision was
                                                               appealed but rejected because of lack of new
                                                               information to consider.
     Loan 1885-BAN:      2004   Submission of false            Evidence was received that the firm submitted a
     West Zone Power            performance certificate        falsified performance certificate. The firm did not
     System                                                    respond to inquiries to seek clarifications. The firm
     Development                                               was sanctioned for 7 years. No appeal was
     Project                                                   received.
     Loan 1884-BAN       2004   Alleged submission of          The EA substantiated that the firm falsified its
     (SF) and 1885-             false performance              performance certificate. A finding letter was sent to
     BAN:West Zone              certificate                    the firm and a representative admitted he was
     Power System                                              responsible for falsification of the document. The
     Development                                               firm is ultimately responsible for its representatives,
     Project                                                   directors, and officers when they act in behalf of
                                                               the company. Both the firm and its erring
                                                               representative were each sanctioned for 3 years.
     TA 3552-NEP:        2004   Various allegations from       The firm's nonpayment of service fee and expert's
     Power Sector               the expert and two             failure to return the advance payments are
     Reforms in Nepal           project officers:              contractual issues which should be resolved
                                (i) according to a project     between the expert and the firm. The allegation of
                                officer, the expert            misrepresentation was investigated and it was
                                misrepresented his             found that the expert did not inform ADB of his
                                availability when he           current engagement on another ADB project,
                                signed the contract with       causing delay for 1.5 months. The expert claimed
                                ADB for subject TA;            he asked for a leave and thus thought that it would
                                (ii) another project           be okay but the Project Officer explained that such
                                officer claimed the            accommodation was done to minimize disruption in
                                expert failed to return        the project. There was no misunderstanding since
                                the advance payment of         the expert only asked for a leave and did not
                                $552 and airline ticket of     disclose his prior commitment on the other TA. The
                                A$6,662 when he was            expert was sanctioned 3 years.
                                terminated as a
                                consultant; and
                                (iii) the expert stated that
                                the consulting firm did
                                not pay his service fee
                                of $US11,000.
     Loan 1817-TAJ       2004   Submission of falsified        A joint venture consisting of two firms submitted an
     (SF): Power                financial information          audit opinion for 3 years ending December 2003,
     Rehabilitation             during the pre-                but the financial information was for calendar year
     Project                    qualification stage of the     2000, 2001, and 2002. The firms are United Sates
                                tender of the bidding for      based companies while the certifying auditor is
                                the contract                   based in Tajikistan. There was no reply to the
                                                               letters to the firm. ADB attempted to reach the firm
                                                               through the auditor and the resident mission but
                                                               failed. The letters sent through the resident
                                                               missions were not delivered, as the local couriers
                                                               were not able to locate the firm's addresses. The
                                                               joint venture firms were both sanctioned for 7
                                                               years. No appeal was received during the 90-day
                                                               appeal period.
     Loan 2039-BAN:      2005   Joint venture submitted        The certificate of the joint venture was falsified.
                                                                                               Appendix 5      81


 Project No./Title     Year           Allegation             Anticorruption Sanctions by ADB Integrity
                                                                          Oversight Committee
 Power Sector                  a false certificate of     Two of the five firms in the joint venture were
 Development                   experience in its bid      subcontractors of the project in 1999 and both
 Program                       tender                     asserted the correctness of the information
                                                          provided to the firm representing the joint venture.
                                                          These two firms (firms A and B) along with two
                                                          other firms (C and D) failed to review the bid
                                                          submission. The representative firm admitted the
                                                          wrongdoing. The representative firm was declared
                                                          ineligible to participate in ADB-financed activity for
                                                          5 years, firms A and B for 3 years, and firms C and
                                                          D for 1 year.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, BAN = Bangladesh, EA = executing agency, NEP = Nepal, No. = number,
PAK = Pakistan, SF = special fund, TA = technical assistance, TAJ = Tajikistan.
Source: Asian Development Bank. Office of the Auditor General, Integrity Division.
82    Appendix 6



        ENERGY INITIATIVES LEADING TO ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND IMPROVED
                            ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS


A.     Introduction

1.     Energy Efficiency initiatives promote reductions in greenhouse gas emissions hence
these initiatives are directly related to improvements in the environment. The most effective
mechanisms are demand-side and supply-side initiatives are discussed in more detail below.
More recent ADB initiatives are outlined at the end of Appendix 6.

2.       Supply-side energy efficiency projects refer to efficient energy generation, efficient
transmission, and distribution networks. Typical demand-side energy efficiency projects include
a full set of measures summarized by sector in Table A6. Most of the measures listed could be
applicable in many sectors, depending on the specific activities and the usage of energy.

       1.       Applications of Energy Efficiency at the Supply and Demand Side

3.       Most electricity generation plants in developing countries have a poor efficiency level.
The electricity transmission and distribution networks are also the poorest in the world. In India,
technical transmission and distribution losses were estimated at 22% in 2005. The
improvements of energy use will take place at both generation plants and delivery systems
(electric grid, hot water network) sides.

                a.     Supply-Side Energy Efficiency Applications at Generation Plants

4.     Energy at the supply side can be either electricity or heat. The primary sources are oil,
natural gas, coal, and hydro. Energy generation plants considered here are any centralized
systems that deliver end-use energy (electricity or heat) to consumers. For plants transforming
the thermal contents of primary resources in end-use energy, energy efficient measures could
include:
       (i)      fuel switching (natural gas/biomass instead of oil or coal);
       (ii)     renewable energy (biomass);
       (iii)    plant upgrading;
       (iv)     cogeneration;
       (v)      replacement of old equipment or plant by new efficient technologies (efficient
                boilers, efficient combustion control, etc.);
       (vi)     heat recovery (condensing water, waste gases);
       (vii)    steam systems (leaks control);
       (viii)   geothermal energy; and
       (ix)     efficient high voltage transformers and power factor correction (capacitor bank).

                b.     Supply-Side Energy Efficiency Applications in Energy
                       Transportation and Distribution Networks

5.     Transmission and distribution improvement measures aim to reduce energy losses
between the generation plant and end users. In the electricity network, current measures consist
of upgrading the voltage on transmission lines, installing capacitors in specific lines, and using
more efficient transformers. Thermal energy distribution systems are applied in urban heating.
Common actions target heat loss reduction through efficient insulation of the piping system, best
                                                                                                  Appendix 6      83


return lines, leak elimination, and trap maintenance. Energy can also be saved through better
design of the distribution network (pipe sizing, network length reduction with few zone boilers
instead of one large capacity boiler).

6.      The following table outlines demand-side measures which are capable of reducing the
overall energy consumption across for instance, commercial, industrial, and domestic sectors.

               Table A6: Application of Energy Efficiency at the Demand Side
Sector                                                  Applications/Technologies
                     ·   Combined heat and power systems (cogeneration)
                     ·   Waste heat/gas recovery for electricity generation or process heat
                                                                                      a
                     ·   Motors equipped with controllers and variable speed drives
                     ·   Steam systems: insulating steam and condensate return lines, stopping any steam
                         leaks, and maintaining steam traps
                     ·   Compressed air systems: variable-speed drives, stopping leaks, efficient nozzles
Industry
                     ·   Combustion: high performance furnaces and boilers, combustion control
                     ·   Absorption chillers: waste heat recovery or natural gas-fired machines
                     ·   Process change: from "wet" to "dry" process (in cement industry)
                     ·   Lighting: improve design; new technology (tri-phosphor fluorescents, high pressure
                         sodium); control (timers, sensors); skylights
                     ·   Energy management
                     ·   Improvement of buildings envelope (insulation, shading, efficient windows
                         and doors, etc.)
                     ·   Lighting systems improvements (low consumption lamps, compact fluorescent lamps,
                         electronic ballasts, skylights, control)
                     ·   Appliance efficiency: through star ratings and minimum standards
                     ·   Heating and cooling system (ice storage, upgrading boiler, insulation of ducts, free
                         cooling)
Commercial and       ·   Absorption chillers: waste heat, solar or natural gas-fired machines
Residential          ·   Control improvements
Buildings            ·   Energy efficient motors and variable-speed drives
                     ·   Energy efficient electronic goods (computers, photocopiers, etc.)
                     ·   Cogeneration
                     ·   Heat recovery
                     ·   Fuel switching (natural gas for oil or use of biomass)
                     ·   Renewable energy (solar hot water, photovoltaic, geothermal heat pump)
                     ·   Hot water heat pump or wastewater heat exchange
                     ·   New-build passive design (zero or low energy houses)
                     ·   Motors: efficient motors and pumps, variable speed drives for pumps
                     ·   Improvements of irrigation systems: water management, stopping water leaks,
                         maintaining water traps, waterway resizing
                     ·   Efficient lighting system
                     ·   Waste treatment system
Agricultural         ·   Fuel switch: biomass, biogas
                     ·   Efficient vehicles and machinery: top-runner standard tractor, low fuel consumption, bio-
                         carburant, etc.
                     ·   Renewable energy: solar hot water, photovoltaic, geothermal

                     ·   Development of clean energy motor vehicles
Transportation       ·   Energy conservation measures for traffic systems
                     ·   Accelerated introduction of cars acceptable to the top-runner standard
                     ·   Fuel switch for vehicles: hybrid, natural gas, or biofuel (bio-diesel, ethanol) models
                     ·   Technical improvements in electronic engine controls
                     ·   Demand-actuated cooling fans
                     ·   Intercoolers
                     ·   Low-profile radial tires
84       Appendix 6


Sector                                                    Applications/Technologies
                          · Multiple trailers
                          · Conservation programs: reduce energy use, e.g., programs to improve the
                            efficiency of equipment (e.g., lighting and motors); buildings; and industrial processes
                          · Load management programs: redistribute energy demand to spread it more
                            evenly throughout the day, e.g., load shifting programs (reducing air conditioning loads
Utility DSM                 during periods of peak demand and shifting these loads to less critical periods), time-of-
                            use rates (charging more for electricity during periods of peak demand), and interruptible
Programs                    rates (providing rate discounts in exchange for the right to reduce customers' electricity
                            allocation during the few hours each year with the highest electricity demand)
                          · Strategic load growth programs: increase energy use during some periods, e.g.,
                            programs that encourage cost-effective electrical technologies which operate primarily
                            during periods of low electricity demand
                          · Energy-efficiency labels affixed to manufactured products describe the product's energy
                            performance (energy use, efficiency, energy cost), giving consumers the data necessary
                            to make informed purchases
                          · Energy-efficiency standards are procedures and regulations that prescribe the energy
                            performance of manufactured products, sometimes prohibiting the sale of products that
Standard and                are less efficient than a minimum level
Label Programs            · The most commonly labelled appliances are refrigerators, freezers, and air conditioners,
                            although the range is as diverse as rice cookers, boilers, lighting products, and washing
                            machines
                          · Labelling and standards programs aim to transform energy-efficient products market by
                            progressively removing inefficient devices from the market through awareness
                            campaigns, incentives, taxes rebates, and mandatory prescriptions
a
  Motor-driven equipment accounts for 64% of the electricity consumed by US industries, and the related energy
  savings are estimated to be at least 12%.
DSM = demand-side management.
Source: Econoler International.

          2.      New Initiatives

7.       Consistent with the 2000 Review, ADB has launched several new initiatives that should
allow it to play a greater role in promoting clean energy. These include the Carbon Market
Initiative, the Energy Efficiency Initiative, the Asia Clean Energy Fund, and the China
Environment Fund.

8.      The Carbon Market Initiative was approved in November 2006 1 and is intended to
deepen ADB's commitment to clean energy and climate change mitigation. It will provide
financial and technical support to developers and sponsors of projects with greenhouse gas
mitigation benefits that can quality as an eligible Clean Development Mechanism project under
the Kyoto Protocol. As part of this initiative, the Asia Pacific Carbon Fund, a trust fund
established and managed by ADB on behalf of fund participants, will provide up-front funding
against the purchase of an estimated 25%­50% of future carbon credits expected from projects.
In addition, the initiative will provide grant-based technical support for preparation and
implementation of eligible projects as well as marketing support for additional carbon credits.

9.     The Energy Efficiency Initiative (EEI),2 is a cohesive approach for ADB to expand its EE
investments, with an indicative annual lending target of $1 billion between 2008 and 2010. The
medium term investment and action plan will refine and break down this investment target using
bottom-up analyses of key sectors in the high energy consuming DMCs. It will also define the

1
    Participants who so far have agreed to put in a total of $85 million into the fund include Luxembourg, Spain,
    Sweden, and Switzerland. Other countries have expressed intent to come in before the fund's deadline for
    investment at the end of June 2007, by which time total committed funds are expected to exceed $120 million.
2
    ADB. 2006. Report of The Energy Efficiency Initiative. Manila.
                                                                                   Appendix 6   85


operational plans to implement replicable energy efficient investments and proven development
models in the period from 2008 to 2010. In the decade 2010­2019, when the DMCs are
projected to have even higher energy consumption, ADB will have the appropriate tools and
instruments to scale up EE investment commensurate with the challenge.

10.     As part of the EEI, the $ 250 million Clean Energy Financing Partnership Facility,
approved by ADB in April 2007, is designed to finance (i) smaller energy efficiency investments
that require quick and efficient transactions; (ii) technology transfer costs of clean technologies
for a small number of high demonstration impact, large interventions that will catalyze
deployment of clean energy technologies; and, (iii) grant assistance for activities such as
developing the knowledge base and incentive mechanisms, advocacy, institutional capacity
building, project preparation, and establishment of the monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.

11.     Other initiatives to target renewable energy and energy efficiency projects include equity
fund investments in the Asia Clean Energy Fund ($20 million, 2003) and the China Environment
Fund ($10 million, 2002).

12.     In addition to the above, ADB is establishing regional knowledge hubs to support and
strengthen regional capacity to generate innovative concepts, science, technology, and
management development on clean energy. Three knowledge hubs have been established: (i)
The Energy Research Institute in New Delhi for Clean Energy, (ii) Tsinghua University in Beijing
for Climate Change, and (iii) the Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok for the 3Rs (reduce,
reuse and recycle).
86       Appendix 7



     TIME-OF-USE PRICING: APPLICATION OF LONG-RUN MARGINAL COST PRICING TO
                           GENERATION AND CONSUMERS


1.     Common to electricity sectors reviewed in all developing member countries (DMCs) is
the need for them to become more self-sustaining through the introduction of tariffs, which
recover the total long-run cost of the industry, reduce subsidies, remove cross-subsidies within
and across tariffs, and reduce the risk of volatile or rapidly increasing tariffs through the
introduction of better risk management policies and procedures.

2.       The cost of electricity supply has increased dramatically during the past decade, and
tariff increases have severely lagged behind the cost of supply. 1 Major sources of tariff
increases have come about from the Asian financial crisis and large devaluations of DMC
currencies, and the effect of foreign-denominated loans in the electricity sector. Additionally,
some of the power purchase agreements (PPAs) undertaken by DMCs were above market
costs. More recently, fuel prices have been very volatile, and their inclusion in automatic
increases in tariffs makes tariffs very volatile.

A.        Recovery of Full Costs of Supply

3.      Tariffs are often highly politicized, and while decisions about them continue to be made
in the political arena, the electricity industry is often forced to cut maintenance and reduce
system expansion,2 finally leading to lower service standards and a reduction in the competitive
capacity of industry and commerce. Tariffs which recover the "best practice" total long-run
marginal costs (LRMCs)3 of supplying electricity ensure the long-term viability of the electricity
sector. In Viet Nam and Indonesia, tariffs approach "best practice" LRMC of delivery. However,
electricity tariffs in a number of other DMCs are well below their LRMC. This continues to be a
major deterrent to new investment.

B.         Removal of Subsidies and Cross-Subsidies

4.      Subsidies can occur through direct funding, and cross-subsidies between consumer
classes and between services such as transmission and generation. Some sectors, particularly
the very poor rural consumers, cannot afford either the cost of connections or a tariff based on a
LRMC and rely on lifeline rates (cross-subsidies) or direct subsidies. Subsidies are "addictive",
like taxes: once they are implemented, politicians are very reluctant to remove them. While
there are ample opportunities to make these subsidies transparent, the use of cross-subsidies is
more difficult to monitor, as the subsidies are hidden.

5.     Subsidies for rural electrification and the provision of electricity to the very poor provides
major social benefits, but a recurring concern expressed in the evaluation of Asian Development
Bank (ADB) lending programs is the treatment of subsidies and cross-subsidies for these
people. The major concern is that, by giving subsidies at the onset without a clear program to
1
    The two key reasons for the substantial increases in cost of supply were: (i) the Asian financial crisis (severely
    impacting Indonesia, Lao PDR, Philippines, and Thailand); and (ii) less than prudent power purchase agreements
    (PPAs) signed with independent power producers (IPPs) (Indonesia, Pakistan, and Philippines). Inability to adjust
    tariffs to fully cover such cost increases led to insolvency of the utilities in Indonesia, Lao PDR, Pakistan, and
    Philippines (National Power Corporation), and to near insolvency of EGAT (Electricity Generation Authority) in
    Thailand.
2
    For instance, generation tariffs in Mindanao, Philippines are well below the marginal cost of fuel. This will deter
    private sector entry into the system, which is now at the peak of its capacity.
3
    For hydro projects, the long-run marginal cost should be taken as the actual costs on each system is unique.
                                                                                               Appendix 7     87


reduce them, expectations of continuous low costs will arise. These have hampered full cost
recovery across the borrowers. Subsequently, this impairs their service delivery and their ability
to service loans. Subsidies may still be necessary, but they should be made as transparent as
possible; budgeted for under separate (e.g., government) provisions; and have a well-publicized
time frame for gradual withdrawal. Gradual, even monthly, increases of tariffs to full cost
recovery levels have been accepted in several of the DMCs for example in Bangladesh,
consumers have indicated a willingness to pay increased rates for more reliable supply.
Additionally, commercial lending institutions are withholding funds to DMCs where tariffs are
perceived to be significantly below the LRMC, preventing the entry of the private sector and
competition in the electricity sector. Thus, ADB should continue to use DMC lending covenants
to increase tariffs.
           (i)     Intra-sector subsidies between profitable and unprofitable components of supply
                   can be exposed through unbundling. This assists in the regulation of the
                   components and possible future market restructuring.
           (ii)    Introducing time-of-use (TOU) tariffs removes cross-subsidies between customer
                   segments, promotes the use of demand-side management, and creates further
                   efficiency in the use of transmission and distribution facilities. TOU tariffs also
                   signal the true cost of production and delivery of energy, and provide cost signals
                   for the supply of appropriate infrastructure to meet needs at particular times.4
                   TOU prices should promote more efficient use of energy infrastructure and
                   should result in lower tariffs for consumers.

C.         Time-of-Use Pricing

6.      TOU pricing at the wholesale level provides the generation sector with clear cost signals,
and allows them to recover their full LRMCs while maintaining a correct mix of plant in the
system. At the retail level, passing the actual cost of consumption on to consumers removes
cross-subsidies, which are inherent in flat rates. TOU signals the actual cost of supply, and
encourages demand-side adjustments which promote more efficient use of transmission and
distribution assets.

           1.      Generation Effects of TOU

7.     There is a very large difference in marginal production costs between peak and off-peak
generation. Off-peak generation is usually supplied by geothermal and coal-fired stations, with a
marginal cost of around $17 per megawatt-hour (MWh), whereas peak energy marginal costs
range from $60 per MWh (for gas-fired combined cycles) to $100 per MWh (for diesel-fired gas
turbines).

8.     To maintain a balance of generation plant supplying base, intermediate, and peaking
loads--and because generation plants may not be part of a portfolio--it will be necessary to
price energy so that each type of plant can recover its individual total LRMC. A single (average)
price which enables a peak load plant to recover all costs (say $100) will give base load
producers unnecessary profits. Conversely, average prices set at the LRMC of base loads
(almost $40) will not ensure that peak generation plant will be dispatched, as these prices are
uneconomic for peak load plants. Thus, single pricing may induce immediate shortages of
supply.5

4
    For instance, peaking prices should cover the long-run marginal cost of a peaking plant.
5
    A single (average) price discourages the building or sale of peaking assets in the event of increased private
    participation.
88    Appendix 7



       2.      Base Load Plant

9.      For discussion purposes, it is assumed that base load plant will typically be coal fired.
Coal-fired plants have the property that they take some considerable time to start-up and
shutdown. As such, it is desirable that once started this plant runs continuously throughout the
year until a routine maintenance cycle requires the system to shut down. The operation of this
plant requires the continuous feed of coal from the fuel sources available, and the continuous
removal of ash from the boiler system. The plant is typically dispatched to deliver about 50% (at
off peak) to 100% of its rated output at system peak.
       3.      Midrange Plant

10.     This plant is characterized by its ability to move between approximately 30% and 100%
of its rated output power. While it will often be shut down within a 24-hour period, it is less
expensive to remain online at low output rather than having to cycle down and up. This
minimizes wear and tear and allows rapid response to step changes in plant availability,
bolstering network system reliability. In most instances, this plant is gas fired but a dual-fired
gas/coal plant is also used in this format. The plant capacity factor is lower, at around 30­50%.
       4.      Peak-Load Plant

11.     These generators are characterized by the capability for a rapid start-up and shutdown
cycle (i.e., less than 1 hour). These plants are typically gas-fired, single-cycle turbines and
usually do not run continuously during the day. In fact, many are only fired up for the peak
periods of demand during the daily load profile. The plant capacity factor is also usually low,
typically 10­20%.
D.      Generator Cost Profile

12.     The characteristics of each plant lead to a typical cost (or in the case of a market, bid
stack) profile. As depicted in Figure A7.1, the coal-fired plant usually runs 24 hours per day as it
has both the largest power output and best economies of scale. During the very low demand
periods early in the morning, the plant is run at reduced output levels. The mid-range plant,
while usually being turned off during low-demand periods, will fire up for the remainder of the
day. Its operating profile tends to provide fewer economies of scale; hence a higher price is
required to recover costs than base load plants. A peak-load plant is typically the most costly
plant to operate, but can be brought online very rapidly.

13.     During each half hour period, the system operator dispatches the generation plant from
the lowest cost through to the highest required to provide the forecast half-hourly demand of the
system. This sets the half-hour cost at the highest cost plant which has been dispatched--the
"dispatch price" (or tariff). All plants receive the dispatch price for that half-hour period. The
different revenues over time recover the total costs of each plant.
                                                                                                 Appendix 7   89



                                       Figure A7.1: Generator Load and Price Profiles

                                                                                      Peaking
                                                                                       Plant


                                                                                     Mid-merit
                                                                        Load
                                                                                       Plant


                                                                                        Base
                                              Prices                                    Load



                                                                 0- 24 Hours


                             Source: 2005. IJEN Pty. Ltd. Consulting.


14.      Off-peak prices are low and off-peak generation units often run at low capacities,
incurring a further cost penalty as the generation efficiency is reduced with lower loads. Hence,
it is highly desirable for the base load generation to increase capacity factors during off-peak
periods. Figure A7.2 indicates the reduction in costs per kilowatt-hour (kWh) as the plant loading
is increased from 25% to 100% for a coal-fired plant. This provides strong incentives for base
load generators to offer additional load at near peak loading short-run marginal cost (SRMC)
prices.


                    Figure A7.2: Short-Run Marginal Cost Price of Base Load Plant under Different
                                                      Loads

                    $24

                    $22

                    $20
     SRMC Per MWh




                    $18

                    $16

                    $14

                    $12

                    $10
                                25%                    50%                     75%             100%
                                                                Loading
   Source: 2005. IJEN Pty. Ltd. Consulting.
90       Appendix 7



E.         Consumer Effects

15.     TOU pricing removes the cross-subsidies between consumer groups, as those with the
majority of consumption at peak periods (hotels and domestic consumers in particular) will not
be subsidized by off-peak loads. Figure A7.3 depicts typical load shapes for customer classes. It
shows that domestic consumers use most energy at the system peak, followed by commercial
customers, whereas industrial customers have constant loads and are not responsible for the
"spikes" in demand. A flat tariff penalizes efficient users. In Figure A7.3, the real tariffs of
domestic consumers should be about 18­20% above the average tariff paid by commercial
users, and those of commercial consumers should be about 12­15% higher than the
commercial user rate. Thus, TOU pricing reduces cross-subsidies imposed by average tariffs.


               Figure A7.3: Example of Customer Class Loads and Time-of-Use Costs

             80                                                                       $80

             70                                                                       $70

             60                                                                       $60

             50                                                                       $50                Tariff $/MWh




                                                                                             Tariff
                                                                                                         Commercial
             40                                                                       $40
                                                                                                         Industrial
             30                                                                       $30                Domestic

             20                                                                       $20

             10                                                                       $10

              0                                                                       $0
               1

                    3

                          5

                               7

                                     9

                                          11

                                               13

                                                    15

                                                          17

                                                               19

                                                                     21

                                                                          23




                                           Time of day


     Source: IJEN Pty. Ltd. Consulting.

16.     TOU pricing provides a signal to consumers about the cost of consumption. TOU pricing
will assist customers in the transition to full competition in a deregulated market, in that the cost
of energy will more closely reflect production costs and alert customers to the risk of under-
contracting at peak times.6 In a deregulated market, plants are unlikely to bid at prices below
their SRMC, so pool prices will reflect actual, rather than average, costs of production.

17.    Pricing also encourages efficient use of transmission and distribution facilities, as the
demand shifts to take into account the pricing signals provided by generation. Flatter loads
require less capacity in the transmission system and reduce line losses (these increase as the
square of the load), thereby reducing the cost of the transmission system and the delivered cost
of energy.

6
    For instance, existing flat prices in the Philippines permit customers to buy all energy at a single price without
    regard to production costs. As a result, distribution utilities are generally under contract for their needs as they are
    able to buy any additional power at fixed prices. In this scenario, the utility with a peaking plant bears the risk of
    additional loads with a single pricing regime.
                                                                                       Appendix 8   91


                                        REGIONAL COOPERATION

1.       The 1995 Energy Policy of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) identified ADB's role as
a catalyst in regional cooperation by (i) providing information to developing member countries
(DMCs), (ii) facilitating dialogue and participation, and (iii) assisting in the mobilization of public
and private sector resources to finance regional cooperation activities. ADB initially adopted a
phased approach in supporting regional cooperation where ADB aimed to finance or help
mobilize finance for (i) regional projects that carried a strong economic rationale, (ii) national
projects with regional implications, or (iii) projects that called for complementary investment by
neighboring DMCs. Opportunities identified for regional cooperation included agreements and
complementary investments for equitable exploitation of common hydropower potential, and
petroleum resources and inter-country transmission of energy supplies. The regional
cooperation policy was later revised and a Regional Cooperation and Integration Strategy
(RCIS) was adopted in July 2006. 1 The RCIS broadened the scope of regional economic
cooperation by spelling out ADB's role in trade and investment cooperation and economic
integration, including: (i) support to regional and subregional trade and investment promotion by
playing a facilitating role in policy dialogue; (ii) capacity and institutional development for DMCs
on issues related to free trade agreements and trade facilitation; (iii) research and information
dissemination, including support for establishing a database on free trade agreements in the
Asia and Pacific region; and (iv) building stronger partnerships with other stakeholders and
institutions that support RCIS.

2.      ADB has initiated or supported six programs to promote regional cooperation in the
region:
          (i)      Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) program, which the Mekong River passes
                   through, comprising Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR),
                   Myanmar, Thailand, Viet Nam, and Yunnan Province and Guanxi Province of the
                   People's Republic of China (PRC)
          (ii)     Brunei Darussalam Indonesia Malaysia the Philippines East Asean Growth Area
                   (BIMP-EAGA) program
          (iii)    South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation (SASEC) program
          (iv)     Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) program
          (v)      Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-GT) program
          (vi)     Cooperation between Mongolia and the PRC.

3.      Under the GMS program, cooperation in energy focuses on the development of the
regional power market and power trade arrangements. This involves a two-pronged approach
consisting of (i) providing the policy and institutional framework for promoting opportunities for
extended cooperation in regional power trade; and (ii) using a building block approach to realize
essential grid interconnection infrastructure that will physically allow the cross-border dispatch of
power. The rationale for promoting regional power trade arises from the fact that, while the GMS
region is well-endowed with diverse energy resources to feed the growing demand for
electricity, the geographic distribution of these resources is uneven. Power trade can help
secure a better balance in the subregion's energy supplies.

4.     Enhanced energy connectivity is being steadily achieved under the GMS program
through construction of cross-border power transmission lines. Initially, these lines fulfill bilateral
but one-way trade arrangements, e.g., export of power from specific hydropower projects in a

1
    ADB. 2006. Regional Cooperation and Integration Strategy. Manila
92      Appendix 8



surplus country to the grid system of a power-deficient country. Even this limited power trade
currently taking place in the GMS has generated substantial benefits to parties involved--Lao
PDR's export of hydropower to Thailand helped boost its foreign exchange earnings for its
development programs while helping meet its projected power demand, expected to grow in
excess of 7% per annum through 2020. Thailand, on the other hand, gained access to a low-
cost energy source.

5.      ADB approved the GMS Transmission Project2 for Cambodia in November 2003. The
total cost of the project is $95 million, of which ADB financing is for $44.3 million, World Bank
financing is for $16 million, Nordic Development Fund financing is for $11 million, and the
Government of Cambodia will finance the balance of $23.7 million. The project's aim is to
provide sustainable and reliable supply of electricity to consumers in Phnom Penh and to those
living along the route of the transmission line. This will be done by importing up to
1,490 gigawatt-hours (GWh) of electricity from Viet Nam by constructing a 230 kilovolt (kV)
transmission line from the Viet Nam border to Phnom Penh via Takeo. The border price of
electricity will average $0.06/kWh. The delivered electricity price to medium voltage system in
Phnom Penh will be about $0.078/kWh, which includes losses, operation and maintenance, and
all taxes. The electricity from Viet Nam will provide a sustainable and reliable supply at a lower
cost than any alternative currently available in the country and will improve Electricity Du
Cambodia's (EDC) financial position, and eventually ease pressure for tariff increases.
Electricity will also be supplied to Takeo Township and to rural villages and communities living
close to the transmission line that are currently not served. Bidding for the construction of the
towers commenced in June 2006 and the bids are to be awarded shortly. The transmission line
is envisaged to be commissioned by the end of 2008.

6.      The Second Power Transmission and Distribution Project3 was approved in September
2006. The total project cost is $52 million, of which ADB will provide financing for $20 million,
Japan Bank for International Cooperation will finance $22 million, and the Government of
Cambodia will provide the balance of $10 million. The project will (i) extend the 230 kV power
grid from Kampot to Sihanoukville and provide reliable electricity supply at affordable prices to
consumers in Sihanoukville and adjacent areas along the transmission corridor, (ii) increase
connections, (iii) stimulate economic growth in the southern economic corridor, and (iv) improve
EDC's operational efficiency and performance through institutional development and capacity
building.

7.      Currently, the EDC tariff in Sihanoukville ranges from $0.13/kWh to $0.20/kWh. In rural
towns, the rural electric enterprises supply electricity at tariffs as high as $0.38/kWh­$0.68/kWh.
Through the project, electricity from Viet Nam will have a delivered price in Sihanoukville of
around $0.08/kWh, including losses, operation and maintenance, and all taxes. This will greatly
ease the burden of consumers by enabling them to use the savings for other purposes
(education, health, or business); and promote sustainable economic development. Rural
villages and communities close to the transmission line that are currently not served will also be
supplied with electricity.

8.      Eventually, the aim is for grid-to-grid interconnection involving two or more countries that
will enable multiparty trading of power and therefore more efficient power markets in the long
run. To achieve this, the GMS countries agreed that a gradual approach should be undertaken,

2
    ADB. 2003. Loan (2502) to Cambodia on GMS Transmission Project. Manila.
3
    ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors for a Proposed Loan to
    Cambodia for Second Power Transmission Project. Manila.
                                                                                       Appendix 8   93


moving from stage 0 (one-way trade) to stage 1 (bilateral, two-way trade) then to stage 4
(competitive, multiparty trade). To facilitate the market's evolution, the GMS program worked to
strengthen the policy and institutional framework for power trade. A major step was taken when
the GMS countries signed the Inter-Governmental Agreement on Regional Power Trade during
the First GMS Summit in 2002, which sets the long-term vision and objective for the regional
power market. The Inter-Governmental Agreement also provided for the Regional Power Trade
Coordination Committee (RPTCC), established in 2004, to coordinate with and represent the
GMS countries involved in regional power trade. The RPTCC, with the help of its subgroups
(focal group and planning working group) is currently developing the Regional Power Trade
Operating Agreement, which will prescribe the operating guidelines for power trade. At the
Second GMS Summit in July 2005, the GMS countries signed a memorandum of understanding
on the Guidelines for the Implementation of the Regional Power Trade Operating Agreement
Stage 1, which sets rules for initial trade at Stage 1.

9.      Current RPTCC activities cover the conduct of priority studies (performance standards,
transmission regulation); capacity building; power master planning; database development; and
preparation of best practices (a "how-to manual") for power purchase agreements (PPAs).
These are all directed toward: (i) facilitating the preparation of cross-border transmission
projects needed for power trade by removing or minimizing the financial, economic, and
technical bottlenecks in building such lines; and (ii) equipping the GMS member countries with
the capacity to plan, regulate, secure, and operate a power market where power trade takes
place more regularly. A more competitive regional power market will result in: (i) reduced need
for investments in power reserves to meet peak demand, (ii) more reliable supply, (iii) reduced
operational costs, and (iv) enhanced consumers' access to the cheapest power sources
available. The earlier stages of GMS power trade could be based on export of hydropower to
Thailand and Viet Nam from the rest of the GMS, which brings the added advantage of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and other pollutants. However, other energy sources abundant in
the GMS (coal, gas, renewables) could eventually be tapped for the regional power market to
ensure against risk of energy shortfall caused by climactic changes. In summary, through
regional power trade, GMS countries will be able to rely on more economically favorable energy
resources, thus enhancing the efficiency and competitiveness of their economies.

10.    The following tables summarize lending and TA assistance for regional cooperation.

               Table A8.1: Energy Projects Promoting Regional Cooperation
                             in the Greater Mekong Subregion
                                        (1994­2005)

                                                                                  Approved
        Loan                                                          Year of      Amount
         No.    Country          Project Name                        Approval     ($ million)
        1329     LAO    Theun Hinboun Hydropower                       1994          270.0
        1456     LAO    Nam Leuk Hydropower                            1996          112.6
                        Development
        2052     CAM    Cambodia: GMS Transmission                      2003           95.0
                        Project
        2162     LAO    Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project               2005        1,250.0
      CAM = Cambodia, GMS = Greater Mekong Subregion, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic.
      Source: Asian Development Bank database.
94   Appendix 8




             Table A8.2: Technical Assistance Promoting Regional Cooperation
                                  in the CAREC and GMS
                                        (1996­2006)
                                                                                   Approved
       TA                                                            Year of        Amount
       No.                      Project Name                        Approval        ($'000)
      Greater Mekong Subregion
      5643    Subregional Electric Power Forum - GMS                  1995              78.0
      5697    Se Kong-Se San and Nam Theun River Basins               1996           2,500.0
              Hydropower Development Study
      5920    Regional Indicative Master Plan on Power                2000             900.0
              Interconnection in the Greater Mekong Subregion
      6100    Regional Power Trade Operating Agreement in the         2003             850.0
              GMS
      6147    Preparing the GMS Power Interconnection Project         2003             800.0
              Phase I
      4323    Preparing the Greater Mekong Subregion: Nam             2004           1,000.0
              Theun 2 Hydropower Development Project - Phase
              II
      6301    Developing the Greater Mekong Subregion Energy          2006             900.0
              Sector Strategy
      6304    GMS Regional Power Trade Coordination and               2006           1,200.0
              Development

      Central Asia
      5663    Kyrgyz Republic and Xinjiang Yugur Autonomous           1996             360.0
              Region
      5960    Preparing the Regional Power Transmission               2000             900.0
              Modernization Project in the Central Asian
              Republics
      6023    Regional Gas Transmission Project in the CARS           2002             900.0
      3956    Hydropower Development Strategy (Tajikistan)            2002             600.0
      6163    Improved Management of Shared Water                     2003             700.0
              Resources in Central Asia
      4596    Preparing the Power Rehabilitation Phase II             2005             500.0
              Project (Tajikistan)
      6267    Establishment of the CAREC Members Electricity          2005             500.0
              Regulators Forum
     CAREC = Central Asian Regional Economic Cooperation, CARS = Central Asian Republics, GMS = Greater
     Mekong Subregion, TA = technical assistance.
     Source: Asian Development Bank database. See also Appendix 1.
                     COMPARISON OF ENERGY POLICIES AND OPERATIONAL STRATEGY OF VARIOUS FUNDING AGENCIES


Operational Priority           ADB Energy Policy                World Bank Energy Policy            United Nations Energy Policy              JBIC Energy Policy

A. Poverty Reduction        The energy sector                  Improve access of the poor to        Access to clean and affordable           Support for economic and
                            operations of the Asian            modern energy services by            energy is a key requirement to           social development in
                            Development Bank (ADB)             reducing the cost and improving      increase agricultural productivity,      developing countries. The
                            will be aligned with the three     the quality of energy supplied to    achieve food security, and improve       Japan Bank for
                            pillars of its poverty             low-income households and            rural livelihoods.                       International Cooperation
                            reduction strategy. Energy         social services, and ensuring                                                 (JBIC) aims to contribute
                            projects will be formulated        that energy subsidies are                                                     to raising income
                            and designed to support pro-       targeted at and reach the poor.                                               standards and improving
                            poor growth and, to the                                                                                          quality of life to achieve a
                            extent possible, contribute to                                                                                   self-sustainable
                            ADB's goal of devoting no                                                                                        economy, and to reducing
                            less than 40% of its public                                                                                      the proportion of people
                            sector lending to poverty                                                                                        living in poverty, through
                            intervention.                                                                                                    support for sustainable
                                                                                                                                             growth of developing
                                                                                                                                             economies.
1. Rural Electrification    ADB will help its developing       The Global Environment Fund          Subsidize capital costs for rural grid
                            member countries (DMCs)            (GEF) is playing a key role in the   electrification and develop off-grid
                            provide more regions and           design of comprehensive rural        solutions for providing energy
                            new consumers with access          electrification programs that        services.
                            to electricity. Projects will be   involve both traditional grid-
                            designed either as stand-          extension approaches as well as
                            alone electrification projects     innovative off-grid approaches.
                            for increasing access, or          GEF has three implementing
                            where possible integrated          agencies: United Nations
                            rural development projects         Development Program (UNDP),
                            where electricity supply will      United Nations Environment
                            complement development             Program (UNEP), and the World
                            and poverty reduction efforts      Bank.
                            in other sectors such as
                            agriculture, public health,
                            education, rural
                            development, and forestry.




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 9
                                                                                                                                                                            95
                                                                                                                                                               96
                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 9
Operational Priority          ADB Energy Policy               World Bank Energy Policy            United Nations Energy Policy            JBIC Energy Policy

2. Rural Energy Services   Rural expansion of energy         The Bank has been at the             The poor obtain energy services by
                           supply needs to be timed to       forefront of international support   gaining access to modern fuels,
                           coincide with the                 on energy access and poverty         electricity, and mechanical power.
                           implementation of integrated      since the 1996 publication of its    This access is particularly important
                           rural development projects        rural energy strategy. The Bank's    for women and girls since they are
                           covering water supply,            program on energy access and         often the most affected by
                           irrigation, farm-to-market        poverty provides for direct          inadequate energy services.
                           roads, sanitation and             lending for provision of energy      UNDP's activities to promote
                           sewerage, agricultural            services and modern fuels to         access to rural energy services
                           processing facilities, and        unserved households and              focus on meeting people's cooking
                           public health and education       enterprises, through: (i) grid       and heating needs, and providing
                           facilities, so that the synergy   extension programs, (ii) off-grid    electricity and mechanical power for
                           among these activities            renewable solutions,                 household and productive uses.
                           stimulates economic growth        (iii) improved fuels for cooking,
                           and reduces poverty while         (iv) parallel support for
                           increasing the demand for         productive uses of energy, and
                           energy and improving load         (v) innovative financing
                           factors.                          mechanisms such as output-
                                                             based assistance approaches.
B. Promoting Private       ADB will encourage market-        Energy sector policy reform is
Sector Involvement         based mechanisms to attract       urgently needed to stimulate the
                           private expertise and             investments needed for
                           investment for decentralized      developing and transition
                           energy options, and will help     economies to meet their energy
                           identify appropriate forms of     needs. Much of the investment
                           private sector participation      need is unmet because of policy
                           and develop the necessary         constraints: addressing these
                           regulatory environment.           problems through joint public and
                                                             private participation, and working
                                                             across the spectrum of public
                                                             and private interventions, are
                                                             required.
Operational Priority         ADB Energy Policy               World Bank Energy Policy            United Nations Energy Policy             JBIC Energy Policy

1. Private Sector         ADB will strongly encourage       Promote good governance and
Participation             private sector participation in   private sector development by
                          energy sector operations in       divesting assets to strategic
                          its DMCs by helping create        investors in a socially
                          enabling environment,             responsible and corruption-free
                          prepare projects suitable for     way, catalyzing private
                          such participation, and           investments by liberalizing entry
                          selects sponsors through          to energy markets, and
                          international competitive         strengthening the voice of
                          bidding (ICB), and if             consumers and communities,
                          necessary, to catalyze other      thus improving the investment
                          financing sources by              climate for clean energy. The
                          providing direct assistance       Bank will aggressively pursue
                          to the sponsors.                  the commercialization and
                                                            corporatization of, and private
                                                            sector participation in,
                                                            developing country power
                                                            sectors. The Bank will also use
                                                            some of its financial resources to
                                                            support programs that will
                                                            facilitate the involvement of
                                                            private investors.
2. Sector Restructuring   ADB will help its DMCs            Establishment of a credible legal    Reforms to energy markets should
                          restructure the energy            and regulatory framework that        focus on removing obstacles to
                          subsectors by unbundling          provides the stability on rules      efficient functioning of these
                          existing entities and             and prices that will induce          markets. These reforms include
                          establishing competition          investments into financially         providing for efficient entry and exit
                          where possible. The               viable products. The failure to      to these markets for energy
                          assistance will help DMCs in      reform the energy sector limits      suppliers and users, eliminating
                          formulating energy sector         access to finance.                   restrictions or bottlenecks on the
                          policies and enacting related                                          import and distribution of modern
                          laws.                                                                  fuels and electricity, removing
                                                                                                 market distortions that unfairly favor
                                                                                                 one supply source over another,
                                                                                                 and pricing energy to cover the cost
                                                                                                 of both operations and investments
                                                                                                 incurred in the delivery of energy




                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 9
                                                                                                 services.




                                                                                                                                                               97
                                                                                                                                                                   98
                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 9
Operational Priority       ADB Energy Policy               World Bank Energy Policy           United Nations Energy Policy           JBIC Energy Policy

3. Social Development   The social impact of projects                                                                               In order to raise the
                        and programs proposed for                                                                                   quality of life of the poor,
                        ADB assistance will continue                                                                                JBIC will place emphasis
                        to be analyzed, and                                                                                         on the kind of
                        recommended measures will                                                                                   infrastructure assistance
                        be incorporated in design                                                                                   that improves the quality
                        according to the relevant                                                                                   of life of the poor by
                        ADB guidelines. In line with                                                                                focusing its efforts on
                        the poverty reduction goal,                                                                                 direct assistance to
                        particular emphasis will be                                                                                 education and healthcare
                        given to analyzing the                                                                                      while taking into
                        impacts of energy projects                                                                                  consideration
                        on poverty reduction.                                                                                       infrastructure networks,
                                                                                                                                    such as transportation,
                                                                                                                                    communication,
                                                                                                                                    electricity, power, and
                                                                                                                                    water.
4. Subsidies            ADB will encourage DMCs           Subsidies for energy producers      Well-targeted subsidy and taxation
                        to withdraw subsidies in the      and consumers can become a          policies are needed to help bring
                        production and use of all         large drain on the government       affordable energy services to the
                        energy products. However,         budgets. Removal of broad-          poor and to enhance their energy
                        recognizing the need of the       based subsidies, currently          security.
                        poor and the possible             estimated to exceed $250 billion
                        recessionary impact of price      per year for all energy products,
                        increases, transparent and        reflect the true cost of energy
                        well-directed subsidies will      supply.
                        be considered, when
                        appropriate, over the short
                        and medium term.
5. Energy Pricing       ADB's approach to energy                                              Pricing energy to cover the cost of
                        pricing evolved in the                                                both operations and investments
                        context of energy supply                                              incurred in the delivery of energy
                        entities being in the public                                          services.
                        sector, organized as
                        vertically integrated utilities
                        and subjected to
                        administered pricing
                        regimes.
Operational Priority      ADB Energy Policy              World Bank Energy Policy            United Nations Energy Policy           JBIC Energy Policy

6. Governance          Support will also be             Strategy for a clean energy          Public service providers need
                       extended for improving the       future includes policies that call   incentives to operate efficiently
                       governance of public sector      for: (i) removal of broad-based      through sound corporate
                       organizations. In countries      subsidies; (ii) establishment of a   governance and sector regulation.
                       where competition is             credible legal and regulatory        Reforms to energy markets should
                       possible, ADB will support       framework that provides stability    focus on removing obstacles to
                       restructuring and the            on rules and prices that will        efficient functioning of these
                       creation of an enabling          induce investments into              markets.
                       environment for the transfer     financially viable products;
                       of commercial activities to      (iii) development of enabling
                       the private sector. ADB will     policy environments through
                       prepare and implement            regulatory interventions;
                       energy projects with due         (iv) creation of market-based
                       emphasis on accountability,      approaches such as emission
                       participation, predictability,   trading, energy service
                       and transparency, which are      companies, innovative clean
                       identified as basic elements     energy, and energy efficiency
                       of good governance.              funds, etc.; (v) reduction of
                                                        transaction cost at the supply
                                                        and retail level; and
                                                        (vi) information dissemination
                                                        regarding energy savings and
                                                        clean energy options.
7. Cofinancing         To help meet the large           Even with an improved                Public financing from both domestic   JBIC provides low
                       capital requirements in the      regulatory environment and use       resources and official development    interest and long-term
                       energy sector of its DMCs,       of policy and political risk         assistance, combined with private     loans to assist developing
                       ADB will continue to             mitigation instruments, the          entrepreneurship and investment,      countries in their self-help
                       catalyze additional funds        challenge of financing               are needed to develop energy          efforts toward sustainable
                       from other sources through       incremental costs and reducing       services for the poor.                economic development,
                       official and commercial          technology risks will be                                                   by financing the building
                       cofinancing grants, and          significant. These issues could                                            of their economic and
                       export credit operations.        be addressed by means of                                                   social infrastructure.
                                                        innovative financial instruments,
                                                        which could complement existing
                                                        World Bank Group and
                                                        International Finance
                                                        Corporation (IFC) instruments.




                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 9
                                                        Among those which hold promise




                                                                                                                                                                  99
                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 9
Operational Priority      ADB Energy Policy              World Bank Energy Policy             United Nations Energy Policy   JBIC Energy Policy

                                                        are the following: (i) clean energy
                                                        financing vehicle; (ii) power
                                                        rehabilitation financing facility;
                                                        (iii) project development fund;
                                                        and (iv) venture capital funds for
                                                        technology adoption.
8. Capacity Building   Capacity building will be
                       supported in DMCs for
                       activities in line with the
                       energy sector policy.
9. Private Power       ADB will assist its DMCs in      To produce the greatest impact,
Generation             creating an enabling             the World Bank combines
                       environment for private          financing for energy supply
                       sector participation,            reforms that meet the Bank's
                       preparing private sector         four priorities for the energy
                       projects that are compatible     sector. It deploys financing
                       with the move to competitive     instruments following a hierarchy
                       electricity markets, and         that is based on country
                       selecting their developers       creditworthiness and starts with
                       through ICB.                     loans, equity investments, and
                                                        guarantees to catalyze private
                                                        investment in the sector.
10. Public Power       ADB will continue to assist      Private investments take priority
Generation             its DMCs when power              but, where private investments
                       generation capacity              and guarantees cannot be
                       additions (including             catalyzed or for investment that
                       hydropower capacity), which      the private sector should not
                       are beyond the private           undertake, the World Bank
                       sector capability or interest,   provides sovereign-guaranteed
                       are needed.                      loans and credits to state-owned
                                                        energy suppliers for such
                                                        investments.
Operational Priority             ADB Energy Policy              World Bank Energy Policy            United Nations Energy Policy              JBIC Energy Policy

C. Addressing Regional        ADB will support measures                                             The essential beneficial role of         JBIC is supporting
and Global Environmental      to address acid rain                                                  energy as an input to achieving this     projects directly aimed at
Impacts                       problems, use of clean                                                Millennium Development Goal              environmental
                              energy, and Kyoto Protocol                                            (MDG) is not reflected in the MDG        conservation and
                              mechanisms for greenhouse                                             framework. Energy use and                improvement, while
                              gas abatement; and by                                                 production, however, affect local,       mainstreaming
                              financing renewable energy                                            regional, and global environments.       considerations for natural
                              projects.                                                             The poorest countries are generally      and social environments
                                                                                                    acknowledged to be among the             in its finance operations.
                                                                                                    most vulnerable to the impact of
                                                                                                    climate change.                          Japan Greenhouse Gas
                                                                                                                                             Reduction Fund, Asia's
                                                                                                                                             first fund to reduce
                                                                                                                                             greenhouse gas, and
                                                                                                                                             Japan Carbon Finance,
                                                                                                                                             Ltd.
1. Environmental Protection   ADB will help its DMCs           Protect the environment by           The environmental sustainability of      The clean development
                              address regional acid rain       removing market and regulatory       energy supply and consumption            mechanism (CDM) is
                              problems. ADB will assist        barriers to renewable energy and     should be enhanced to reduce             becoming increasingly
                              interventions in the energy      energy efficiency investments;       environmental and health hazards.        important in preventing
                              sector that increase the         and reducing gas flaring,            This requires measures that              global warming, given the
                              sustainable use of cleaner       reducing or eliminating local        increase energy efficiency,              need for measures in
                              forms of energy and that         pollution, and facilitating carbon   introduce modern technologies for        developing countries
                              support the Kyoto Protocol       trading and joint investments to     energy production and use,               where emissions have
                              mechanisms for greenhouse        reduce greenhouse gas                substitute cleaner fuels for polluting   been increasing.
                              gas abatement within the         emissions.                           fuels, and introduce renewable
                              overall framework of the                                              energy.
                              United Nations Framework
                              Convention on Climate
                              Change (UNFCCC).
                              Assistance will also be
                              provided to DMCs to
                              address environmental
                              issues related to the existing
                              use of fuels, and reduce
                              poverty through
                              environmental protection.




                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 9
                                                                                                                                                                          101
                                                                                                                                                                   102
                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 9
Operational Priority           ADB Energy Policy             World Bank Energy Policy            United Nations Energy Policy         JBIC Energy Policy

2. Efficiency Improvement   ADB will assist its DMCs in     Many of the technologies needed      Improving energy efficiency and     JBIC fund projects that
                            the design and                  to achieve clean energy for          increasing reliance on advance      contribute to anti-global
                            implementation of measures      development are important first      energy technologies, including      warming. It funds thermal
                            to improve the efficiency of    steps in paving the way to           cleaner fossil fuel technologies.   power plant projects to
                            energy supply and use. This     address the challenge of                                                 reduce environmental
                            includes assistance for         reducing greenhouse gas                                                  stress caused in power
                            reducing technical and non-     emissions. The higher the                                                generation by switching
                            technical losses.               efficiency of thermal power                                              to natural gas, which
                                                            plants, the greater the uptake of                                        releases less carbon
                                                            renewable energy technologies                                            dioxide (CO2) than other
                                                            and nuclear power, and the                                               energy sources such as
                                                            greater the efficient use of                                             coal and oil. It also funds
                                                            energy in industry, buildings, and                                       cogeneration projects to
                                                            transportation sector, the lower                                         economize on fuel and to
                                                            the emission of greenhouse gas.                                          reduce CO2 emissions
                                                                                                                                     through efficient use of
                                                                                                                                     energy by using
                                                                                                                                     cogeneration systems.
3. Energy Conservation      ADB will assist its DMCs in
                            the design and
                            implementation of measures
                            for energy conservation and
                            demand-side management.
4. Acid Rain                ADB, in cooperation with                                                                                 JBIC's financing policy for
                            UNEP and the Stockholm                                                                                   energy and natural
                            Environment Institute,                                                                                   resources adheres to the
                            provided technical                                                                                       environmental guidelines
                            assistance (TA) that                                                                                     of alleviating/minimizing
                            eventually led to the                                                                                    environmental impacts,
                            promulgation of the Malé                                                                                 reducing gas flare, and
                            Declaration in 1998 by                                                                                   reducing So2/NO
                            South Asian countries to                                                                                 emissions.
                            combat air pollution. In East
                            and Southeast Asia, ADB is
                            cooperating with the
                            Japanese East Asia Network
                            in monitoring acid rain.
Operational Priority      ADB Energy Policy              World Bank Energy Policy              United Nations Energy Policy            JBIC Energy Policy

5. Greenhouse Gas      The blending of ADB              Transformational policies and          Policies and programs are needed       JBIC participated in the
Abatement              resources and GEF grants         strategies will be needed to meet      to facilitate the widespread           Prototype Carbon Fund,
                       will allow DMCs to shift more    national expectations of secure,       development and adoption of            which was established by
                       rapidly toward renewable         safe, and clean energy to deal         environmentally friendly               the World Bank in 2000 to
                       energy technologies. Under       with the implications of climate       technologies for energy production     support a project
                       the Kyoto Protocol of            change. To reduce the threat of        and use, including low-carbon          reducing greenhouse gas
                       December 1997,                   human-induced climate change           technologies.                          emissions. JBIC
                       38 industrialized countries      will require a significant reduction                                          committed $10 million for
                       and the European Union           in the emissions of greenhouse         UNDP supports the introduction and     the fund. JBIC is also
                       have committed to reduce         gas globally. The energy sector        adaptation of low emission             planning to establish the
                       their greenhouse gas             accounts for about 80% of              technologies to promote economic       Japan Carbon Fund in
                       emissions to a level about       greenhouse gas emissions and           growth and social development          the near future.
                       5.2% lower than the 1990         the agricultural sector for most of    while mitigating greenhouse gas
                       level.                           the remaining 20%.                     emissions.
6. Renewable Energy    Renewable energy deserves        GEF is playing a key role in the       Develop and disseminate                JBIC is also active in
                       priority for sustainable         design of comprehensive rural          alternative energy technologies with   funding renewable energy
                       energy development, as it        electrification programs that          the aim of giving a greater share of   projects such as wind
                       meets the objectives of          involve both traditional grid-         the energy mix to renewable            power projects and
                       environmental improvement,       extension approaches as well as        energy.                                hydropower projects.
                       increasing access to energy      innovative off-grid approaches
                       (in off-grid application), and   (solar, wind, gas, geothermal,
                       poverty reduction.               etc.).

                                                        Renewable energy and energy
                                                        efficiency are integral
                                                        components of the Bank's
                                                        energy strategy. In 2004, the
                                                        Bank committed to achieving
                                                        20% average annual growth in
                                                        renewable energy and energy
                                                        efficiency investment over the
                                                        next 6 years.




                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix 9
                                                                                                                                                                  103
                                                                                                                                                                          104
                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 9
 Operational Priority               ADB Energy Policy              World Bank Energy Policy              United Nations Energy Policy           JBIC Energy Policy

 D. Promoting Regional           ADB will assist its DMCs in      Energy integration has recently       Promotion of regional energy
 Cooperation                     identifying and implementing     gathered momentum in several          production and supply cooperation
                                 energy projects (including       regions, and the World Bank has       under market conditions.
                                 hydropower and gas-based         supported efforts to help
                                 power generation projects,       participating countries ensure
                                 mainly for export) that          their energy security and
                                 promote regional trade with      reliability of energy supply in the
                                 economic gains for all           most efficient and cost-effective
                                 participating countries.         manner.
 1. Regional Energy Trade        ADB is a key facilitator and                                           Promotion of regional energy
                                 honest broker of regional                                              cooperation and integration through
                                 and subregional cooperation                                            the establishment of subregional
                                 in Asia. Toward this end, it                                           power pools. These power pools
                                 provides considerable                                                  help address the challenges of
                                 support through regional TA                                            uneven energy resource
                                 and complementary project                                              distribution.
                                 investment in national
                                 infrastructure.
 E. Millennium                   ADB energy policy works to                                             The UN is developing a set of tools    JBIC loans have been
 Development Goals               eradicate extreme poverty,                                             to assist countries in integrating     tackling the issue of
                                 promote gender equality,                                               energy into national poverty           poverty reduction,
                                 and ensure environmental                                               reduction strategies and other         keeping in mind the need
                                 stability.                                                             development planning activities at     to contribute to the
                                                                                                        the national level.                    attainment of the MDG
                                                                                                                                               (goals 1­6).
                                                                                                        UNDP's efforts in energy are
                                                                                                        focused on supporting the              Supply of power and
                                                                                                        achievements of the MDGs,              electricity is
                                                                                                        especially the target of reducing by   indispensable for the
                                                                                                        half the proportion of people living   improvement of the
                                                                                                        in poverty by 2015. The program        quality health care
                                                                                                        works in the context to eradicate      services, education, and
                                                                                                        extreme poverty, promote gender        economic opportunities.
                                                                                                        equality, and ensure environmental
                                                                                                        stability.
Sources: Asian Development Bank. 2000 Review, United Nations, Japan Bank for International Cooperation, and World Bank energy policies.
                                                                                                            Appendix 10   105

                 POWER PROJECT EFFICIENCY EVALUATIONS

   Ex-Ante and Ex-Post Economic Internal Rates Of Return (EIRRs) For Power Projects

1.      The ex-ante and ex-post economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) for power projects are
compared (see Figures A10.1 to A10.8). The ex-post EIRRs estimated at the time of evaluation
were lower than the estimates at the time of project approval for 61% of thermal energy
generation and 52% of transmission and distribution projects. Hydropower projects performed
better in terms of this criterion--EIRRs for 50% of hydropower projects reestimated in the
project performance audit report (PPAR) exceeded the initial estimates. Reasons for the
divergence between ex-ante and ex-post EIRR estimates include (i) less than expected tariff
increases, (ii) higher than expected operating costs, (iii) lower than expected demand, and (iv)
delays in implementation. Despite being lower than expected, 51 of the 68 evaluated power
projects (75%) 1 achieved EIRRs at evaluation that were greater than or equal to the 12%
benchmark. Despite the lower ex-post EIRRs, evaluation results indicate that a clear majority of
the projects was economically justified and that the benefits generated are likely to be
sustained.

2.      In the energy sector, financial viability is a fundamental issue. Information is not
available to compare the financial internal rates of return (FIRRs) with the average weighted
cost of capital for all projects. In 73% of the power projects evaluated, the ex-post FIRRs were
lower than the ex-ante estimates. Lower FIRRs occurred in 75% of transmission and distribution
projects, 88% of hydropower projects, and 62% of thermal projects. Reasons for this include
overoptimistic sales projections, failure to adjust tariffs to the required levels, cost overruns, and
implementation delays. For hydropower projects, lower than expected power generation is
sometimes due to less than expected water flow.




                                               Figure A10.1: EIRRs of Conventional Energy Generation
                                                                                        a
                                                           Projects at RRP and PPAR (%)

                                          30
                         PPAR Estimates




                                          25

                                          20

                                          15                 (12, 12)
                                          10

                                           5

                                           0
                                   0          5                 10          15        20   25          30
                     a
                           Excludes outliers.                           RRP Estimates

                    EIRR = economic internal rate of return, PPAR = project
                    performance audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of
                    the President to the Board of Directors.
                    Source: Asian Development Bank database.
106   Appendix 10



                                                               Figure 10.2: FIRRs of Conventional Energy Generation Projects at
                                                                                                       a
                                                                                      RRP and PPAR (%)
                                                                25




                                              PPAR Estimates
                                                                20

                                                                15

                                                                10

                                                                    5

                                                                    0
                                                                        0          5              10         15        20         25

                                                                a                            RRP Estimates
                                                                    Excludes outliers.

                    FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance
                    audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to
                    the Board of Directors.
                    Source: Asian Development Bank database.




                                    Figure 10.3: EIRRs of Transmission and Distribution Projects at
                                                                           a
                                                          RRP and PPAR (%)
                                         40
                                         35
                        PPAR Estimates




                                         30
                                         25
                                         20
                                         15                                       (12, 12)

                                         10
                                          5
                                          0
                                              0                     5       10      15       20        25   30    35        40
                    a                                                             RRP Estimates
                        Excludes outliers.

                    EIRR = economic internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance
                    audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to
                    the Board of Directors.
                    Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                                            Appendix 10   107


                  Figure 10.4: FIRRs of Transmission and Distribution Projects at
                                                         a
                                         RRP and PAR (%)

                  35

                  30




 PPAR Estimates
                  25

                  20

                  15

                  10

                   5

                   0
                       0                          5   10      15       20      25       30        35
                  -5

a                                                             RRP Estimates
      Excludes outliers.

FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance
audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to
the Board of Directors.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.




                                        Figure 10.5: EIRRs of Hydropower Projects at RRP and
                                                              PPAR (%)

                                         30
                       PPAR Estimates




                                         25

                                         20

                                         15

                                         10

                                          5

                                          0
                                              0       5      10         15         20        25        30

                                                                   RRP Estimates

 EIRR = economic internal rate of return, PPAR = project
 performance audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of
 the President to the Board of Directors.
 Source: Asian Development Bank database.
108   Appendix 10



                                             Figure 10.6: FIRRs of Hydropower Projects at RRP and PPAR (%)

                                                    25




                                  PPAR Estimates
                                                    20

                                                    15

                                                    10

                                                        5

                                                        0
                                                            0       5          10           15       20           25
                                                                            RRP Estimates



                     FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance
                     audit report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to
                     the Board of Directors.
                     Source: Asian Development Bank database.




                                                        Figure10.7: EIRRs of Energy Sector Development Projects
                                                                         at RRP and PPAR (%)


                                                   20
                      PPAR Estimates




                                                   15

                                                   10

                                                    5

                                                    0
                                                        0           5          10            15           20
                                                   -5

                                               -10

                                                                             RRP Estimates

                    EIRR = economic internal rate of return, PPAR = Project
                    Performance Audit Report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of
                    the President to the Board of Directors.
                    Source: Asian Development Bank database.
                                                                                Appendix 10   109


          Figure 10.8: FIRRs of Energy Sector Development Projects at RRP and
                                        PPAR (%)


                 20

PPAR estimates   15

                 10

                  5

                  0
                      0     5           10           15         20
                 -5

                                     RRP Estimates

FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PPAR = project performance audit
report, RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of
Directors.
Source: Asian Development Bank database.
110        Appendix 11

                                    COMPLIANCE WITH COVENANTS

1.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has imposed a number of financial covenants on
power utilities and governments as part of its lending operations. Utilities are required to submit
audited accounts by a deadline and to achieve other financial objectives related to the
management of customer receivables and their overall performance. However, there have been
many examples of utilities failing to meet these objectives. Overall, 81% of covenants reviewed
in Operations Evaluation Department (OED) Project Performance Audit Reports/ Project
Performance Evaluation Reports in the period 2000­2006 were fully complied with. However,
lack of compliance with financial covenants (18% noncompliant and 14% partially compliant)
continues to be a concern.1 Recently, the power utilities in Assam and Madhya Pradesh both
failed to submit audited accounts on time. There is, therefore, a significant problem with
compliance with financial covenants.

2.     The identification of utilities that produce unreliable accounts is possible from a critical
analysis of their accounts and audit reports. The types of problem found in such accounts
include the following.
          (i)      High levels of accounts receivable relative to sales. This indicates that power bills
                   are not being paid but the unpaid amounts are not being written off or provided
                   for.
          (ii)     Asset and liability account balances that are static for very long periods. This
                   often indicates an old problem that is being ignored, e.g., a failed investment that
                   is not written off. The notes to the accounts will often indicate the nature of the
                   item.
          (iii)    Suspense account balances showing up on the published balance sheet. Such
                   accounts should be cleared and high and rising balances are often indicators of
                   failures to carry out internal reconciliations properly.
          (iv)     Inadequate depreciation provisions that write assets off over a longer period than
                   they are likely to be useful for.
          (v)      High capital work in progress relative to the size of the investment program. This
                   often indicates that costs such as feasibility studies and initial work on projects
                   that have not been undertaken or completed are not written off but left in the
                   balance sheet.
          (vi)     Very high levels of stocks relative to the use made of those stocks. This may
                   indicate high levels of redundant stock or a failure to write off any discrepancies
                   between physical and financial stock balances.
          (vii)    Failure to maintain fixed assets records.
          (viii)   Failure to reconcile accounts with other entities in the power sector.
          (ix)     Failure to provide for pension liabilities. Accounts often show utilities making
                   pension payments but without provisions for future liabilities.
          (x)      Qualifications on particular balances in the auditor's reports, especially
                   qualifications that recur from year to year.
          (xi)     Audit reports which give unqualified opinions on accounts that contain the sort of
                   problems discussed above. This often suggests that the auditor has a relaxed
                   view of what constitutes a fair presentation of the accounts and may suggest that
                   there are likely to be other problems in the accounts which will be exposed by
                   scrutiny of more detailed accounting records.


1
    The 2005 OED review indicated a compliance level of 61%.
                                                                                           Appendix 11    111


3.      Companies that produce dubious accounts create serious difficulties in setting financial
objectives. The financial indicators which ADB has adopted in the energy sector include the
current ratio, debt equity ratio, debt service coverage ratio, return on net fixed assets, return on
equity, and self-financing ratio. All of these ratios are seriously distorted by inaccuracies in
accounts. The current ratio of a company that fails to provide for bad debts will look more
favorable than it should because it exaggerates its current assets. The debt equity ratio will also
appear too favorable because the size of the equity is exaggerated. The debt service coverage
ratio appears more favorable than it should because revenue is exaggerated and costs are
understated. Returns are exaggerated because they are based on exaggerated profits.

4.      Poor accounting impedes any setting of financial objectives for utilities, and ADB needs
to attach significant priority to improvement of the accounts before applying more sophisticated
financial objectives in its covenants. The approach will vary from utility to utility but the following
components are likely to be widely applicable:
       (i)     Initiate dialogue with the utility, its owners, and its auditors; and gain an
               understanding of the problems in the accounting function and the steps that are
               likely to be required for improvement. Ensure regular discussions over progress.
       (ii)    Press for power utilities to be established under companies act legislation rather
               than as government entities. This has led to improvements in Bangladesh where
               accounting standards are far higher at Dhaka Electricity Supply Company and
               Power Grid Company of Bangladesh than at Bangladesh Power Development
               Board and Dhaka Electricity Supply Authority.
       (iii)   Consider seeking a change of auditor in cases where the auditor is clearly aware
               of the problems but unwilling to qualify accounts.
       (iv)    Continue to require submission of audited accounts against a timetable as a
               condition of lending but be tolerant of delays where they are the result of efforts
               to improve the accounts. For example, a lot of work is being undertaken in
               Assam to improve their accounts which are currently extremely unreliable.
       (v)     Use technical assistance, which may well need to be long-term, where there is a
               willingness in the client and its owner to make changes in policies and
               procedures. This is a major factor in the improvement that is currently being
               made in Assam.
       (vi)    Devise thoughtful covenants to tackle the biggest problem areas. Typically, this is
               often receivables, where utilities may have over 1 year's sales tied up. However,
               simply requiring the utility to reduce its receivables to the equivalent of 2 months'
               sales is unlikely to lead to improvement. A more considered approach would
               require the utility to adopt an accounting policy of perhaps providing for (not
               writing off) 50% of unpaid bills after 3 months and 100% after 5 months. The
               utility could also be asked to develop a recovery plan for old debts, including
               writing off items that are clearly irrecoverable.
       (vii)   Use restructuring as the opportunity to create "clean" new entities with balance
               sheets that only contain current, agreed, and properly verified assets and
               liabilities. Old assets and liabilities can be left in shell companies.
112        Appendix 12



CONGRUENCE OF THE 2000 ENERGY POLICY REVIEW IN THE CONTEXT OF EVOLVING
 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY STRATEGY AND PRIORITIES IN DEVELOPING MEMBER
                             COUNTRIES

1.     The Asian Development Bank (ADB)'s 1995 Energy Policy 1 emphasized sector
reforms to unbundle regulated monopolies and develop independently regulated and privatized
energy markets. This was expected to lead to more efficient use of energy, lower costs, and
more private investment. Within the framework of the 1995 Energy Policy Review (2000
Review) emphasized four operational priorities: (i) reducing poverty; (ii) promoting private sector
involvement; (iii) addressing environmental impacts; and (iv) promoting regional cooperation.

2.      The 2000 Review has evolved significantly since 1980. It has been responsive to global
pressures (e.g., the oil price shock) and to the changing needs and priorities of its partner
developing member countries (DMCs) in the sector. From the 1980s policy, ADB energy policy
has shifted focus from supplying generation and infrastructure to more comprehensive and
mixed-style strategies attuned to address major energy development constraints and issues.
The evolution of the policy has been customer-driven. The 2000 Review, for instance, has
become broad in scope but flexible enough to remain relevant in the context of the evolving
national energy policies and strategies of DMCs. The development of the 2000 Review can be
said to be in gradual transition--moving forward to respond to the changing needs of the sector
while taking into account past provisions as building blocks of the current development of the
sector. Relevant experiences and lessons from ADB's past power sector assistance are clearly
distinguished in the Review. The global trend of harmonizing national priorities and strategy has
significantly influenced the existing energy policies of DMCs. The majority of the changes made
to national energy policies were made coherent and aligned to the Millennium Development
Goal (MDG) objectives.

3.      The Operations Evaluation Department (OED) reviewed several national energy policies
and strategies made after the release of the 2000 Review. ADB policies, together with other
development partners such as the World Bank, United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), and Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) have contributed
immensely in the development of the energy sector in the DMCs. ADB and World Bank
assistance, through program loans and technical assistance (TA), played a substantial role in
shaping the national energy policies and strategies of DMC partners, particularly in areas of
sector reform, regulation, and restructuring--the main bulk and most crucial part of the national
policy agenda of DMCs for their energy sector.

4.       The 2000 Review remains in harmony with the national energy development agenda,
priorities, and objectives of ADB's partner DMCs. However, the country strategy and programs
(CSPs) have not made any explicit reference to the 2000 Review as the guiding principles of
ADB's program assistance in developing countries' energy sectors.

5.    The discussion below further illustrates the congruence and relevance of the 2000
Review in the context of the evolving national energy policies and strategies of DMCs.



1
    ADB. 1995. The Bank's Policy Initiatives for the Energy Sector, Manila.
                                                                                                 Appendix 12     113


6.      India. India's 10th Five Year Strategy on energy (2002­2007) 2 focused on (i) energy
security; (ii) infrastructure development (refining capacity, regulatory mechanism; (iii) efficiency
improvement (benchmarking of the hydrocarbon sector with international standards, oil
conservation, demand-side management); (iv) environment and quality improvement; (v)
reforms; and (vi) regulatory mechanism. These are all aligned with the 2000 Review priority
areas. In recognition of the sector issues and complexities,3 ADB tried to be selective in its
operational strategies. The country strategies and program for India from 2002 to 2005 4
responded to the priorities of the 10th Five-Year Strategy, giving priority to: (i) developing
hydrocarbons and power infrastructures; (ii) promotion of private and public sector investments
(particularly in developing its national transmission grid); and (iii) power sector reforms and
restructuring (including private sector participation and critical investment to support improved
efficiency, system reliability, and increased distribution coverage through rural electrification). All
these interventions are within the broad scope of the 2000 Review. ADB has taken a phased
approach and has prioritized addressing the most crucial bottlenecks of the sector's
development--reform and restructuring. However, it has also worked on improving the
efficiency of crucial energy investments and resources (e.g., national transmission grid
development and hydrocarbons), in consideration of India's environmental and energy security
concerns.

7.       In 2006, the Government of India released a draft of the 11th Five Year Plan (2008-
2012). The plan was geared to evolve policies that can ensure generation capacity created in an
efficient, least-cost manner while emphasizing exploitation of India's hydro potential and nuclear
capabilities, especially in the field of breeder reactions. The 11th plan has even a broader scope,
which covers more elements of the 2000 Review: (i) ensure energy competition in each sub-
segment of the energy sector; and remove all entry barriers to rationalize optimal fuel and
technology choices for extraction, conversion, transportation, and end use of energy; (ii) ensure
energy pricing that leads to efficient choice of fuel, inter-fuel substitution, and technology so that
resource allocation takes place based on market forces operating under a credible regulatory
regime; (iii) provide incentives for rational use of energy across all sectors including agriculture,
industry, commerce, domestic, personal transport, public transport, and haulage; (iv) ensure an
institutional framework that provides a level playing field to public sector and private sector
players, and provides comparable incentives to producers across all energy sectors; (v) ensure
a consistent tax and regulatory structure across all energy subsectors; (vi) meet social
objectives as far as possible through direct trade and tradable entitlements offered to those
genuinely in need; (vii) treat environmental externalities uniformly under the "polluters pays"
principle; (viii) strengthen institutions for promoting energy conservation and energy efficiency;
(ix) develop renewable and non-conventional energy; (x) set up Research & Development to
develop technology and energy sources that will enhance energy security leading to energy
independence. The 2000 Review comprehensively covers, and remains responsive to, the new
strategy directions of the 11th plan. The Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
initiative reflects the 2000 Review major thrust on poverty reduction, to provide electricity access
to all households, particularly the poor.



2
    Source: India's National Development Council.
    Available: http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/10th/volume2/v2_ch7_3.pdf
3
    The country strategy and program for India (2003­2005) has indicated that reforms have been less successful.
    After unbundling power generation, transmission, and distribution, respond of private investments remained weak.
    The country strategy and program (2003­2005) indicated that huge losses of state electricity boards (SEBs)
    remain a pertinent issue in the sector.
4
    OED reviewed country strategy and programs starting 2002­2005.
114        Appendix 12

8.      People's Republic of China (PRC). The PRC's energy strategy is directed toward
addressing long-term concerns on energy supply, security, and sustainability issues.5 In 2000,
its 10th Five Year Plan (2002-2007) raised major concern on reverting environmental
degradation, which have been the result of the PRC's intensive energy production and heavy
reliance on coal during the past regime. These similar sectoral issues have been recognized by
the 2000 Review, thus defining one of its major operational strategies to address concern for
environmental protection.6 The 2000 Review policy context support the PRC's evolving thrusts
and focus in energy development: (i) environmental protection and improvement,
(ii) development of cleaner/renewable energy, and (iii) energy efficiency. In 2004, the
Development Research Center of the PRC's State Council completed its National Energy
Strategy and Policy Report,7 which recommended policy thrusts that are in harmony with the
2000 Review.

9.       The 11th Five Year energy strategy of the PRC further declared its stance on:
(i) enhancing energy efficiency; (ii) improving energy structure through comprehensive
development of coal, electricity, oil and gas, and new energy resources; (iii) developing energy
that considers regional balance; demands of urban and rural development; and an appropriate
mix/match of energy production, transportation, and consumption; (iv) improved participation in
terms of international energy resource development, and good use of both domestic and
international energy; (v) enhancing research and techniques in energy production and
conservation, (vi) strengthening environmental protection by reducing impacts of energy
production and consumption; (vii) emphasizing energy safety, establishing an early warning
system and strategic oil reserve, and preparing measures that ensure energy production; and
(viii) enlarging the roles of the market. All these remain congruent to the thrust of the 2000
Review. In addition, the PRC's Medium and Long Term Energy Conservation Plan8 and the
Renewable Energy Law9 are relevant to the 2000 Review. It is difficult to attribute the level of
the 2000 Review's influence on PRC's evolving energy policy. Generally, ADB and PRC policy
partnership has been operated through activities financed under ADB's TA program for the
energy sector: (i) energy efficiency and conservation, (ii) clean energy promotion, (iii) power
sector and market restructuring, (iv) tariff reform, and (v) private sector participation.

10.     Sri Lanka. The persistence of political unrest in the country hampered the large potential
of the sector. The ADB's country strategy and program has included energy among the five core
sectors for ADB's intervention. In 2003, ADB provided TA to develop the country's energy


5
    These issues include high energy intensity, heavy reliance on coal, reform of energy tariffs, and establishment of
    competitive power markets.
6
    The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) of March 1994 had been ratified by
    181 countries as of December 1999. The UNFCCC aims to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the
    atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. The
    UNFCCC recognizes explicitly that energy consumption in developing countries needs to grow to support
    economic development and reduce poverty, and requires industrial countries to aim for greenhouse gas emission
    stabilization. The Global Environment Facility (GEF), the financial instrument of the UNFCCC, provides grants to
    assist developing countries in (i) removing barriers to energy efficiency and conservation, (ii) promoting the
    adoption of renewable energy by removing barriers to and reducing the implementation costs of commercial or
    near-commercial technologies, and (iii) reducing the long-term costs of low greenhouse gas-emitting energy
    technologies. The GEF has recently adopted a policy to expand opportunities for regional development banks to
    access its resources.
7
    This report builds on the recommendations of the National Energy Strategy and Policy Report by outlining
    additional issues in design and implementation of a comprehensive energy strategy.
8
    National Development and Reform Commission. 2005. China Medium and Long Term Energy Conservation Plan.
    The People's Republic of China.
9
    2006. The Renewable Energy Law. The People's Republic of China.
                                                                                               Appendix 12     115


master plan10 to identify the long-term directions of the sector. However, the master plan has yet
to be implemented because of a change of government. A draft national energy policy and
strategies for Sri Lanka proposed many strategies for the energy sector, including provisions to:
(i) provide the basic energy needs of the population; (ii) ensure energy security through a
diversified and rational energy mix; (iii) promote energy efficiency and conservation through
efficient management and operation, and efficient utilization and conservation of energy;
(iv) promote and develop indigenous resources to minimize the vulnerability of energy supplies
to external factors by supporting oil and gas exploration programs; (v) adopt an appropriate
pricing policy to reflect real energy cost, need for targeted subsidies, and competitiveness of
locally produced goods and services in the regional and international markets; (vi) enhance
energy sector management capacity to improve technological developments and good
governance; (vii) promote consumer protection and ensure a level playing field for all
stakeholders in the sector; (viii) enhance the quality of energy services by imposing appropriate
quality standards and regulatory interventions; and (ix) provide protection from adverse
environmental impacts. Many of these suggestions were made in the Regional Energy Security
study carried out with the assistance of the USAID-funded South Asia Regional Initiative on
Energy (SARI/Energy). The proposed strategies are all relevant to the 2000 Review and fall
within the scope of the policy's context.

11.     The Philippines. In 2005, OED conducted an evaluation of the Philippine energy
sector.11 Findings indicated that ADB operational strategies in energy and energy policies have
tried to meet the country's changing development needs in the sector. However, such needs
have been difficult to quantify in practice, and the formulation of some operational strategies
may have been based on overestimated demands for power capacities. The ADB assistance
program has been broadly relevant in addressing the needs of the sector and in complying with
ADB's sector strategies and policies. The focus of assistance shifted from adding generation
capacity to improving power infrastructure (transmission and distribution), and recently shifted to
creating an enabling environment to attract private investment (in terms of physical
infrastructure, institutional conditions, and policy). Although it was not explicitly stated in the
strategy and program papers, ADB's sector strategies for the Philippine sector have covered: (i)
development of indigenous energy and energy infrastructure to reduce heavy reliance on
imported fuel, (ii) provision of reliable and affordable electricity, and (iii) establishment of a
financially viable power sector. All remain relevant thrusts of the 2000 Review.

12.     The institutional structure of the Philippine power sector has changed substantially over
the past decades. The Electric Power Industry Reform Act (2001), for instance, is ushering in a
new unbundled structure of the power sector. Structural changes promoted by this Act has been
supported by local energy priorities and the evolving policy recommendation of development
partners (through policy dialogues and TA), including ADB. However, ADB's role in power
sector restructuring in the Philippines has been criticized by different civilian groups and
nongovernmental organizations. Critical views pointed out that the external borrowing, including
that from ADB, have (i) added a burden to the country's increasing debt; and (ii) resulted in
some cases of fuel corruption and mismanagement within the sector, which have caused high




10
   ADB. 2003. Technical Assistance to Sri Lanka for Energy Sector Master Plan. Manila (TA No. 4113). The TA was
   rated "generally successful".
11
   ADB. 2005. Sector Assistance Evaluation of the Philippine Power Sector. Manila. This view was based on Malalua,
   N. and J.J. Chavez. 2005. Private Power Failure, ADB and Policy (Mis)governance in Asia. Focus on the South.
   May (pp. 13­19).
116         Appendix 12

electricity prices and burdened the poor most.12 OED assessed ADB's operational programs in
this sector "partly successful". The assessment recognized that ADB-supported projects have
mostly achieved their expected outputs satisfactorily, with a good level of quality. However,
there were often delays, scope reduction, or in some cases cost overrun. Despite efforts, ADB
policy dialogue has not always achieved its objectives. The program as a whole has not
achieved some of its key sector objectives. ADB has played a major role in promoting power
sector restructuring.

13.    The 2000 Review's generic provisions have not considered precautionary safeguards
that may be relevant to address such issues. Overall, the Review has been relevant and
responsive to the developing needs of the Philippine power sector, but the overwhelming
presence of governance issues in the sector delays the effectiveness of the policy and sector
operations in the country.

14.     The following table summarizes the relevance of the 2000 Review on energy strategy
direction of DMCs.




12
     ADB. 2005. Sector Assistance Evaluation of the Philippine Power Sector. Manila. This view was based on Malalua,
     N. and J.J. Chavez. 2005. Private Power Failure, ADB and Policy (Mis)governance in Asia. Focus on the South.
     May (pp. 13­19).
                                  Table A12: Relevance of the 2000 Review on Energy Strategy Directions of DMCs
Country       Relevant Sectoral                Country/National Energy                 Relevant Elements of         ADB Energy Strategy             ADB Projects Since the
                   Issues                             Strategy                           the 2000 Energy              Addressed in the                 Release of the 2000
                                                                                          Policy Review                    CSP/CAP                          Review
            th                           th
India     11 Five Year Plan           11 Five Year Plan                                 Private sector          CSP (2003­2006)                     No loans approved
                                       Ensure energy competition in each                participation           ADB promoted South Asia             since 2000
          Electricity                   subsegment of the energy sector and                                     Subregional Economic
           Rapid growth will place      remove all entry barriers to rationalize        Sector restructuring    Cooperation. Action programs        Technical Assistance:
             heavy demand on            optimal fuel and technology choices for                                 were developed for                  2000
             electric power             extraction, conversion, transportation,         Efficiency              subregional projects in              TA 3573-IND:
                                        and end use of energy                           improvement             energy, environment,                  Reorganization Plan
          Coal                         Ensure energy pricing that leads to                                      transport, and private sector         for Gujarat Electricity
           Coal production is           efficient choice of fuel, inter-fuel            Subsidies/efficiency    cooperation.                          Board
            nationalized at present     substitution, and technology so that            improvement                                                  TA 3574-IND:
                                                                                                                Emphasis on hydrocarbons              Consumer Awareness
            and limited private         resource allocation takes place based on
                                                                                        Sectoral reform and     and power development.                and Participation in
            investment is allowed       market forces operating under credible
                                                                                        restructuring           Investments were directed to          Power Sector Reforms
           Environmental pollution      regulatory regime
                                                                                                                removing key bottlenecks             TA 3575-IND: Support
                                       Incentivize rational use of energy across
                                                                                        Tariff reform           where private investment is           to Gujarat Electricity
          Oil and Gas                   all sectors including agriculture, industry,
                                                                                                                not forthcoming.                      Regulatory
           High dependence on           commerce, domestic, personal transport,
             crude oil imports          public transport, and haulage                   Poverty                                                       Commission
                                                                                        reduction/rural         CSP Update (2005­2007)
           High subsidy                Ensure an institutional framework that                                   Continued association with
                                                                                                                                                    2001
           Pricing of domestically      provides a level playing field to public        electrification                                              TA 3734-IND: Kerala
                                                                                                                private and public sectors,           Power Sector
             produced natural gas       sector and private sector players, and
                                                                                        Environmental           especially in developing the          Development Program
             and its allocation to      provides comparable incentives to
                                                                                        protection              national gas transmission grid      2002
             power and fertilizer       producers across all energy sectors
                                                                                                                in the country; focus on sector      TA 3882-IND:
             industry                  Ensure a consistent tax and regulatory                                   restructuring, including private
           Strengthening                structure across all energy subsectors          Energy efficiency                                             Development of a
                                                                                                                sector participation and critical     Transfer Scheme for
             upstream regulation       Meet social objectives as far as possible                                investments to support
           Ensuring competition         through direct trade and tradable               Renewable energy                                              Madhya Pradesh
                                                                                        development             improvement of efficiency,            Power Sector Reform
             and open access            entitlements offered to those genuinely in                              system reliability, and
                                        need                                                                                                         TA 3883-IND: Legal
                                                                                        CDM                     increase distribution coverage        Support for Madhya
          CSP (2003­2006)              Treat environmental externalities                                        (including rural electrification)
           Reforms have been            uniformly under the "polluters pays"                                                                          Pradesh Power Sector
            less successful. After      principle                                       Capacity building and                                         Reform
                                                                                        information systems     CSP Update ( 2006­2008)              TA 3885-IND: Energy
            unbundling generation,     Strengthen institutions for promoting                                    Continued focus on important
            transmission, and           energy conservation and energy                                                                                Efficiency
                                                                                                                areas such as strengthening           Enhancement Project
            distribution, private       efficiency                                                              the national transmission grid       TA 3953-IND: Assam
            investments were           Develop renewable and nonconventional                                    and other critical investment
            allowed but the                                                                                                                           Power Sector
                                        energy                                                                  needs
            response was weak                                                                                                                         Development Program
                                       Set up Research & Development to                                                                              TA 3972-IND:
                                        develop technology and energy sources                                   Continued focus on state
                                                                                                                                                      Strengthening




                                                                                                                                                                                Appendix 12
          Huge losses of SEBs           that will enhance energy security, leading                              power sector loans for
                                                                                                                upgrading transmission,               Consumer and
                                        to energy independence
                                                                                                                distribution, rural                   Stakeholder
                                                                                                                electrification, and capacity         Communication for




                                                                                                                                                                                117
                                                                                                                                            118
                                                                                                                                            Appendix 12
Country   Relevant Sectoral   Country/National Energy   Relevant Elements of        ADB Energy Strategy         ADB Projects Since the
               Issues                Strategy             the 2000 Energy             Addressed in the            Release of the 2000
                                                           Policy Review                   CSP/CAP                        Review
                                                                               building of power sector           Madhya Pradesh
                                                                               institutions aimed to improve      Power Sector Reform
                                                                               metering, collection of bills,   2003
                                                                               and reducing system losses        TA 4083-IND: Building
                                                                                                                  the Capacity of Assam
                                                                                                                  Electricity Regulatory
                                                                                                                  Commission
                                                                                                                 TA 4182-IND: Urban
                                                                                                                  Clean Fuel
                                                                                                                 TA 4241-IND:
                                                                                                                  Reorganization of
                                                                                                                  Assam State Electricity
                                                                                                                  Board
                                                                                                                 TA 4242-IND:
                                                                                                                  Institutional
                                                                                                                  Development for Rural
                                                                                                                  Electrification
                                                                                                                 TA 4243-IND: Policy
                                                                                                                  and Legal Support for
                                                                                                                  Power Sector Reforms
                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                 TA 4380-IND:
                                                                                                                  Uttaranchal Power
                                                                                                                  Sector Development
                                                                                                                 TA 4496-IND: Capacity
                                                                                                                  Building for Clean
                                                                                                                  Development
                                                                                                                  Mechanism
                                                                                                                 TA 4498-IND: North
                                                                                                                  East Power
                                                                                                                  Development
                                                                                                                 TA 4336-IND:
                                                                                                                  Hydropower
                                                                                                                  Development
                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                    TA 4630-IND:
                                                                                                                    Uttaranchal Power
                                                                                                                    Sector Capacity
                                                                                                                    Building
Country       Relevant Sectoral                 Country/National Energy                Relevant Elements of         ADB Energy Strategy         ADB Projects Since the
                   Issues                              Strategy                          the 2000 Energy              Addressed in the            Release of the 2000
                                                                                          Policy Review                    CSP/CAP                     Review
China,     Major problems in           China Medium and Long Term Energy                                       CAP (2001­2003)                  Loans approved since
People's   energy conservation         Conservation Plan (2005)                                                ADB will encourage private       2000
Republic   work                        Principles to be followed for energy                                    sector participation
of          Insufficient knowledge     conservation                                     Environmental          (LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS           2000
             and guideline policy on   1. Adhere to taking energy conservation          improvement            terminals and gas pipeline);      L 1818-PRC: Wind
             energy conservation           as an important component of changing                               technology transfer to address     Power Development
            Energy conservation            economic growth pattern                      Energy efficiency/     the Government's concerns        2001
             laws and regulations      2. Adhere to the integration of energy           improvement/           over pollution standards and      L 1901-PRC: Shen-Da
             are incomplete. PRC           conservation with structural adjustment,     regarding structural   production efficiency;             Power Transmission
             Energy Conservation           technology progress, and management          reform                 development of merchant            and Grid Rehabilitation
             Law, effected in 1998         enhancement                                  Sector reform          power plants; privatization of   2002
            No effective energy        3. Adhere to the integration of the function                            state-owned power plants;         L 1922-PRC: Hebei
             conservation incentive        of market mechanism with government                                 creation of competitive            Zhanghewan Pumped
             policy                        macro-regulation                                                    markets for electricity; power     Storage
            Energy conservation        4. Adhere to the integration of lawful                                  restructuring to introduce       2003
             mechanism adaptive to         management and policy incentives                                    competitive power markets;        L 2032-PRC: Gansu
             market-driven             5. Adhere to giving prominence to                                       priority given to projects         Clean Energy
             economy system has            emphases, providing guidance by                                     involving strengthening and        Development
             not yet been                  categories, and promoting                                           modernization of the rural and   2004
             established                   comprehensively                                                     urban distribution systems.       L 2146-PRC: Coal
            Development and            6. Adhere to public participation by the                                ADB will focus on small to         Mine Methane
             dissemination of              whole society                                                       medium hydropower projects         Development
             energy conservation                                                                               in the western region. ADB        L 2112-PRC: Liaoning
             technology is             Implementing measures                                                   will identify more renewable       Environmental
             inadequate                    Adhere to and implement the guideline                               energy projects (e.g., wind        Improvement
            Capacity building in           of giving priority to energy conservation                           power, solar power, and use      2006
             energy conservation           Formulate and implement unified and                                 of biogas).                       L 2260-PRC: Inner
             regulatory and service        harmonized energy and environment                                                                      Mongolia Autonomous
             institution lags behind       policies to promote energy                                          CSPU (2003­2005)                   Region Environment
                                           conservation                                                        Proposed program will              Improvement
                                           Formulate and implement industrial                                  improve system-wide power
                                           policies to facilitate structure                                    transmission and rural           Technical Assistance
                                           adjustment                                                          electrification systems; and     2000
                                           Formulate and implement incentive                                   develop small-scale               TA 3547-PRC:
                                           policies to intensify energy                                        hydropower projects in the         Interregional Power
                                           conservation                                                        west, and coal bed methane         Transmission Network
                                           Strengthen energy conservation                                      demonstration projects in          Development Strategy
                                           management according to laws                                        Shanxi and Liaoning. Ongoing     2001
                                           Accelerate development,                                             and proposed TA programs          TA 2477-PRC: Hebei-
                                           demonstration, and promotion of                                     will support power sector          Zhanghewan Pumped




                                                                                                                                                                            Appendix 12
                                           energy conservation technology                                      reforms to develop                 Storage
                                           Promote new market-based energy                                     competitive markets and the        (Supplementary)
                                           conservation mechanism                                              necessary regulatory              TA 3673-PRC: Pro-
                                           Reinforce energy conservation                                       capability, and develop pro-       Poor Urban Heating




                                                                                                                                                                            119
                                                                                                                                                               120
                                                                                                                                                               Appendix 12
Country   Relevant Sectoral          Country/National Energy            Relevant Elements of      ADB Energy Strategy             ADB Projects Since the
               Issues                       Strategy                      the 2000 Energy            Addressed in the               Release of the 2000
                                                                           Policy Review                   CSP/CAP                         Review
                                 regulation on key                                             poor tariff structures for rural     Tariff Reforms
                                 Intensify promotion, education, and                           consumers and urban district        TA 3730-PRC: Gansu
                                 training of energy conservation                               heating.                             Hydropower
                                 Enhance organization and leadership,                                                             2002
                                 and promote program implementation                            ADB assistance in 2003­2005         TA 3840-PRC:
                                                                                               will help develop cleaner            Opportunities for the
                                                                                               forms of energy (e.g., small-        Clean Development
                                                                                               scale hydropower, coal bed           Mechanism in the
                                                                                               methane).                            Energy Sector
                                                                                                                                   TA 3931-PRC:
                                                                                               CSPU (2006­2008)                     Establishing the
                                                                                               The 2006­2008 program will           National Electricity
                                                                                               cover clean energy and               Regulatory
                                                                                               energy conservation                  Commission
                                                                                               development (e.g., developing      2003
                                                                                               cleaner forms of energy,            TA 4117-PRC: Power
                                                                                               promoting efficient energy use       Pricing Strategy: Tariff
                                                                                               and renewable energy, and            Setting and Regulation
                                                                                               reducing emissions that             TA 4195-PRC: Jiangsu
                                                                                               contribute to global warming).       Urban Environment
                                                                                               ADB supports CDM-related             Improvement
                                                                                               projects, sponsored mainly by       TA 4309-PRC :
                                                                                               private sector developers,           Renewable Energy for
                                                                                               under the Kyoto Protocol as          Poverty Reduction
                                                                                               well as existing carbon credit     2004
                                                                                               markets.                            TA 4389-PRC: Waste
                                                                                                                                    Coal Utilization Study
                                                                                                                                   TA 4402-PRC: Heating
                                                                                                                                    Supply for Urban Poor
                                                                                                                                    in Liaoning Province
                                                                                                                                   TA 4416-PRC:
                                                                                                                                    Capacity Strengthening
                                                                                                                                    of Power Planning
                                                                                                                                    Process
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                   TA 4511-PRC: Energy
                                                                                                                                    Development Strategy
                                                                                                                                    for the Inner Mongolia
                                                                                                                                    Autonomous Region
Country       Relevant Sectoral                   Country/National Energy               Relevant Elements of    ADB Energy Strategy   ADB Projects Since the
                   Issues                                Strategy                         the 2000 Energy        Addressed in the       Release of the 2000
                                                                                           Policy Review             CSP/CAP                   Review
           Intensive energy               11th Five-Year Plan                            Environmental                                2005
             requirement                   Enhance energy efficiency by abiding to       improvement                                   TA 4566-PRC: Poverty
           Existing laws, policies,         energy conservation regulations and          Energy efficiency/                             Reduction in Coal Mine
             and regulations on             measures;                                    improvement                                    Areas in Shanxi
             energy needs to be            Improve energy structure through                                                             Province
             realigned along                comprehensive development of coal,                                                         TA 4584-PRC: Inner
             strategic goal.                electricity, oil and gas, and new energy                                                    Mongolia Autonomous
             Heavy dependence on            resources;                                                                                  Region Environmental
             coal needs urgent             Develop energy while taking into                                                             Improvement
             solutions to address           consideration regional balance, demands                                                    TA 4706-PRC : Energy
             environmental concern          of urban and rural development, and                                                         Conservation and
             and safety                     matching of energy production,               Regional cooperation                           Resource Management
             Promotion of clean and         transportation and consumption;                                                            TA 4649-PRC :
             renewable energies            Participate in international energy           Environmental                                  Alternative Energy
             remain a challenge             resource development, and make good           improvement                                   Supply for Rural Poor
             Market mechanisms              use of both domestic and international       Renewable/clean                                in Remote Areas
             need to be introduced          energy;                                       energy development                          2006
             in setting energy tariffs     Enhance research and techniques in                                                          TA 4812-PRC:
             and establishing full          energy production and conservation                                                          Establishment of the
             competitive power             Strengthen environmental protection by                                                       Clean Development
             markets                        reducing impacts of energy production                                                       Mechanism Fund
             Need to have                   and consumption                              Private sector                                TA 4819-PRC: Energy
             transparent, market-          Emphasize energy safety, and establish         development                                   Conservation and
             oriented tariff setting to     an early warning system and strategic oil    Energy security                                Resource Management
             reflect the increasing         reserve                                                                                    TA 4783-PRC: Gansu
                                                                                         Energy structural
             cost for energy               Prepare measures to ensure energy                                                            Heihe Hydropower
                                                                                          reform
             production, promote            production, and enlarge the roles of                                                        Development
                                                                                         Poverty reduction
             energy efficiency,             market
             attract private sector
             participation, and
             access to energy for
             poor.




                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 12
                                                                                                                                                                 121
                                                                                                                                                                                   122
                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 12
 Country       Relevant Sectoral                   Country/National Energy                 Relevant Elements of           ADB Energy Strategy           ADB Projects Since the
                    Issues                                Strategy                           the 2000 Energy                Addressed in the              Release of the 2000
                                                                                              Policy Review                      CSP/CAP                       Review
 Sri            Energy Security           National Energy Policy and Strategies                                      CSP (2003­ 2005)                   Loans approved since
 Lanka                                                                                                               In the energy sector, the          2000
                Over reliance on
                hydro and oil-fired        Provide basic energy needs of the                Poverty reduction/       reform efforts included a
                                             population                                      rural electrification   transparent automatic price        2000
                plant
                                             Ensure energy security through                 Energy security/         adjustment formula for              L 1929-SRI: Power
                Lack of commercially         diversified and rational energy mix             diversity               petroleum products and an            Sector Development
                driven policies                                                                                      average 35% increase in              Program (Program)
                                             Promote energy efficiency and                  Structural reform
                Large losses due to          conservation through efficient                 Environmental            power tariffs. The                  L 1930-SRI: Power
                under recovery of            management and operation, and efficient         protection              Government is fully committed        Sector Development
                costs                        utilization and conservation of energy         Renewable energy         to rationalizing and simplifying     Program (Project loan)
                Political resistance is      Promote and develop indigenous                  development             the tax system.
                impeding reform              resources to minimize vulnerability of         Tariff/energy price
                progress                     energy supplies to external factors;            restructuring           CSP (2004­2008)                    Technical Assistance
                                             support oil and gas exploration programs                                Energy is included among the       since 2000
                                             Adopt appropriate pricing policy to reflect                             five core sectors for ADB's
                                             real energy cost, need for targeted            Sector reform/good       intervention.                      2000
                                             subsidies, and competitiveness of locally       governance                                                  TA 3450-SRI:
                                             produced goods and services in the                                      CSP (2002­2004)                      Promotion of Private
                                             regional and international markets                                      ADB supported formulation of         Sector Involvement in
                                             Enhance energy sector management                                        an integrated energy sector          Oil and Gas
                                             capacity to improve technological              Demand-/supply-side      master plan to guide future          Exploration
                                             developments and good governance                efficiency              ADB assistance in regional
                                             Promote consumer protection and                                         development, agriculture and       2002
                                             ensure a level playing field for all                                    rural development, and              TA 3857-SRI:
                                                                                            Environmental
                                             stakeholders in the sector                                              energy sectors.                      Restructuring of the
                                                                                             protection/
                                             Enhance quality of energy services by                                                                        Power Sector - Phase
                                                                                             improvement
                                             imposing appropriate quality standard                                                                        II
                                             and regulatory interventions
                                                                                                                                          2003
                                             Protection from adverse environmental
                                                                                                                                           TA 4113-SRI: Energy
                                             impacts
                                                                                                                                             Sector Master Plan
                                                                                                                                           TA 4262-SRI: Rural
                                                                                                                                             Electrification and
                                                                                                                                             Network Expansion
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CAP = country assistance plan, CDM = clean development mechanisms, CSP = country strategy program, LNG = liquefied natural gas,
PRC = People's Republic of China, TA = Technical Assistance.
Sources: ADB country strategies and programs.
                                                                                               Appendix 13   123

                           ADB ENERGY SPECIALISTS' COMPETENCIES SURVEY


                                                                                         Competency
Competency Area                                          Competence Level            As Percentage of Total
                                                                                         Respondents
                                                  High        Med       Low/None   High      Med      Low/None
Thermal, District Heat, Clean Coal,                  7           9             9    28        36             36
  Coal Bed Methane
Hydropower                                           8           8            9     32        32             36
Other Renewables                                     5           8           12     20        32             48
Power Transmission                                   6          11            8     24        44             32
Oil and Gas Pipeline                                 0           6           19      0        24             76
Gas Distribution                                     1           0           24      4         0             96
Power Distribution and DSM                           7           4           14     28        16             56
Industrial Efficiency Improvement                    2           7           16      8        28             64
Energy Economics, Forecasting                        7           6           12     28        24             48
Project Economic Analysis                            4          12            9     16        48             36
Tariffs                                              8           6           11     32        24             44
Corporate Governance                                 3           4           18     12        16             72
Regulation                                           3          10           12     12        40             48
Competitive Electricity Market                       5           6           14     20        24             56
Unbundling and Restructuring                         8           6           11     32        24             44
Financial Management                                 3           6           16     12        24             64
Project Financial Analysis                           7           6           12     28        24             48
Business Model and Financial Projections             7           2           16     28         8             64
Privatization                                        6           2           17     24         8             68
Public-Private Partnership                           3           6           16     12        24             64
DSM = demand-side management.
Source: ADB. 2006: Regional and Sustainable Development Department staff survey.
124         Appendix 14

                                           FUTURE STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

      1.       The Asian Development Bank (ADB)'s Energy Policy needs to be updated to reflect the
      changing external environment and the needs of the DMCs. The evaluation findings indicate
      that, while the principles and objectives of the 2000 Review remain valid and relevant, there is a
      need to update the policy to better reflect current needs and resources within DMCs and ADB.
      This includes a consolidation of the new initiatives and strategies, including the Energy
      Efficiency Initiative (EEI) and the Carbon Fund. The four pillars of ADB's 2000 Review
      emphasize different aspects of setting investment priorities. However, linkages between the four
      pillars are not clearly set out. Few if any projects will contribute to all four of these pillars. There
      were no clear criteria which can be used to set priorities between the four objectives.

      2.      The evaluation suggests that ADB's support for the energy sector should be driven by
      two key policy considerations: energy efficiency and good governance. Efficiency can be
      achieved by: (i) the use of demand side technologies, regulation and time of use tariffs to
      promote energy efficiency; and (ii) the use of the most energy efficient supply technology in
      distribution transmission and generation to supply residual load, time of use wholesale pricing
      and sharing regional energy surpluses.

      A.         Identifying and Supporting Energy Efficiency

      3.      Before increasing the supply of energy into a system, all feasible efforts should be made
      to decrease the demand for energy use through energy efficiency initiatives and increased
      system efficiencies. Commonly termed "negawatts" 1 , estimations indicate energy efficiency
      efforts to reduce demand cost less than half the cost of adding additional capacity. Energy
      efficiency initiatives should precede funding for new capacity, however not at the expense of
      "turning off the lights". Energy use, which is expected to continue to increase with the expanded
      economies, is likely to remain high in the medium term particularly for Asia. There will be a time
      lag for energy efficiency initiatives to take effect hence investment in new generation and
      transmission capacity will be needed to meet the increased demand associated with economic
      growth.

                1.        Demand Side Energy Efficiency

      4.       The economic basis for energy efficiency projects are the relatively large avoided costs
      of new generation and generally fast returns in the investments.2 The updated Energy strategy
      should make it clear that initiatives that promote energy efficiency should be the single largest
      priority in ADB operations in the energy sector as it will contribute most to reducing the cost of
      supply. This would be a pro-poor initiative and would avoid the adverse environmental and
      social impacts that are sometimes associated with new capacity.

      5.      Energy efficiency projects need to be tailored to sub-national rather than national needs
      as each region will have different opportunities at the demand and supply side of the energy
      cycle. Broad based policy frameworks need to be developed at the national level, completed by
      more specific policies at the regional or provincial levels in large DMCs. These policies should
      be supported by an appropriate regulatory and/or legal framework to monitor and enforce policy.



      1
          As opposed to adding watts, negawatts implies reducing watts.
      2
          Usually 24-36 months.
                                                                                                   Appendix 14    125

6.      Knowledge must be transferred to financing institutions which are likely to fund energy
efficiency or to electricity supply companies (ESCOs). However, this process is not likely to
succeed if it is based only on the three features which are generally discussed in the Energy
Efficiency Initiative (EEI): technology, economics and finance. There are three other
requirements which broadly can be classified as implementation issues:

           (i)      legal and policy support need to be incorporated into energy efficiency designs
                    so that a system of incentives and penalties encourage investment in energy
                    efficiency;
           (ii)     each specific regional energy efficiency needs to have a measurable base data
                    and outcomes which are incorporated into designs; and
           (iii)    each specific regional EEI needs to be marketed to the specific energy efficiency
                    targets.

           2.       Supply Side Energy Efficiency

7.      Efforts to increase supply side efficiencies would have both positive economic and
environmental benefits. The technical choices should consider minimizing both the total life time
costs and include the externalities associated with environmental effects. ADB should actively
explore opportunities to fund new high efficiency supply technologies, where these are
economically and commercially viable. Many emergent generation technologies 3 have
significant promise from an environmental perspective, however there are risks associated with
new technologies which have not been proven to be commercially and operationally viable and
are not attractive to commercial lenders.

           3.       Time of Use (TOU) Tariffs

8.       ADB should encourage the use of tariff designs and other price signals to encourage
measures to promote energy efficiency. The finding of the evaluation confirms that TOU tariffs
can exert powerful influence that improves efficiency and reduces the need for additional
generation capacity. ADB should more aggressively promote the use of well structured TOU
tariffs.

                    a.      Promoting the Use of Cost Effective Renewable Energy

9.     Using sustainable renewable energy efficiently increases fuel security and reduces
greenhouse gases. Renewable energy projects funded by ADB include hydropower (run of river,
large storage, and pumped storage facilities), geothermal wind, solar, biomass and waste
generation. The energy strategy update should reflect the environmental and social benefits and
mainstream renewable energy. However, there is limited commercial scope for technologies
such as wind and hydro, as their energy supplies, wind and water are irregular, and redundancy
costs may be too high. The objective should be to create a framework that makes investing in
renewable energy a commercially viable proposition.

10.    Hydropower technology is advanced and efficient and, and for some projects, provides
one of the lowest long run costs of supplying energy and technical systems support4. Options
include large and medium storage dams, reservoirs with multipurpose facilities, pumped

3
    Newer generation technology such as Integrated Gasified Combined Cycle (IGCC).
4
    Hydropower, as an energy supply source, provides a technical benefit to the power system, i.e., power is readily
     available to meet peak loads, maintain adequate voltage and frequency levels and supply systems stability.
126          Appendix 14

      storage, run-of-river, and small hydro. An increasing number of hydropower plants are under
      construction or being planned in the Asian and Pacific region. Many of these plants are run-of-
      river but a few are designed as storage type. Run-of-river type projects generally have small
      reservoir facilities and are considered less environmentally disruptive than dams with large head
      ponds, however there is no clear evidence to indicate that the total effects per installed kW is
      less for run of river dams. This warrants a cautious evaluation of cascading projects.

      11.    Rural electrification can, in many instances, be most cost efficiently supplied through
      renewable energy. Much of this could be addressed through low cost/cost effective renewable
      sources, many of which are suitable for off-grid users. Operational costs are lower due to not
      being subject to fluctuating prices, like fossil fuels. Furthermore, grid extensions are not
      required, thus saving on transmission costs.

      12.     The cost of renewable energy technology fallen in the past five years as a result of
      economies of scale and the benefits now being better understood by the power industry and the
      financial institutions which fund them. Wind power has been demonstrated to be commercially
      viable in India and the PRC. Geothermal energy is widely used in the Philippines and Indonesia.
      However, many other renewable energy technologies are not yet commercially proven. ADB
      should support the development of renewable energy initiatives and finance pilot projects where
      these can be replicated and are capable of providing long term sustainable and competitive
      energy sources.

      13.    ADB should place a high priority in providing assistance to develop an appropriate legal,
      policy and regulatory framework for renewable energy. Supply options include taxes and
      demand side options include legal obligations such as compulsory levels of supply and
      voluntary measures such as "green energy" schemes.

                 4.        Reflecting Environmental Costs in Economic Analysis

      14.     As reflected above, in supply-side energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives the
      study recommends the inclusion of externalities into cost benefit analysis. ADB does not, as a
      matter of routine, reflect environmental costs in the economic analysis undertaken for energy
      projects. While there have been some attempts, these have generally been for projects that
      have environmental benefits. Consistently reflecting the environmental benefits and costs in the
      economic analysis would help ADB to make better decisions in determining which projects to
      support and identifying the costs and benefits of mitigating environmental costs associated with
      alternative energy projects. For example, the environmental costs associated with coal
      generation are typically born by society at large through air pollution and acid rain rather than
      directly by the project. Because these costs are externalized, thermal power sometimes appears
      to be a better economic investment than energy conservation, clean energy and renewable
      energy projects. If environmental externalities were included in the analysis, ADB would be
      better able to choose which projects to support.5

                 5.        Use of Strategic Environmental Assessment

      15.     Much of ADB's attention on environmental issues in the energy sector is focused at the
      project level. This generally focuses on traditional `within-the-fence' efforts to ensure that
      projects meet the objectives of ADB's environmental safeguard policies. While attention to

      5
          Evaluation Cooperation Group. 2007. The Nexus between Infrastructure and Environment, a joint paper by
          Evaluation Cooperation Group and the International Financial Institutions including Asian Development Bank.
                                                                                     Appendix 14   127

environmental issues are the project level is important, ADB's approach of primarily focusing on
project level safeguards is too narrow. Project-level environmental assessments, however well
done, do not adequately handle strategic issues. The project level approach must be
complemented by a broader, sectoral level approach to effectively address the strategic
elements of the energy environment nexus. Broader questions include things like: (i) Are the
right kinds of projects being selected for ADB support? (ii) Are policy reforms preferable to
investments in more energy infrastructure? (iii) Could energy efficiency initiatives reduce or
eliminate the need for further investment in generation capacity? (iv) What needs to be done to
promote renewable energy? (iv) Would regional cooperation in the energy sector be a way to
reduce environmental costs? Strategic environmental assessment is a term broadly applied to
the scaling-up of environmental assessments beyond the project level to the sectoral or national
level. Such assessments, if properly done, would be an appropriate vehicle to help ADB and
DMCs to develop more effective strategies to address issues related to the energy/environment
nexus. At the national or sectoral level, there are many options for addressing the
energy/environment nexus. However, these options may not be apparent if environmental
assessments focus on the project level. To achieve this vision requires moving beyond the
conventional project level "Do No Harm" approach to a more pro-active "Do Good" approach at
the sectoral level.

B.       Good Governance

16.    Good governance in the energy sector enhances its performance. ADB can help to
achieve high governance standards by supporting measures such as:

       (i)     ensuring that the sector makes effective use of the private sector as an investor
               and manager;
       (ii)    applying commercially and sustainable management principles to publicly owned
               utilities; and
       (iii)   supporting effective and independent regulation.

       1.      Making Effective Use of the Private Sector

17.     The complete privatization of the power sector will be difficult in most countries in Asia.
Many countries do not regard privatization of existing assets as a priority. However, in view of
the huge financial needs of the power sector, more efforts need to be made to mobilize private
financing. There are a number of ways that ADB might extend this involvement including:

       (i)     Ensuring that the enabling environment is in place to encourage private sector
               investment.
       (ii)    Encouraging sector restructuring to make utilities bankable, so that local banks
               and other financial institutions can become more involved in project and working
               capital financing.
       (iii)   Offering ADB private sector involvement in projects such as peaking units, hydro
               plants and merchant power plants, and supporting governments and utilities in
               developing the contracting structure for such plants.
       (iv)    Encouraging developments such as franchising distribution activities and
               contracting out of billing and debt collection to bring private sector entrepreneurs
               into the distribution function.
       (v)     Selectively supporting full privatization, particularly for thermal generation assets
               and in cases where significant investment in rehabilitation of plant is required.
128       Appendix 14

             2.         Applying Commercial and Financially Sustainable Management Principles

      18.     There is compelling evidence to show that application of commercially and sustainable
      management principles can achieve many of the benefits of privatization. Successful initiatives
      include creating companies under local companies acts to take over the role of public
      corporations, recruiting managers from the private sector on term contracts, giving employees
      financial incentives to achieve measurable performance objectives and using merit based
      systems for recruitment and promotion. Further measures, such as independent directors and
      external independent auditors, should be more widely adopted.

      19.     A realistic objective for ADB is to raise accounting and auditing standards applied in the
      energy sector. The transition from statutory utilities to companies established under a
      companies act provides a good basis for doing this in that the new companies have the freedom
      to set their own accounting policies and processes within their framework of national legislation
      and could use commercial auditors. Both these developments would be positive. In the short
      term sector restructuring is creating some accounting and auditing problems. The establishment
      of new companies necessitates the splitting of accounts of former utilities between several new
      entities. This, in turn, requires a clean up of the accounts which is frequently time consuming. It
      delays completion and internal approval of accounts and may give rise to numerous audit
      queries which may lead to further delays. The process is beneficial, despite the delays, because
      it leads to more accurate accounts.

      20.     For utilities' accounts that are produced and audited to good local and international
      practice standards, covenants are useful in that they give ADB assurance over how the utility is
      using its funds, both those borrowed from ADB and more generally. However, for utilities where
      accounting and auditing fails to meet proper standards alternative approaches are needed. ADB
      should use covenants to require improvements in standards, for example by changes to
      accounting policies and procedures. Where necessary, ADB should require the appointment of
      accounting advisers or possibly independent auditors to address these problems.

      21.    There is little point in ADB focusing on strict compliance with covenants relating to the
      submission of audited accounts when those audits are of doubtful value. Delays in submissions
      should be accepted if efforts are being made to improve quality of the audited accounts. In
      moving forward, there is a need to find the right balance among compliance, quality capacity
      development, and implementation monitoring. While ADB does monitor the timely submission of
      audited financial statement, it is rare for ADB financial analysts to rigorously review the audit
      reports and to raise questions about them. This is a failure in project administration on ADB's
      part and raises questions why ADB required auditing of financial statements in the first place.

             3.         Supporting the Establishment of an Independent Regulator

      22.    Comprehensive, independent regulatory structures which are capable of achieving a
      balance between the interests of investors and consumers have played a vital role in energy
      sector reform. Independent regulation has promoted accountability and transparency in the
      power sector and has also played a role in broader reforms such as encouraging investment in
      renewable energy and addressing environmental concerns.

      23.     Independent regulation is a relatively new activity in the Asia Pacific Region and more
      assistance is required. Numerous issues were raised in discussions with regulators by the OEM
      such as the need to ensure financially competitive salaries, the scope for creating career
      structures for regulatory staff, meeting training needs, methods of achieving financial
                                                                                                  Appendix 14    129

independence of the regulator and means of sharing information about best practice. Dialogue
between power sector regulators is a powerful tool in sharing and promoting best practice.
Where there are opportunities for ADB to promote regulatory cooperation and skills
development, they should be taken.

          4.       Supporting the Financial Restructuring of Insolvent Utilities

24.     In a number of countries the power sector has been insolvent for many years and there
is a culture of non payment both between utilities and from utilities to government. The power
sectors in the Philippines and Bangladesh both illustrate the problem.6

25.     The authorities in India have had success in placing the power sector on a commercial
footing, following the scheme of settlement, organized in 2001/02 and involving state electricity
boards, central and state governments and the Reserve Bank of India. Debts were resolved
through a combination of securitization and write off. State electricity boards now keep current
on their power purchases under a letter of credit scheme. Similar schemes should be evaluated
in other countries with insolvent power sectors to introduce commercial discipline and
encourage greater private sector involvement.

          5.       Encourage the Wider Adoption of Risk Management Policies and
                   Procedures

26.     In emerging markets, risk management is an essential requirement for the long term
survival of all participants and risk management needs to develop simultaneously with a market
structure. Future lending may shift towards non sovereign lending; hence more financial risks in
addition to potential performance based risks imposed by regulators will increase for
restructured utilities. ADB should ensure that risk management is part of an overall plan for
market liberalization. This requires a considerable investment in time and training, the
development of new software and organizational changes. It also requires considerable
investments in capital for computer systems. General corporate risk management, through the
requirement of a risk management committee, reporting directly to an independent board should
be included in loan covenants.7

C.         Promote Regional Co-Operation to Share Resources

27.     Regional energy integration has proceeded slowly in the Asia Pacific Region, but the
potential benefits have increased since 2000. First, fuel prices have increased substantially
placing a greater value on sharing cross country hydroelectric resources. Second, power grids
within countries are improving, ensuring that power transfers across national borders can be
widely distributed within other markets. The unrealized hydro potential in Bhutan (21,000MW),
Nepal (83,00MW), and Pakistan (36,00MW) is significant. Bangladesh has considerable gas
and coal reserves which it uses for power generation and could use more effectively if
complemented with hydro resources. The Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation
(CAREC) also has extensive surpluses of hydropower and gas which can be exported within
and outside of the CAREC region.

6
    In the Philippines, defaults by distribution cooperatives to National Power Corporation are commonplace and
    National Power Corporation itself is overdue on repaying many loans from central government. In Bangladesh,
    both Bangladesh Power Development Board and Dhaka Electricity Supply Authority have a long history of
    defaulting on government loans. Dhaka Electricity Supply Authority has also defaulted on payments to Bangladesh
    Power Development Board and more recently Power Grid Company of Bangladesh.
7
    These recommendations were implemented in a recently approved loan to Madhya Pradesh. March, 2007.
130        Appendix 14



      28.     ADB should focus on removing the roadblocks to increased co-operation and trade in
      the energy sector. Regulatory, currency and trading risks and political uncertainty must be
      addressed. Regional cooperation on power trading has so far achieved limited success outside
      of GMS although there are huge opportunities. Addressing divergent national concerns can be a
      considerable barrier to making progress in regional cooperation in the energy sector. ADB has
      the potential to be a source of finance and advice as well as being an honest broker between
      the various parties in the region

      29.     The commercial case for regional linkages is also compelling and ADB should aim to
      involve the private sector as well as public utilities. Some major companies such as National
      Thermal Power Corporation, Tata and Power Trading Corporation in India, have shown an
      interest in investing and operating regionally. Private sector involvement has the potential to
      make regional cooperation a reality. These companies will readily appreciate the opportunities
      for improving financial performance through regional cooperation and can be expected to
      promote regional initiatives with their governments if it is their commercial interest.

      D.       Catalyze Investment Resources

      30.     Many ADB clients in the energy sector require financing to support development of the
      power sector. The funding will need to be raised from multiple sources and ADB will only be
      providing a small percentage of the total. However, the commitment of resources from ADB may
      be helpful in encouraging other investors. For example, typical IPP investors believe that there
      is less risk if there is a long term ADB commitment in place to support development of the
      sector. Newer financial products at the local level may also be required to develop local markets
      and reduce foreign exchange risks.

      31.    ADB can achieve only limited results acting on its own. Effective development of power
      systems requires balanced investments in generation, transmission and distribution. Policy
      reforms can be achieved most effectively if development partners offer consistent advice and
      support and coordinate their support for the different parts of the power system. ADB has
      worked effectively with other development partners, and in particular with the World Bank, in
      several countries. In the future cooperation will need to deepen, and include private sector
      investors because the large investment needs can only be met by a coordinated response from
      a number of sources. Similarly, the TA needs of a power sector being restructured are
      considerable and are beyond ADB's funding capacity. Cooperation with development partners
      and the private investment community needs to be recognized formally as a part of ADB's
      energy strategy.

      E.      Become a More Client Focused Organization

      32.     Increased competition by multilaterals and commercial financiers to lend to energy
      projects will enable DMCs to "shop around" for better products. ADB will need to respond to this
      challenge and other client issues by adopting a more client oriented approach. This should
      include developing new lending products, a more tailored approach to covenants and
      safeguards, a long term approach to developing appropriate responses to client needs and
      assuring staffing skills are appropriate to meeting these needs. Restructuring power sectors
      requires many years of planning and capacity building. Significant, long term involvement of
      ADB in the context of Country Partnership Strategies also allows ADB to build its sector
      knowledge and develop into a trusted advisor for energy agencies. OED findings suggest that
                                                                                   Appendix 14   131

continuous ADB involvement in a sector increases the likelihood to the achievement of
development results.

33.      The study concluded that both the generation and transmission sectors, for instance in
India, are capable of undertaking non sovereign lending to support their expansion needs.
Furthermore there is significant potential for additional PPP projects in the region, such as the
ultra mega power projects in India and Viet Nam. It is appropriate that PSOD takes a larger role
to fund these sectors and to catalyze private sector funds, particularly into new area such as the
transmission sector where PPPs are viable. PSOD is uniquely situated to coordinate with ADB's
public sector operations, and has the expertise needed to develop the transition of the
generation and transmission sectors into private sector-like operations. Current PSOD
limitations on funding ceilings and staffing needs may be the primary inhibiting factors, and
should be addressed as a matter of urgency.

34.      This study, as well as the 2007 Report of the Eminent Persons Group to the President of
the ADB8 recognizes a need to review the locations of, the number and the skills mix of ADB's
energy sector to meet the changing sector demands. This will be required to meet changing
clients' needs and to meet the emphasis of the energy sector strategy.




8
    ADB. 2007. Towards A New Asian Development Bank In A New Asia. Manila.
      MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY ON
   ENERGY POLICY 2000 REVIEW: ENERGY EFFICIENCY FOR A BETTER FUTURE



        On 22 June 2007, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received the
following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.     General Comments

       1.     We welcome OED's Special Evaluation Study (SES) of ADB's 1995
       Energy Policy and 2000 Review. The SES is timely and will provide an important
       input into the development of our new Energy Strategy currently under
       preparation. We note that through frequent interaction with OED, the draft
       Energy Strategy has now been circulated for consultation with external
       stakeholders.

       2.      We are encouraged to note the SES finding that ADB's operations in the
       energy sector were successful and ADB's assistance in the sector has achieved
       positive development impact. We note the SES findings that the ADB's energy
       operations should continue to focus on sector reform and that there is a need to
       enhance our efforts to promote energy efficiency, renewable energy, and clean
       energy programs. These findings are effectively aligned with the main thrusts of
       the proposed draft Energy Strategy and validate the importance of on-going
       ADB's work on Clean Energy and Environment Program (CEEP).

       II.    Comments on Recommendations

       3.       Stronger Focus on Private Sector Participation, Mitigation of
       Environmental Impacts and Regional Cooperation. We agree with the
       suggestion that we need stronger client focus on private sector participation,
       mitigation of environmental impacts, and regional cooperation in energy sector.
       We note that the proposed new Energy Strategy will emphasize the importance
       of private sector participation, effective environment management, and regional
       cooperation.

       4.      Energy Efficiency. We agree with the importance of pursuing energy
       efficiency as the first priority. However, we note that it may be counterproductive
       to hold back investment in new energy supply projects until all efficiency
       improvements are realized in both energy supply and demand. We believe that
       the need for new investments to maintain the reliability of energy supply is
       extremely important in many DMCs. As recognized in the SES, it will take time to
       increase investments in energy efficiency. In the meantime, if we do not support
       DMCs in building new cleaner energy generation capacity, they may resort to
       less efficient and more polluting energy sources as DMCs strive to ensure energy
       security. Further, investing in new and efficient generation capacity (including
       advanced technologies and renewable energy) is vital to maintain and improve
       the level of energy efficiency in existing energy supply systems.

       5.     Center for Excellence. We agree with the suggestion that ADB should
       become known as a center for excellence to improve policy, legal, and regulatory
       framework and to encourage the use of market based incentives to improve the
       enabling framework for energy efficiency, renewable energy, and ways to
       address environmental concerns in the energy sector. We note that to achieve
this, ADB needs to build a stronger knowledge base by recruiting highly skilled
technical staff in a timely manner. The Clean Energy Financing Partnership
Facility (CEFPF)1 will also be useful in implementing new and innovative
approaches to deploy new cleaner technology and to provide capacity building
assistance to DMCs. ADB has also established regional knowledge hubs2 to act
as the think tanks for ADB and the DMCs on clean energy. The knowledge hubs
will support and strengthen the region's capacity to generate innovative
concepts, science, technology, and management of clean energy.

6.       Environmental Costs and Benefits Analysis. We agree with the
suggestion that, in principle, we should make our best efforts to estimate the
environmental costs and benefits and incorporate them in the economic analysis.
We note that some of the environmentally sensitive projects supported by ADB,
e.g., Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project, have indeed done so. However, we
also note that there is no universally agreed methodology in quantifying the
environmental costs and benefits for different modes of power generation
facilities because the environmental consequences vary significantly from one
project to another. Therefore, it would be difficult to ensure consistency in
assessing such costs and benefits across different energy sector projects.

7.      Strategic Environment Assessment. We agree with the importance of
country-level strategic environmental assessments. However, we disagree with
the suggestion to undertake separate strategic environmental assessments for
the energy sector. Country environmental assessments are now an integral part
of the preparation of all country partnership strategies (Operations Manual,
Section A2/OP), and it should discuss the environmental impacts of energy
production and use, along with other development activities in the country
including other infrastructure sectors. To mandate a separate strategic
environmental assessment for the energy sector, as it is suggested in the SES,
will be impractical since other infrastructure sectors may also have equally
significant environmental impacts in a country. Our view, therefore, is that
environmental assessment of the energy sector should continue to form part of
the country environmental assessment, and the depth of the analysis may be
varied with the impact that ADB's lending assistance is likely to have on the
energy-environment nexus.

8.      Improved Sector Governance. We agree with the importance of
promoting good governance in the energy sector. We note that in this
connection, ADB will continue to assist DMCs in the restructuring and reform of
the energy sector through technical assistance and project support. In terms of
strengthening staff capacity, ADB launched its Governance and Anticorruption
Action Plan II in 2006, which provides training program to ADB staff on how to
better handle corruption and governance issues.

9.     Implementation Plan for the New Energy Strategy. We agree with the
importance of assessing resource implications of any ADB activities and with the
usefulness of results framework effective monitoring of the sector performance.
We note that a results framework which will be included as part of the new
Energy Strategy is being developed.


1
    Two donor countries have expressed interest in providing funding to support the CEFPF.
2
    Currently, there are three knowledge hubs: (i) The Energy Research Institute in New Delhi, India
    for Clean Energy; (ii) Tsinghua University in Beijing, People's Republic of China for Climate
    Change; and (iii) Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok, Thailand for 3R (reduce, reuse, and
    recycle).
                             DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE

                 Chair's Summary of the Committee's Discussion on 27 June 2007


Special Evaluation Study (SES) on Energy Policy 2000 Review: Energy Efficiency for a
Better Future

1.     The SES was designed to feed into the ongoing review of the Energy Policy and strategy
update. Its preliminary findings were presented at one of the NGO seminars in ADB's Annual
Meeting in Kyoto.

2.      The energy sector is one of ADB's most successful sectors. Over 80% of the projects
have been rated as successful, surpassing ADB's benchmark for successful outcomes at the
project level. The evaluation also rated the Energy Policy as successful; its relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability were all rated as satisfactory or better.

3.      ADB has successfully promoted sector restructuring, although this has typically been
more difficult and taken longer than expected. This has opened up opportunities for private
sector investment. Much of the new capacity that ADB has financed since 2000 was through
PSOD.

4.      Improving energy efficiency should be the highest priority in the ADB's new energy
strategy. All feasible efforts should be made to decrease demand through viable energy
efficiency initiatives and increases in system efficiencies before investing in new capacity.
However, the increasing demand for power in the Asia Pacific region will require significant
investment in new generation capacity. Thus, pursuing energy efficiency initiatives should not
be at the expense of "turning off the lights".

5.     Energy efficiency programs, the development of renewable energy, and the adoption of
clean energy technologies are all in their infancy in the Asia Pacific region. They have
substantial need and potential to grow. The higher oil prices that prevailed for most of the
evaluation period and the new Clean Energy and Environment Initiative have placed ADB in a
competitive position to do more in this area.

6.     There is no universally accepted methodology for quantifying the environmental costs
and benefits of energy projects. However, progress is being made (e. g., Stern Review) and
ADB has made past attempts to undertake analysis of projects (in PRC), taking into
consideration positive environmental externalities in the sensitivity analysis.

7.      In its response, Management disagreed with the idea of undertaking strategic
environmental analysis at the sector level. OED explained that this suggestion was made
because of the strong interest in the energy/environment issue, but that this should be limited
only to those countries in which the CSP envisions a major ADB involvement in the energy
sector.

8.     Since 2003, when Country Environmental Assessments became mandatory, ten CEAs
have been prepared1. None have been completed since the end of 2005 (although one is under
preparation in the PRC).


1
    For Azerbaijan, Cambodia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and
     Viet Nam.
9.      OED examined the CEAs to determine the context in which the energy sector was
assessed. In general, CEAs do not provide any strategic environmental assessment for the
different sectors. Energy projects (loans/TAs) are sometimes presented but environmental
concerns arising from these projects are not examined in detail nor are the broader level
environmental impacts of the energy sector. OED is skeptical that these CEAs seriously
influence the design of ADB's energy program in CPSs.

10.    Acting DG, RSDD indicated that the positive message of the report showed that the draft
energy strategy is well aligned to ADB's work in this area. He emphasized the need for ADB to
continue to be involved in investments while at the same time pursuing an energy efficiency
agenda.

11.    DEC appreciated Management's Response, which generally agreed with the
conclusions and recommendations of the SES. DEC also noted the clarifications made by
Management on some areas that it disagrees with.

12.      DEC agreed that energy was one of the key areas of strength of ADB which ADB must
exploit. Energy supply should be given also due importance in the future while energy efficiency
is being emphasized. Some DEC members supported the idea of ADB becoming a centre of
excellence but questioned whether this was a realistic vision given the current resource
limitations.

13.     A DEC member noted that the performance of ADB in energy projects was good (80%),
but that the rating for sector reform was lower (70%). He noted that PPP has worked well in this
sector, but was interested in knowing what could be done better beyond the project level, for
instance in terms of reforms or investments. Another DEC member noted that the report does
not address capacity building and the institutional and technical level.

14.     Emphasis was given on the usefulness of strategic environmental assessments as a
tool, but noted the need to avoid them when their value added was not justified.

15.    A DEC member noted that the report reflects the fact that there is not a single blue print
for energy efficiency. He indicated that ADB must continue its policy dialogue work and
assistance with sector governance, but that the necessary skills for the sector would continue to
be required.




                                                                                               2
