ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                       SST: REG 99002




             SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY


                      OF THE


         ENVIRONMENTAL MITIGATION MEASURES


                        IN


          SELECTED BANK-FINANCED PROJECTS




                   December 1998
                   ABBREVIATIONS


BAPEDAL   ?      Badan Pengendalian Dampak Lingkungan
                 (Environmental Impact Management Agency)
BME       ?      Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation
DENR      ?      Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DMC       ?      Developing Member Country
DPW       ?      Department of Public Works
ECC       ?      Environmental Compliance Certificate
EGF       ?      Environmental Guarantee Fund
EIA       ?      Environmental Impact Assessment
EMA       ?      Environmental Management Agency
EMAP      ?      Environmental Management Plan
EMM       ?      Environmental Mitigation Measures
EMOP      ?      Environmental Monitoring Program
EPB       ?      Environment Protection Bureau
ESP       ?      Electrostatic Precipitator
FGD       ?      Flue Gas Desulfurization
MME       ?      Ministry of Mines and Energy
NGO       ?      Nongovernment Organization
NPC       ?      National Power Corporation
O&M       ?      Operation and Maintenance
OFA       ?      Overfire Air
PCB       ?      Pollution Control Board
PDP       ?      Power Development Program
PLN       ?      Perusahaan Umuum Listrik Negara
                 (National Electric Company)
PRC       ?      People's Republic of China
UDP       ?      Urban Development Project




                          NOTE

          In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


              Postevaluation Office, SS-34
                                               2


                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


               Environmental mitigation measures (EMM) have been included on a selective
basis in Bank-financed projects since the early 1980s, and guidelines are included in the
Operations Manual and other Bank documents. The Bank has made good progress in
integrating environmental considerations in improving the project design. However, the
effectiveness and implementation of EMM have not been evaluated. The objective of this study
is to assess the effectiveness of measures included in selected Bank-financed projects to
mitigate adverse environmental impacts. The study examines whether the measures produced
the anticipated benefits, and if not, what factors contributed to the failure. The purpose is to
examine whether the Bank is emphasizing the correct expenditure and mitigation measures
and what could be done to implement them more effectively. The study pays particular attention
to internal or controllable factors, particularly those relating to the Bank's internal business
processes, and provides some recommendations for operational improvement.

               The study focuses on thermal energy generation projects (plus two urban
development projects) selected from projects in People's Republic of China, India, Indonesia, and
Philippines. These four countries account for about half of all Bank lending in the power sector.

               The environmental impact assessment (EIA) process required and supported by
the Bank has often resulted in successful identification and mitigation of major environmental
impacts. The study projects are generally in compliance with environmental protection
regulations and guidelines of the respective developing member country, even though the
mandate and capacity of its environmental management agency (EMA) to regulate and monitor
EMM may be low. Mitigation measures requiring foreign exchange are usually undertaken
because the Bank provides funds for this purpose, but related local expenditure for maintaining
and monitoring EMM are often delayed until the plant is well into the operational phase. Thus,
the Bank should more frequently provide for detailed itemizing and earmarking portions of a
loan to encourage greater application of prescribed measures. The possibility of doing this in
foreign currency and/or establishing a local currency escrow fund needs to be explored.

              The Bank should be able to routinely assess throughout the project cycle
whether or not a project is in compliance with host country environmental protection legislation.
The study recommends that the Bank develop and implement an EMM evaluation and reporting
system to establish a transparent environmental audit trail. Environmental performance
measurement criteria would be agreed upon on a country, sector, or project basis, in line with
the EMA standards and procedures of the developing member country.

                Environmental personnel, management plans, and monitoring programs have
had variable success in achieving EMM during the operations phase in the study projects. In the
study countries, the provincial EMAs do not have adequate capacity, training, means, or the
incentive to ensure compliance with regulations. The Bank should promote regular external
audits of the large power plants to ensure compliance with regulations, and continue to develop
the institutional capacity, as well as the enforcement, compliance, and monitoring capability of
the EMAs, depending on each country's needs. Decentralization of enforcement responsibilities
to provinces needs to be encouraged and accompanied by capacity building of the provincial
EMA.

              Environmental protection needs greater attention in the planning and feasibility
study stage. The scope and timing of the EIA of the study projects indicate that EMM were often
                                                3


designed after the site and technologies for the plant had been selected. The EIA should be
done during feasibility assessments prior to finalizing the site and type of technology. It should
also include strategic and cumulative studies, and risk assessment and emergency response
planning for some projects. For Category A projects such as large thermal power plants, in
addition to addressing the impacts of specific projects in the planning stage, cost-effectiveness
of using a cluster development approach to EMM should be explored where possible.

               Several of the study plants experienced problems due to improper planning.
These included waste (ash) disposal problems due to reduced demand, overestimation of
demand for environmental improvements generated by the plant (i.e., district heating,
wastewater, or sewage treatment); and inadequate space to install equipment required by new
regulations (e.g., flue gas desulfurization). Adequate attention needs to be given to these
considerations by providing contingency plans and allocating space requirements at the
planning stage. A public promotion campaign to increase the demand for environmental
improvements and a willingness-to-pay survey to assess the extent of demand would have
enabled this type of project to be more cost-effective.

              Implementation of EMM during the construction phase appears to be weak,
especially where the plant operator or the EMA applied little pressure on the contractor to
undertake them. Plant operators need to carefully itemize the budget for EMM, build in penalty
schemes for violation of EMM by contractors, and should designate a trained environmental
inspector, with the responsibility of enforcing the EMM set out in the environmental
management plan. In addition, ensuring that procurement documents adequately reflect
environment loan covenants and prequalifying contractors who have demonstrated ability to
comply with these covenants, as well as engaging external parties to supervise the
implementation of the stipulated EMMs would enhance their compliance.

                From the plant's perspective, most case study plants (except those in India) used
cost-effective technology to reduce the major adverse impacts of power generation. From the
broad perspective of the cluster of industrial plants operating in a watershed or an airshed, the
power plants may be able to provide their excess capacity on a fee-for-service basis to other
users, and this approach should be examined at the planning stage on a case-by-case basis.
The wastewater treatment, waste heat utilization, and solid waste management systems for
large power plants could be expanded to serve nearby residential areas or industrial estates at
lower cost than for separate facilities, and could provide additional cash flow to the thermal
power plant. To successfully implement such arrangements, there has to be good coordination
and trust between the parties sharing the same facilities. The cluster approach can also be
used to address environmental compliance status of projects related to a Bank-financed project
such as a previous phase of a thermal power plant or an associated transmission system not
financed by the Bank. The Bank may consider providing additional funding solely for
implementation of EMM in a related project on a case-by-case basis, thus avoiding the
reputational risks associated with such operations.

                The role of public awareness and public participation in affecting EMM differs in
developing member countries, sectors, and projects. Generally, greater public participation has
improved the design, operations, and monitoring of EMM. Increased transparency has led to
greater flexibility in adjusting the EMM to suit changing circumstances. This participatory
approach can be facilitated by local nongovernment organizations and other representatives
who should be involved in the early stages of developing terms of reference for EIA, as well as
during the design and implementation phases. Establishing a multipartite monitoring group (as
in the Philippines) helps to keep the momentum for mitigation measures and often provides on-
                                             4


the-job capacity building for representatives of the EMA. However, mechanisms to provide
funding for these environmental groups to work, travel, and participate have to be determined
clearly.
                                         I.       INTRODUCTION



A.     Background


1.             The Bank introduced environmental mitigation measures (EMM) in projects on a
selective basis since the early 1980s, and has made good progress over the years integrating
environmental considerations in improving the project design. The steps the Bank has taken are
well documented.1 However, the effectiveness and implementation of EMM have not been
evaluated. This study was initiated at the suggestion of the Bank's Environment Division.
Recent project completion reports and project performance audit reports have generally
included a brief assessment of the environmental impact of projects, but have not focused on
whether (i) EMM were being appropriately designed and implemented as designed; (ii) sufficient
attention was being given to operational aspects, particularly maintenance; and (iii) policy
issues and institutional aspects were being adequately considered during project design, or
being implemented as agreed.


B.     Study Objectives, Scope, and Methodology


2.             The overall objective of this study is to assess the effectiveness of measures
included in selected Bank-financed projects to mitigate adverse environmental impacts.2 The
study examines whether the EMM were identified correctly and appropriately designed, whether
they produced the anticipated benefits, and if not, what factors contributed to the failure. The
purpose is to determine whether the Bank is emphasizing the correct expenditure and mitigation
measures and what could be done to implement them more effectively. The scope of the study
does not include economic or financial evaluation of projects. The study pays particular
attention to internal or controllable factors, particularly those relating to the Bank's internal
business processes, and recommends operational improvements where possible.3




1      These include ADB Environment Paper No. 1:Environmental Planning and Management and the Project
       Cycle (May 1988); ADB Environment Paper No. 5:Integration of Environmental Considerations into the
       Project Cycle (September 1990); Guidelines for Preparation of Project Performance Audit Reports (August
       1992) Postevaluation Office; Economic Evaluation of Environmental Impacts: A Workbook (March 1993);
       Environmental Guidelines for Selected Industrial and Power Development Projects, Office of the
       Environment (1993); The Environment Program of the Asian Development Bank: Past, Present, and Future
       (April 1994); Operations Manual Section 20-97; and GP:20-97:Environmental Considerations in Bank
       Operations, (January 1997); and ADB Environment Paper No. 13:Measuring Environmental Performance in
       Asia (April 1997).
2      The study was financed ($150,000) under RETA 5762 approved in 16 December 1997, and the field work
       was carried out between April-June 1998.
3      While the study acknowledges the improvements made in the past decade in integrating environmental
       concerns in Bank projects and the contributions made as a result of environment specialist participating in
       design, implementation, and postevaluation of selected projects, it looks beyond this to identify further
       improvements that can be made.
                                                            2


     3.             The portfolio of projects with EMM mostly covers energy, urban infrastructure,
     and natural resources development. EMM in the thermal power and urban infrastructure
     projects concentrate on pollution abatement (brown) issues and related policy and institutional
     aspects. Projects in hydropower and natural resource development deal with quite different
     EMM, focusing on biodiversity (green), fisheries issues, and associated social concerns. To
     keep the study scope manageable and to be able to draw lessons from cross-country
     comparison of similar projects, this study focuses on the thermal energy generation projects.1
     Therefore, the findings of the study generally stem from the thermal power projects. The study
     included two urban development projects (in Indonesia) on a pilot basis to ascertain whether the
     issues raised during the study differ significantly by sector and to determine the need and scope
     of future work in this area. Although these may have some relevance in terms of EMM, they
     may not be fully applicable for urban sector operations.

     4.             Most of the early Bank projects (approved prior to 1992) did not focus on
     integrating environmental concerns in project design and thus did not include substantial
     measures to address adverse environmental impacts. Since 1992, the Bank has sharpened its
     focus on promoting environmental performance of its projects, and requires EMM often in the
     loan covenants based on the project environmental impact assessments (EIAs) carried out
     during feasibility and design stages. To ensure that the special study will provide useful
     information in the present context, it includes both closed projects approved prior to 1992, as
     well as those approved since 1992. Although projects approved after 1992 were not all closed
     at the time of the Mission, some observations could be made concerning EMM already
     undertaken.2

     5.              The case studies on thermal generation projects are selected from People's
     Republic of China (PRC), India, Indonesia, and Philippines (Table 1). These four countries
     account for about half of all Bank lending in the power sector. During the ten years from 1985 to
     1994,3 the Bank financed 16 power projects with substantially completed thermal generation
     components in these countries. Two power projects from each country were selected by
     stratified random sampling to enable the study to capture differences in policy and institutional
     aspects. Details of the stratification, selection criteria, and summary information on the projects
     are in Appendix 1. Some of these projects include several power-related components, some of
     which are design components for follow-up projects or maintenance and transmission
     components of previously financed projects. Only those components relating to the design,
     physical construction, policy, and institutional aspects of thermal power generation were
     evaluated in the study. However, the effectiveness of EMM of a substitutive (closure of highly
     polluting power plants with the introduction of cleaner plant built under the project) or
     complementary (afforestation in addition to installation of air pollution control equipment) nature
     was also evaluated.

                                Table 1: Loan Information on Study Projects

Country      Project Area      Loan                          Title                       Amount          Date         Status
                                No.                                                      ($'000)       Approved

     1      A special evaluation study of the environmental and social impact of hydropower projects currently underway
            in the Postevaluation Office concentrates on the more "green" type of project.
     2      In fact, there is some advantage in evaluating ongoing projects, because in projects that are closed, it is
            difficult to evaluate the EMM carried out during the construction stage.
     3      Projects approved since 1995 were not sufficiently completed at the time of the Mission to warrant inclusion
            as case studies.
                                                                  3


   PRC             Liulin             1091             Shanxi-Liulin Thermal Power            65,000     25 Jul 1991   closed
                 Qingdao              1205         Qingdao Environmental Improvement         103,000   10 Dec 1992     active
   India         Unchahar              907          Unchahar Thermal Power Extension         160,000   29 Sep 1988     active
               Rayalaseema             988             Rayalaseema Thermal Power             230,000   21 Nov 1989     closed
Indonesia        Suralaya             1172                       Power 22                    350,000     4 Aug 1992    active
                  Darajat             1092                       Power 21                    300,000     25 Jul 1991   active
                 Mataram              1292      Eastern Islands Urban Development (Sector)    85,000   21 Dec 1993     active
              Bandar Lampung          1078         Bandar Lampung Urban Development           33,000    31 Jan 1991    closed
Philippines      Masinloc             1042                Masinloc Thermal Power             200,000    30 Oct 1990    active
                 Pagbilao             7089       Hopewell Power (Philippines) Corporation     50,000   18 May 1993       na
      na = not available, PRC = People's Republic of China.
                                                        4



6.               The study used a common methodology to evaluate the success of EMM in each
study project. A questionnaire was prepared for each project prior to fieldwork with questions
covering environmental issues related to air, water, and land quality; waste management; and
land use, conservation during planning, design, construction, and operations phases.1 During
the field visits, the Mission interviewed plant management and environmental staff, physically
inspected pollution prevention and control operations and equipment, and requested and
reviewed (where available) environmental management plans (EMAPs), environmental
monitoring programs (EMOPs), as well as permits and licenses. Implementation of EMM was
discussed with the local governments, nongovernment parties, national and provincial
environment management agencies (EMAs),2 and the concerned central Government
authorities. The rest of this report presents the main findings, major issues arising from them,
draws lessons learned, and makes recommendations. Appendix 2 gives the Mission's
observations on the implementation of the EMM designed for each project, and Appendix 3
presents the cost-effectiveness of selected EMM and alternative technology options. A
recommended checklist of actions to be taken by a mission leader to ensure that proper EMM
have been built into a thermal power project are presented in Appendix 4.3 Finally, Appendix 5
provides selected photographs of EMM and monitoring equipment.



                    II.      MAIN FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDY PROJECTS



A.     Planning and Design Stage


7.             The selection of sites for the power plants was based on optimizing the
economics of power supply and demand. Except for the Pagbilao plant that is privately owned,
all other proponents were central or provincial government corporations. Selected factors4
relevant to the choice of location, plant size, and technology, and other design issues which
warrant further discussion are presented in Table 2. For example, the status of air and water
pollution control are not presented in Table 2 but are given in detail with other EMM in Appendix
2. In study power plants, generally capital intensive (foreign exchange) technology choices were
made during the planning stage to meet the existing environmental regulations. Therefore, high
efficiency electrostatic precipitators (ESPs), low nitrogen oxides burners, central effluent
treatment facilities, dust suppression systems, and high stacks were generally standard
equipment in the study thermal power plants. Ash disposal methods varied among plants (Table
2) and many (except Unchahar and Masinloc) did not have contingency plans to change from
one disposal method to another. Water usage and ash handling were changed in some plants

1      Social issues not directly connected with plant operations were outside the scope of the study.
2      The national EMAs in the study countries are Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MOEF) in India;
       Environmental Impact Management Agency (BAPEDAL) in Indonesia; Department of Environment and
       Natural Resources (DENR) in the Philippines; and State Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) in the
       PRC.
3      With some modification, the checklist can be adapted for other projects needing EMM.
4      The factors presented in the table are selected because of their variation across projects or their importance
       to major issues discussed in Section III. The factors left out are either not relevant or adequately addressed
       by the plant.
                                                              5


(Unchahar and Pagbilao) subsequent to the planning stage because of implementation
difficulties. None of the plants had plans for EMM related to decommissioning.


      Table 2: Selected Factors Affecting Thermal Power Plant Planning and Design

    Plant              Location                  Size and                   Ash Handling and                   Water Usage and
  (Country)                                     Technology                    Solid Waste                        Treatment
                                                                              Management
    Liulin          Area around plant      Local, high quality coal       No ash utilization planned.        Use deepwell water from
    (PRC)          zoned for industrial      supplied from nearby       Uses hydraulic ash handling            Liulin spring. Water
                      use. No major        mines and delivered by        system capable of recycling            conservation and
                   polluters existed at    truck. Storage exceeds       water used to transport ash to        reclamation intended.
                   the planning stage.        planned quantities.                ash pond.                   Cooling tower installed.
                  Space available for
                          flue gas
                 desulfurization (FGD).
   Qingdao          Expansion project       Size based on demand        Ash transported to distant ash       Uses treated water to
    (PRC)          with district heating   forecast for heat. Actual     pond. Adequate ash disposal         reduce total wastewater
                  and coal gasification    demand is less than the      site available for existing plant.   discharge.
                    plants for Qingdao     projected. Residue from
                      City. Intends to       desulfurization plant
                 replace 1 million tons      used in sulfuric acid
                     of domestic coal                plant.
                          burning.
  Unchahar        Stage II extension in    840 megawatts (MW),           Improvements made for ash              Sufficient water for
   (India)           green field site.a       conventional coal            pond. Separated lagoon               Stages I and II. Uses
                  Space available for        burning technology.          system. Vegetation for dust          once through cooling
                 ash disposal and FGD      Local high ash content,         suppression. Dry fly ash            water system, closed
                        equipment.             unwashed coal                collecting system under             cycle system under
                                           transported by railway.              implementation.                   implementation.
                                                                                                               Domestic wastewater
                                                                                                                treatment to start in
                                                                                                                        1999.
 Rayalaseema        Located in future           220 MW, Stage I         Dry fly ash collection system in       Reservoir water used,
    (India)      industrial zone, large-       conventional design        place but inoperable due to         and cooling water may
                 sized green field site.    plant with total intended      inappropriate design. Ash         be a limiting factor when
                  Adequate space for          capacity of 840 MW.            pond designed to meet            industrial zone is built.
                   ash pond and FGD           Unwashed local coal             standards. Ash water             Dry fly ash collecting
                      equipment.              with high ash content     treatment not planned but later           system in place.
                                             transported by railway                introduced.
                                               over long distances.
    Suralaya      Located in industrial       Extension of existing     On-site cement plant receives        Process water supplied
  (Indonesia)     zone, near the sea.          plant by 400 MW to          fly ash, but difficulty of full         by pipe from
                  No additional space       reach maximum size of         utilization due to economic            desalination unit.
                   available for FGD         3,400 MW. Low sulfur,           crisis. No groundwater           Cooling water drawn
                      equipment.              low ash content local     protection for ash disposal and          from the sea, no
                                                    coal used.                  insufficient space.          groundwater utilization.
     Darajat        Surrounded by            Geothermal plant has                 Not applicable.                Plant uses water,
  (Indonesia)    protected forests and     installed half (55 MW) of                                         groundwater, and water
                   agriculture zones.       total designed capacity.                                           from a water supply
                                                                                                                    company.
   Masinloc      Green field site by the   Size (600 MW) of plant         Dry ash disposal system            Water obtained from the
 (Philippines)    sea, near the (Oyon)      based on demand for          wetted before transportation.           Masinloc River is
                 bay, later defined as a   power. High quality coal        Fly ash utilization study         processed. For cooling
                  protected area. Land       imported. Two-stage                  underway.                  water needs uses open
                 re-zoning being done.      combustion method to                                                  canal method.
                   Space available for        reduce pollutants.
                    FGD equipment.
   Pagbilao          Green field site       700 MW plant, using           Special lining used for ash           Process water and
 (Philippines)      selection partially     imported high quality           pond. Appears to have             groundwater utilization
                    influenced by the              coal.                   insufficient space for ash           planned, but water
                   cooperation of the                                     disposal. Fly ash utilization         desalination plant
                   local government.                                         under consideration.                 installed to use
                                                              6


      Plant             Location                 Size and                  Ash Handling and                Water Usage and
    (Country)                                   Technology                   Solid Waste                     Treatment
                                                                             Management
                                                                                                                seawater.
a
        A green field site is a site located outside industrial areas and away from densely populated areas. Often, it is a site
        without existing infrastructure (roads, railways, harbor, water supply, etc.) suitable for the projects. Environmental
        regulations may vary according to the country and state.
                                               7




8.             The integrated urban infrastructure development program guides the planning,
design, and implementation of urban development projects in Indonesia through a combined
"top down-bottom up" approach. It encompasses urban planning at the national level in
combination with urban development needs identified by local government and inputs from the
public. Although the projects involve provision of infrastructure, improvement of the urban
environment is an objective of each of these projects. The mitigation of environmental impacts
is considered by the National Development Planning Agency at the earliest stages of planning
in these projects.


B.     Construction and Operation Stage


9.              To the extent the Mission could verify them subsequent to the construction stage,
most plants appeared to have carried out major EMM for prevention of erosion and
sedimentation, and for minimization of dust or noise pollution. However, routine supervision and
handling of oil spills, safe disposal of hazardous waste and toxic material, general
housekeeping, proper disposal of aggregate and construction material, and revegetation of
disturbed areas did not appear to be implemented as planned in the plants that were recently
constructed or under construction. The plant operators used routine meetings to remind main
contractors of these requirements but often did not adequately supervise or enforce them. EMM
that need improvement are presented in Table 3 and discussed further in Section III. The other
EMM relating to construction and operation stages are presented in detail in Appendix 2.

10.             During plant operation, implementation of mitigation measures related to core
plant activities were in place in almost all plants visited. For example, the boilers for the
Masinloc, Pagbilao, and the extension at Suralaya are designed to burn only low sulfur coal,
therefore, sulfur oxides emissions are being reduced. Operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
low nitrogen oxides burners, ESPs, coal dust, and coal fire suppression, and water supply and
wastewater treatment equipment were mostly internalized and routinely undertaken. There were
trained personnel, standard operating procedures, and equipment in place to implement the
EMM associated with these routine plant processes. However, mitigation measures relating to
peripheral activities were weak. Generally, housekeeping facilities were weak in all plants
(except in Darajat), and solid waste disposal also needed improvement.
                                                                      8



                Table 3: Environmental Mitigation Measures and Monitoring Programs
                                  Generally Needing Improvement

   Plant         During Construction               Prior to Testing                   Housekeeping                   In-plant Monitoring
 (Country)                                         and Operation
   Liulin       Not possible to evaluate           All environmental             Active housekeeping and               Some sophisticated
   (PRC)           as construction is             mitigation measures             clean-up. Tree planting         monitoring equipment is not
                   complete and no            (EMM) were reported to be                  ongoing.                utilized due to lack of training
                   documentation is             installed except for the                                          and spare parts. Feedback
                       available.              monitoring station for air                                              loop not strong from
                                                         quality.                                                     monitoring to decision
                                                                                                                             making.
  Qingdao         District heating plant      Not applicable, plant under         Housekeeping methods            Existing units have air and
   (PRC)        under construction. Coal            construction.                   could be improved.            water pollution monitoring.
                   gasification plant                                                                             Noncompliance feedback
                operating. Impact is not                                                                            loop not strong. New
                 felt much outside the                                                                            monitoring program not yet
                  existing plant sites.                                                                                     started.
 Unchahar        Dust suppression by          Stage II not in operation at        Inadequate construction        Stage I monitoring carried out
  (India)       sprinkling water partially     the time of the Mission.         waste not properly disposed.          regularly, but further
                    done. No proper           Domestic water treatment                                              evaluation of results not
                precautions for spillage        plant may be delayed.                                                     undertaken.
                  of oil or hazardous
                         material.
Rayalaseema        Construction stage             Several mitigation            Treatment of domestic water       Ash content of coal exceed
   (India)       completed, not possible      measures not ready prior           in township. Plant drainage     design limit, no feedback loop
                      to evaluate.                to operation. Dust              effluent not treated. Total      to comply with emission
                                              suppression system partly          suspended solids standard                 standards.
                                              installed three years after                 exceeded.
                                               operation. Vegetation of
                                                 ash pond not done.
  Suralaya         Construction stage          Not possible to evaluate.         On-site landfill adjacent to        Particulate emissions of
(Indonesia)      completed, not possible         Ash handling does not            the sea not covered or               Stack No. 1 exceed
                      to evaluate.              comply with hazardous               fenced and is being          regulations, but no immediate
                                              waste regulations. (Fly ash               scavenged.                 feedback loop to repair the
                                              is considered a hazardous                                              electrostatic precipitator.
                                                  waste in Indonesia.)
   Darajat      Reclamation of plant site     Designed EMM carried out.          Handling and storage of          Routine monitoring carried
(Indonesia)           complete.                Mitigation measures for          chemicals, oils, paints, etc.,       out as stipulated and
                                                   erosion control,                  well managed.                submitted to environmental
                                                 reforestation can be                                                 monitoring agency.
                                                   improved in the
                                                  surrounding area.
  Masinloc          Erosion control             EMM are updated after           Cleaning up of construction         Monitoring equipment is
(Philippines)   measures, revegetation        interaction with multipartite        material and general             being calibrated. On-line
                  of disturbed areas           team. Plant testing being           housekeeping can be             monitoring of air pollutants
                 carried out. Seagrass              undertaken, dust                    improved.                     possible. Air quality
                  transplantation not             suppression system                                              monitoring equipment do not
                successful, artificial reef   sprinklers not fully installed,                                    have air loggers. Environment
                        planned.                   and temperature                                                    monitoring group for
                                                monitoring systems are                                                operations stage not
                                                      being tested.                                              identified at the testing stage.
  Pagbilao       Construction complete,        Not possible to evaluate         Domestic waste disposed of        On-line monitoring of air
(Philippines)   not possible to evaluate.     whether most EMM were in            in Pagbilao solid waste          pollutants. Submits all
                    No sedimentation            place. EMM not in place                disposal site.            monitoring data according to
                  visible. Tree planting      are temperature monitoring                                          environmental compliance
                 ongoing near the plant         of coal stockpiles, wind                                           certificate. Environmental
                        perimeter.             breakers near coal yard.                                           Management Unit has
                                              Other EMM appear to be in                                             direct access to plant
                                                         place.                                                  manager and feedback loop
                                                                                                                            is strong.
                                                     9



11.             All study plants routinely tested coal content as required in the monitoring
programs. However, implementation of other requirements of EMOPs varied across plants. On-
line monitoring of air pollutants was available in newly completed plants (Masinloc and
Pagbilao). However, monitoring instruments used in laboratories for in-plant monitoring were
not being used in some plants due to incomplete installation, lack of training, or incomplete
assignment of responsibilities. According to the agreement reached with the Bank, the Liulin
plant in the PRC should have established stations to monitor both water quality and air quality.
However, at the time of the Mission's visit (more than a year after operation), only the
monitoring station for wastewater was in operation, whereas the construction of the monitoring
station for air quality was not yet completed. In the Philippines, most of the Masinloc plant
monitoring equipment for the laboratory was in their original packaging although the plant was
in the testing and operation stage. In the Pagbilao plant in the Philippines, environmental
management and monitoring programs provided point-by-point evidence of compliance with the
conditions of the plant's Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC). It engaged an
independent consultant to conduct annual environmental audits at the plant and to recommend
improvements to plant management. Environmental monitoring reports of the Suralaya and
Darajat plants in Indonesia were prepared by consultants who conduct limited sampling and
analyses and consolidate internal plant reports. In India (Unchahar and Rayalaseema), regular
monitoring and sampling is carried out by the plant environmental staff, and also by a privately
approved laboratory and by the regional pollution control board offices. The instrumentation was
not always up-to-date, but improvements and additional training of staff are envisaged in the
future. Similar problems with EMM and monitoring plans were evident in the selected urban
development projects. The Mataram project does not carry out groundwater monitoring or have
a watershed management program to protect the quality of groundwater. Enforcement of water
pollution control regulations is not carried out in Bandar Lampung to reduce domestic and
industrial pollution of the Kuripan river, which is used for the town water supply.



            III.    ENVIRONMENTAL MITIGATION MEASURES: MAJOR ISSUES



A.     Role in the Planning Stage


12.            EIAs prepared for the study plants were design rather than planning endeavors,
and were often done after a green field site had been identified and power generation
technology choices were decided. They did not provide evidence of the selected EMM solution
being the optimal one, taking into account the environmental conditions in the air or watershed
in which the plants operate. Rather, they simply indicated what had to be done, to ensure that
the particular project in a preselected site, would be in accordance with the environmental
standards and guidelines.1 Had the projects in the case studies followed a more regional
planning approach giving environmental issues due consideration, the sites used for the study
plants may have proved not to be the optimum. In the Philippines, both case studies in Masinloc
and Pagbilao are on green field sites with little or no polluters or suitable infrastructure already
existing in the area. This generally enables such plants to comply with the ambient standard

1      Comprehensive documents were not available on the analysis of alternative EMM (sites, coal handling and
       burning technologies, etc.).
                                                    10


quite easily,1 as well as gain acceptance from local communities due to employment generation
and developmental possibilities. Local, site-specific environmental considerations for mitigation
measures and technology alternatives were not addressed in the Liulin, Darajat, or Suralaya
plants. The site planning was done centrally for power generation, taking into account extension
of existing facilities, sources of energy, and power distribution aspects. While these are
important aspects to consider, environmental issues such as saturating an already polluted area
or polluting a green field site have to be given due consideration at the planning stage on a
case-by-case basis. The Bank's endorsement of emission standards as a policy, and
implementation of such, in practice is important in this respect.

13.            Presently, in some Bank projects, emphasis is given to environmental aspects in
the early project stages both in the Bank and developing member countries (DMCs). For
example, in the PRC Qingdao project, environmental considerations were in the forefront of the
planning stage, as the project's objective was environmental improvement of the Qingdao City.
The study DMCs are also exploring means of improving the energy efficiency of new projects
and developing renewable and clean energy alternatives. Since these developments may, in
the future, lead to more careful site selection and consideration of new technology alternatives
for new plants, the Bank should endorse and support them where possible.


B.     Choice of Plant Size and Technology


14.             Choice of plant size and technology should give due consideration to land use
aspects and water conservation needs. In both project areas in India, case study plants are well
oversized in terms of space, even if future expansions are taken into consideration. As the size
of the area, resettlement needs, and land use conflicts will influence the direct and indirect
project costs, these aspects are of major importance during the feasibility study and the project
preparation phase and should also be included in the economic analysis of the project. The
case study power generation units in Liulin are small sized and their efficiency is not very high
compared with the PRC standard of late 1980s. The area where the study plant is located has
limited water resources. Therefore, water conservation technologies such as low water
consuming ash conveyors and low water consuming cooling systems (for example, forced draft
wet cooling towers) should have been considered when constructing a thermal power plant in
this area. On the other hand, water shortages in Pagbilao plant in the Philippines led to the
installation of a reverse osmosis plant. A project's water requirements need to be compatible
with the master plan that regulates water allocation in the area.

15.             The involved ministries and agencies in DMCs now consider a broader range of
technologies, pollution prevention systems, by-product utilization, waste minimization, and water
conservation than in the recent past when the case studies were planned. Presently, national
plans of all four study countries follow a national/regional power generation and distribution plan
considering to a certain extent several environmental aspects such as the use of alternative
sources of energy. Broadening the initial environmental appraisal during the development of
these national plans would likely assist in site selection, technology choice, and implementation
of EMM during construction and operation.




1      These two plants were designed to meet both ambient and emission standards.
                                                        11


C.     Plans for Pollution Control and Demand for Environmental Services


16.            In the case study plants, contingency plans and associated EMM were not
developed during the design phase for scenarios that do not occur according to plan, or for
problems that emerge due to changes in economic conditions or changes in environmental
protection standards. As such, the implementation office of the Qingdao project was not
prepared to react to the lower than anticipated demand for heat. Although the district heating
facility was augmented and a distribution pipe network was constructed, it was difficult to
persuade consumers in the old buildings to pay for the new pipelines. The pipes already
connected to existing inefficient highly polluting boilers did not have the required specifications
needed for the new district heating system. The problem of generating sufficient demand for the
new heating system was exacerbated by the fact that collective action was needed from all
consumers in the building to simultaneously convert to district heating. The Government tried to
remedy the situation by stipulating that all new buildings are required to install the appropriate
heating-pipe network and by providing financial incentives for occupants of older buildings to
convert to the new system. A willingness-to-pay survey to assess the extent of the demand at
the design stage and public promotion campaign to increase the demand for such facilities
could have enabled the project to be more cost effective.

17.              The economic crisis in Indonesia and the resulting reduction in demand for
construction material has made it difficult for the Suralaya plant to utilize the ash it generates.
As it did not have a contingency plan such as an alternative disposal site, the plant was facing
difficulties of ash disposal at the time of the Mission. The quality of coal used in India generates
high ash volume, which has become a major problem for compliance with new legislation1
concerning the utilization of ash. Only a small amount of the total ash produced by the study
plants is being utilized. Each plant in India will soon have a dry fly ash collecting system. The
implementing agencies are trying to promote ash utilization2 through public relations, financial
incentives, and recommendations for government initiatives, etc., but this is proving difficult as
the construction industry has some prejudices against using materials that contain ash. While
the overestimation of demand for environmental services and waste utilization may not
significantly affect the economic viability of the project, they do affect its ability to maximize the
environmental improvements or minimize the adverse impacts. 3


D.     Implementation During Construction Phase




1      Notification on stipulating lower ash content coal for coal-fired power stations situated more than 1,000
       kilometers away from the colliers.
2      Coal benefication would lead to reduced ash generation, reduced emissions of particulate matter,
       improvement in plant availability and utilization factor, as well as lower the cost of transportation. See Bank
       study on TA 2266-IND:Implementation of Clean Technology through Coal Benefication, for $300,000,
       approved on 27 December 1994. However, appropriate EMMs have to be introduced simultaneously to
       reduce adverse environmental impacts that may be created by the coal benefication technologies used.
3      Since the scope of the study did not include the economic analysis of the project, the impact such deviations
       in demand has on the economic internal rates of return of the project was not determined.
                                                      12


18.            To the extent that the Mission could verify them,1 measures to reduce
environmental impacts during the construction phase were generally poor for most study
projects, and compliance with standards and guidelines was not monitored or supervised by the
power plant or the relevant EMA. None of the study projects were able to provide documented
monitoring data or contractor procedures and specifications for EMM during the construction
phase. Precautions to avoid visible silt runoff, sedimentation, and erosion appeared to have
been followed. But generally, housekeeping and precautionary measures to avoid less visible
damage (i.e., groundwater contamination, air pollution, noise, and traffic) were not emphasized.
Plant contractors were informed of the EIA requirements regarding construction; however, there
appeared to be very little supervision except for reminders at meetings to follow the stipulated
procedures. Penalties for failure to adhere to them were rarely built in to the contracts. This is
consistent with the ongoing work in the Bank which indicates that tender documents on EMM,
which are to be implemented by the contractors, seldom included provisions for measurement
and payment. This increases the difficulties of implementation by providing a disincentive for
contractual performance.

19.             For the projects under construction, emphasis to meet construction deadlines
compromised the implementation of some EMM. The Rayalaseema, Liulin, and Masinloc plants
started operation before environmental staff assignments, sampling, monitoring, and analytical
procedures had been established, and before all of the dust suppression equipment had been
installed. For example, proper precautions needed to be taken to avoid spillage and for disposal
of hazardous waste and unutilized construction materials. Physical inspection of some plants
indicated unvegetated disturbed surfaces, abandoned materials, and poor housekeeping. Plant
operators need to improve waste management, and the EMAs should be more vigilant during
both construction and operations phases. Implementation of EMM and procedures should be
better documented as a completed phase of the project EMAP. In all case study countries, the
EMA network especially at the local level, is unable to devote much attention to the construction
stage due to lack of personnel and has a tendency to concentrate on supervising plants only
after they have been given the necessary clearances to operate. One model that might be
followed is in the Philippines, where monitoring is undertaken by multipartite teams. This team
consists of members from the local community, local government, local nongovernment
organizations (NGOs), representatives of the EMA, and the power company. The team is
assembled prior to construction and meets regularly well into the operations stage to address
implementation of EMM. The Bank supervision missions should routinely assess EMM
performance during the project construction stage to stimulate improvement in this area.


E.     Implementation During Operations Phase


20.            The case study projects, physical infrastructure, and technology choices were
generally designed to be in compliance with the applicable environmental regulations and
guidelines.2 They were not considered to be among the major polluting sources in the cities
they operate in. The EIA process required by the Bank identified the major environmental issues
and then led to the development and implementation of appropriate EMM for the case study

1      The Mission found it difficult to evaluate the success of EMM during the construction phase for already
       completed projects.
2      Although well under way in their construction, three plants (at Masinloc, Qingdao, and Unchahar) were still
       not completely operational at the time of the Mission; thus the design and implementation of EMM could not
       be fully evaluated.
                                                        13


projects. The relevant EMAs expressed satisfaction with the actual environmental protection
performance of the thermal power projects in general, but continue to request improvements in
some specific areas where the environmental standards or conditions laid down in the operation
permit are not yet met. Technical mitigation measures involving capital expenditure and foreign
exchange were mostly installed as planned and are generally operating at design efficiency.
Bank funds were usually specifically allocated for this purpose during the design stage. EMM
incorporated into or required for routine plant performance were found to be the most
successful. Except for Rayalaseema and Suralaya, all EMM equipment inspected had been less
than three years in operation. At Rayalaseema, the quality of delivered coal was outside the
design limits, which caused problems for the dust removal efficiency of the ESP.1 If the design
calls for better quality coal than the fuel that is actually delivered, the environmental standards
cannot be met. Therefore, continued monitoring of the quality of coal is required. The study
projects visited had the capacity to test the coal content. However, once the plant design
specifications are in place, there is little a plant can do in the short term to reduce emissions if
the quality of coal is below design specifications.

21.              Mitigation measures related to good housekeeping, waste disposal, and
nuisance and risk minimization could be improved in most plants. Several plants (Suralaya,
Masinloc, and Pagbilao) could improve control of heavy vehicle traffic through neighboring
villages. All the study projects need to develop and rehearse emergency response plans. Some
projects have processes or practices that are not in compliance with environmental regulations
or guidelines. For example, the disposal of fly and bottom ash2 at the Suralaya plant was not in
compliance with the hazardous waste management regulations of Indonesia. Its disposal
method does not meet good practice for disposing of non-hazardous waste to landfill either. For
example, there is no liner, leachate collection system, continuous covering, or a reclamation
plan. The dust suppression system in Masinloc was not completely installed prior to plant
testing and startup, and in the Liulin plant, the dust suppression sprinklers were not able to
reach the top of the coal yard storage as it exceeded the designed storage capacity. Neither of
the study power plants in India treats the ash water so far, but both are planning to do so in the
short to medium term.


F.     Monitoring


22.            Several of the projects could improve the implementation of their EMOPs that are
generally supported by the operational budget. Monitoring aspects are weak in most plants.
Procedures are needed to ensure that the mitigation equipment and spare parts, and the
operating, maintenance, and monitoring procedures are functional prior to startup. Generally,
domestic and plant solid waste minimization and disposal as well as hazardous wastes
management programs could be improved in all the projects evaluated. Few of the power plants
and the urban development projects studied have procedures to routinely segregate, store, or
dispose of their hazardous and toxic wastes in accordance with existing or planned hazardous
and toxic wastes management regulations and guidelines. At the Suralaya plant in Indonesia,
no record of actions taken by management to ensure routine operation and maintenance of
wastewater treatment systems, ash disposal, and ESPs was evident in the plant's quarterly and
annual environmental monitoring reports. Many environmental staff in some plants were not

1      The power plant did not appear to have control over the quality of coal delivered to the plant.
2      This ash is considered a hazardous waste in Indonesia.
                                                      14


aware of their plant's environmental objectives. As an example, dust suppression from coal
handling could be considerably improved without additional costs in the cases of Rayalaseema
and Liulin plants, if the operation of sprinkling facilities were improved. However, this did not
appear to be a routine procedure followed by the staff. On the other hand, in Pagbilao,
environment monitoring documentation provided evidence of compliance with stipulated EMM.
This may be because it was the only plant in the sample that had been subject to an external
audit.

23.               EMAPs and EMOPs, according to the requirements of the EIA, have been
prepared for most study projects. The EMAP stipulated the requirements for preparation of
EMOP as per the regulatory requirements. These environmental monitoring reports are usually
reviewed by the station manager and forwarded to plant headquarters and to the relevant
provincial EMA. The station manager is responsible for taking actions according to the EMAP in
cases where the EMM are not being followed as designed. The feedback loop from monitoring
to initiation of appropriate EMM was quite weak in most plants (except Pagbilao). The Mission
also found that having environmental staff, laboratories, consultants, and regular monitoring of
effluents, emissions, and ambient environmental quality may not necessarily result in well-
documented environmental mitigation efforts and accomplishments. It was not clear what, if any,
self-regulation of EMM were initiated by management based on the monitoring and
recommendations of their own environmental staff and external consultants. For example,
particulate emissions from Stack No. 1 at Suralaya were not in compliance with Indonesia's air
pollution control regulations, indicating that repairs to the ESP were needed.1 This also raises a
separate policy issue on encouraging/requiring the compliance with DMC's regulations from a
project that is related to the Bank-funded project. For example, what should be the Bank's
position on the compliance of a previous phase of a power plant or a related transmission
facility that is not Bank funded.


G.     Enforcement and Institutional Aspects


24.            Despite the improvement made in the last decade with national EMAs, the local
and regional EMAs still need to develop their capacity to critically review the plant compliance
and performance data. The capabilities and skills of the responsible provincial EMAs (with a few
exceptions) are generally limited. The Bank's institutional development and human resource
development programs should continue to strengthen the EMAs in the study countries focusing
more on the decentralization of enforcement and regulatory functions. Different degrees of
training and capacity building have to be addressed depending on each country's needs as
some study countries and provinces are more advanced than others in this respect. In the
Philippines, the provincial EMA staff overseeing the Masinloc plant did not have the expertise
needed to monitor the power plant. They took the opportunity to familiarize themselves with
technical aspects of monitoring when the National Power Corporation (NPC) demonstrated
these to the multipartite monitoring team of which they are members. In both the PRC and
Indonesia it seems that, in practice, the district-level EMAs do not have clear regulatory
authority over all the projects in their domain. In the PRC, decision making tends to be
concentrated within the sectoral hierarchy (electric power administration), and the involvement
of the environmental agencies is restricted to the "appropriate" level; for example, provincial
Environment Protection Bureaus (EPBs) are the institutions authorized to monitor the

1      Stack No. 1 of the Suralaya plant was not financed by Bank funds.
                                                    15


compliance of power plants owned by the province. Therefore, it is the provincial EPB for
Shanxi Province from Taiyuan City that regulates the Liulin plant rather than the district-level
EPB representative office in Liulin. One of the reasons for allocation of this responsibility to the
provincial EPB which is physically far removed from the plant is because the district-level EPB
does not have adequate expertise or resources. In Indonesia, there were no provincial or
district-level EMAs at the time of the study.1 These complications result in EMAs being far
removed from the pollution problems facing the project areas and leads to delays in supervision
and regulatory action.

25.             The institution overseeing the preparation of a project's EIA and EMAP in
Indonesia is quite different from the one in other case study countries. In the others, this
responsibility lies with the national EMA. The Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR) (national EMA in the Philippines) has more regulatory authority and
institutional capacity than the National Environmental Impact Management Agency (BAPEDAL)
of Indonesia. In Indonesia, the authority to prepare and implement the EMAP, including
supervision and inspection, is largely the responsibility of the relevant sector agency of the
Government. The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) and the National Electric Company are
responsible for the environmental management of the energy and power subsector instead of
BAPEDAL. Power plants prepare the EIA to satisfy the terms of reference stipulated by the EIA
commission chaired by the MME. BAPEDAL is represented as a committee member. The
Department of Public Works (DPW) is responsible for supervising the EMAP of urban
development projects in the planning and construction phases; during the operation phase, and
upon transfer of the project assets, it becomes the responsibility of the provincial governor and
the mayor. Therefore, the sector agency effectively regulates its own EMAP. Of the study
projects, those that operate in a sector where environmental performance measures are "sector
regulated" by a sector ministry or agency rather than by a national EMA tended to have lower
levels of environmental protection. For such "sector-regulated" projects, senior management
leadership and the provision of adequate budget are critical for successful EMM.

26.             Generally in all study EMAs, the monitoring results are only used to check if the
emission or effluent standards are met. Subsequent to determining any penalties or sanctions,
often these monitoring reports are stored in paper form with no further analysis. It would be
useful to undertake more analysis (e.g., statistics, correlation analysis) in order to get a better
understanding of the environmental features of the airshed or watershed and the impacts of the
power plant in the surrounding area. For the plant, better evaluation and analysis of the
monitored data would, for example, help to optimize the O&M procedures for the EMM
equipment. Further evaluation of monitored data would also be beneficial to find least-cost
EMMs for similar future projects. Paucity of funds, training, and incentives discourage such
activities, which narrows the purpose of monitoring and enforcement and limits their cost-
effectiveness.


H.     Cost-Effectiveness Within the Plant


27.            One of the major purposes for this study was to evaluate whether the EMM
introduced in Bank-financed projects have been worthwhile in terms of the expenditure incurred

1      There is now attempt by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the National Environmental Impact Management
       Agency (BAPEDAL) in Indonesia to appoint EMAs at the provincial level, however, implementation of this
       scheme is quite slow.
                                                                    16


     and the benefits realized. There are two aspects of cost-effectiveness to consider with respect
     to the adoption of EMM in a plant. First, in a narrow perspective it is necessary to determine
     whether the plant is using the most cost-effective technology to mitigate the adverse
     environmental impacts it causes. The second involves a broader question: whether the EMM a
     plant adopts are the most cost effective in the location in which it operates (paras. 33-36).

     28.              Within the narrow perspective, the EMM technologies a power plant adopts can
     be classified into three main categories: air pollution control, water pollution control, and solid
     waste management. For air pollution control, often the technology choices available for thermal
     power plants depend on the quality of the coal used. Generally, the ash content in the coal
     determines the generation of particulates, and the sulfur content influences the sulfur dioxide
     emissions. The study, therefore, compares the cost-effectiveness of alternative types of coal,
     which will enable the plant to meet its environmental protection requirements. In the PRC and
     India case studies, EMM were complied with by using low quality local coal.1 The Suralaya
     plant in Indonesia uses good quality local coal, whereas in the Philippine case studies, good-
     quality coal is imported.

     29.             Table 4 compares the cost-effectiveness2 of the plant's fuel choice with that of
     an alternative fuel, which could meet the required environmental standards. Supporting analysis
     of the effectiveness and costs of each of the technologies used are presented in Appendix 3.
     The cost-effectiveness of switching from local to imported coal to mitigate ash generation
     depends on the characteristics and cost of local coal and the availability of local technology. In
     India, using imported coal is more cost effective because local coal has very high ash content
     and very low heating value.3 In the PRC, using local coal is more cost-effective because of
     higher heating value of this coal, and the availability of inexpensive locally manufactured ESPs,
     etc.

                     Table 4: Environmental Compliance of Thermal Power Plants and the
                        Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Pollution Control Strategies

Project                     Compliance                 Pollution Control           Cost of Alternative                Pollution Control
                                                        Technologies                Pollution Control                  Technology for
                                                            (Cost)a                    Strategies                   Future Standards for
                                                                                                                       Sulfur Dioxide
Shanxi-Liulin           ?? Complies with total         ?? Use of 99% efficient    ??Using imported coal with          ?? Use of flue gas
Thermal Power            suspended particulates               electrostatic          low sulfur and ash content       desulfurization (FGD)
Plant                     (TSP)emissionstandard and        precipitator (ESP)      is not cost-effective. Cost of         (wet limestone
(2 x 100 megawatts         all ambient standards.           ($1.27 million).          coal will increase by $257      method) using design
[MW])                                                 ?? Use of 180 meter (m)            million for 20 years           coal will increase
                                                          stack ($2.6 million).       operation; increases ESP         capital requirements
                                                                                       cost by $14.13 million;           by $13.7 million.
                                                                                    reduction of ash volume by
                                                                                      53% - use of lower stack


     1       As the quality of coal deteriorates, its ash content increases and the heating value (kilo calorie per kilogram
             [kcal/kg]) decreases.
     2       These cost-effectiveness calculations for coal technology are generally based on the coal prices,
             subsidies/duties, and transportation costs that are available in the project documents. A partial cost-
             effectiveness analysis with respect to the coal technology choice is presented in this study because full-
             scale economic analysis of the projects is beyond the scope of the study.
     3       The data available during the study under TA No. 2266-IND:Implementation of Clean Technology through
             Coal Benefication, for $300,000, approved on 27 December 1994, was not sufficient to do an alternative
             scenario of using local washed coal for study plants in India.
                                                                     17


    Project                    Compliance                Pollution Control            Cost of Alternative              Pollution Control
                                                          Technologies                 Pollution Control                Technology for
                                                                    a
                                                              (Cost)                      Strategies                 Future Standards for
                                                                                                                        Sulfur Dioxide
                                                                                       (e.g., from 180 to 100 m)
                                                                                        cost reduction is 15%.
    Heat Generation at     ?? Complies with TSP          ?? Existing ESP with       ??Use of imported coal with
    Qingdao Plant            emission standard and        higher capacity will be     low sulfur and ash content
    (3 x 12 MW)              all ambient standards.                used.               not cost-effective (cost of
                                                        ?? Use of 180 m stack            coal increase by $80
                                                             ($0.99 million).             million) for 15 years
                                                                                                operation.
                                                                                    ??Use of lower stack height
                                                                                       (e.g., from 180 to 100 m,
                                                                                        cost will be reduced by
                                                                                         approximately $0.38
                                                                                                 million).
    Unchahar Thermal       ?? Complies with the         ?? Design ESP to meet         ??Use of imported coal         ?? Use of FGD with the
    Power Plant             emission and ambient          the emission standard.      reduces fly ash emissions            design coal will
    (2 x 210 MW)              standards for TSP,          Provide a 220 m stack.     and is more cost-effective.        increase investment
                                SO2, and NOx.          ?? Dust suppression and       Cost will be reduced by $60          by $18.5 million.
                                                            extraction system.        million over the lifetime of
                                                                                                 plant.
    Rayalaseema          ?? Complies with emission     ?? 99.5% efficient ESP.      ?? Imported coal reduces fly     ?? Use of FGD with the
    Thermal Power            and ambient standards     ?? Use of 220 m stack.         ash emission and is more             design coal will
    Plant                             for TSP.         ?? Provide adequate                 cost effective. Cost         increase investment
    (2 x 210 MW)         ?? Complies with ambient         space for future FGD.         reduced by $35.3 million          by $18.5 million.
                               standards with stack                                      over the lifetime of the
                             height requirements for                                              plant.
                                  SO2 but not the
                                emission standard.
                           ?? No mention of NOx
                              control but compliance
                             to ambient standards is
                                    committed.
    Pagbilao Thermal        ?? Complies with all        ?? Use of 99% efficient                                      ?? Use of 1% sulfur coal
    Power Plant              emission and ambient           ESP; 220 m stack                                             with FGD will cost
    (2 x 350 MW)                  standards.                 height; low NOx                                             $42.52 million but
                                                                 burner.                                                reduce cost of stack
                                                       ?? Design coal meets the                                           by $2.6 million.
                                                              SO2 emission
                                                                standard.
    Masinloc Thermal        ?? Complies with all          ?? Use 95% efficient                                         ?? Use of FGD and
    Power Plant              emission and ambient            ESP; 150 m stack.                                            higher sulfur coal
    (2 x 300 MW)                  standards.               ?? Screw type coal                                           (<1%) in place of low
                                                           unloader and covered                                           sulfur coal allows
                                                                conveyors.                                                stack height to be
                                                       ?? Two-stage combustion                                                   lower.
                                                                 burners.                                            ?? This will increase cost
                                                                                                                           by $36.4 million.
    Suralaya Thermal     ?? Complies with emission     ?? Ash handling at dust                                         ?? Use of FGD (wet
    Power Plant             and ambient standards.        plant  ESP ($25.8                                              limestone method)
    (3 x 600 MW)                                          million).                                                      using design coal will
                                                       ?? Use of 275 m stack                                                increase capital
                                                          ($29.5 million).                                              requirements by about
                                                                                                                              $90 million.


NOx = nitrogen oxide, SO2 = sulfur dioxide.
a
          Costs given are costs reported from the feasibility study, environmental impact assessment, or Bank project appraisal or
          completion reports as indicated in Appendix 3. Costs were taken from references given in the same appendix.


         30.            The cost-effectiveness of the fuel choice can be illustrated using the case studies
         in India. The power plants at both Rayalaseema and Unchahar are able to meet the emissions
                                                   18


and ambient standards for particulates with the use of an ESP. The coal used in the India case
studies is high in ash content (40 percent) and low in heating value (3,100 kilo calories per
kilogram [kcal/kg]). Alternatively, a good-quality (10 percent ash and 5,200 kcal/kg) imported
Indonesian coal will require an additional fuel cost, but the fuel consumption of the plant will
decline due to the higher heating value. Moreover, a smaller ESP will be needed and the land
requirements for ash disposal will also decrease. Thus, the alternative imported fuel choice will
save about $60 million over the total lifetime of the plant. Similarly, in the Unchahar plant, the
adoption of Indonesian coal will enable a cost saving of $35 million to the plant (Appendix 3,
Tables 3 and 4). Both these plants can use more cost-effective imported fuel instead of what
they presently use. However, the additional costs incurred due to the use of local coal need to
be compared with the other social and national benefits and political considerations stemming
from employment generation in coal mines, washing plants, and transportation systems and the
impact of foreign exchange savings on the trade balance. On the other hand, in the Liulin and
Qingdao plants in the PRC, use of better quality imported coal is not cost effective as it will
increase the cost of coal to the plant, as well as the cost of the ESP due to the availability of
cheap coal and locally produced ESP. In the case study plants in the Philippines and Indonesia,
good-quality coal is necessary at present to meet the environmental requirements and,
therefore, alternative use of lower quality coal (though less costly) is not practical.

31.             All case study thermal power plants are able to cost-effectively meet the ambient
sulfur dioxide (SO2) standards using high stacks. Most of them also meet the SO2 emissions
standards1 (except Rayalaseema plant) using low sulfur coal, but they provide adequate empty
space in the plant premises to install SO2 emission controlling flue gas desulfurization (FGD)
equipment in anticipation of more stringent standards imposed for SO2 in the future. In the
present context, the cost premium for low-sulfur coal is less than the capital and operating costs
for FGD equipment required to remove SO2 emissions from the boiler exhaust. In addition,
markets for the by-products of the FGD-technology (gypsum, elementary sulfur, sulfuric acid)
have not sufficiently developed in these countries to make FGD equipment more attractive.
Therefore, ambient SO2 standards are often met by constructing high stacks, which is cheaper
than installing FGD technology. The additional stack heights (25-50 meters), fabricated to
achieve desired ambient ground SO2 levels, are constructed at low additional cost, as the
materials and labor for stack construction are locally supplied. However, high stacks merely
move the ground level concentration of SO2 to a higher elevation rather than reducing the
emissions. Although cost effective under the present regulatory environment, these plants will
likely need to install FGD equipment when SO2 standards become more stringent or the
premium for low sulfur coal is higher. While some plants (Masinloc, Pagbilao, and Liulin) have
allocated the land for future FGD installations, others (Suralaya) do not have this flexibility. The
mitigation measure of using high stacks to comply with SO2 ambient standards simply transfers
the problem from a local to a regional issue. Therefore, DMCs attempts to replace SO2 ambient
standards with emission standards should be encouraged.

32.             Design and function of wastewater treatment facilities vary considerably from
country to country depending on the availability of land and other resources. Therefore, cost-
effectiveness comparisons become difficult. Locally made facilities in the PRC ($1,028 per MW
in Liulin) were found to be cheaper than those in the Philippines ($7,333 per MW in Masinloc)
and in India ($7,619 per MW in Unchahar). Treatment of heated effluent depends on the
location of the power plant. Natural draft cooling towers are used at plants that discharge
cooling water into adjacent freshwater bodies. Plants located near the sea generally use long

1      The PRC does not have SO2 emissions standards and ground level concentrations of SO2 is controlled by
       the use of 180 m stacks.
                                                  19


channels for cooling, mixing, diluting, and dissipating heat from the discharged cooling water.
Investment costs of both methods range from 2 to 10 percent of total plant cost. It is more
appropriate to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of wastewater treatment facilities in terms of the
potential use of its excess capacity (para. 37). Most of the plants visited had the capacity to
operate cost-effectively as combined wastewater treatment facilities for a cluster of users.

33.             The cheapest and most commonly used nitrogen oxide (NOx) control technology
in thermal power plants is the overfire air burners with low excess air. Overfire air burners have
been extensively used in new boilers because of their low cost and ability to meet the prevailing
emission standards in these countries. There are several technologies available in the market
that reduce NOx levels during the combustion process. Additional cost of low NOx burners is
not significant, as this technology has become standard rather than optional for thermal power
generators.


I.     Cost-Effectiveness in a Cluster


34.             In considering the cost-effectiveness of introducing a "clean" plant in an already
polluted location, the issue is to ascertain whether a combination of mitigation measures in the
plant and neighboring plants would have been more appropriate than concentrating on EMM
just for the plant. To evaluate this broader perspective of cost-effectiveness of EMM for a
particular airshed or watershed, the Mission found it difficult to obtain quantitative data on the
cost of technologies from the neighbors of case study plants. The variety of plant types in a
particular industrial or commercial area prohibits extrapolation of information from available
data. Therefore, qualitative information on how the case study plants can be more cost-effective
in a broader perspective is discussed.

35.            Typically a power plant would be in, or would attract, a cluster of other industries
or services. As a result, a variety of EMM it invests in can be used more cost-effectively if they
are shared with other potential users in the area. Power plants could provide services like clean
water supply, wastewater/sewage treatment, and solid waste disposal on a fee-for-services
basis to adjacent urban or industrial areas and to users operating in the same cluster. For
example, in the area adjacent to the Liulin plant, there are insufficient domestic wastewater and
sewage treatment facilities, and the Liulin district does not have sufficient funds to cover capital
cost of treatment facilities for domestic sewage generated in the district. The domestic
wastewater treatment facilities of the Liulin plant currently has excess capacity and is in use
only eight hours a day as it was built to accommodate Phase 2 needs as well. This excess
capacity could be sold to the Liulin district for at least the marginal cost, thereby increasing the
cost-effectiveness for the cluster (or district in this case) as a whole. Similarly, there may be
opportunities to capture the waste heat from a power plant and use it for the adjacent residential
areas. The Qingdao project uses the waste heat as the main product and electricity as the by-
product. In a broader sense, the district heating plant in Qingdao, is one component of several
under the project that use the cluster approach to providing environmental protection more cost
effectively to Qingdao City.1 Under this project, several highly polluting boilers have been
substituted by cleaner heat generation units. This substitution concept can be considered at the
planning stage with appropriate cost sharing or pricing mechanisms. In appropriate


1      Similar environmental improvement approaches are being used in Bandar Lampung and urban development
       projects as well as Tangshan-Chengde environmental improvement project.
                                                 20


geographical areas where there is a demand for waste heat either from residential areas or
industrial areas, the cogeneration alternative can be explored in the planning stage to increase
the cost effectiveness in a cluster. Cogeneration often has environmental advantages and in
many cases (depending on the prices of power and heat and the demand for heat) also has
economic benefits. This cluster approach to cost-effectiveness can be explored further at the
planning stage of a power plant construction in line with the regional development goals.

36.             In all suggested examples, good coordination between the different agencies is
required to adopt such an approach and to ensure cost recovery for the services provided.
Since the cluster approach crosses sectoral and institutional boundaries, supportive legal and
institutional arrangements are needed. But this should not preclude the concept being
examined at the planning stage on a case-by-case basis. With its existing level of planning and
the organizational structure for administrative functions, this approach may be easier to adopt in
the PRC where there may be a better sense of mutual confidence between public institutions.
On the other hand, it may be quite difficult in countries like India where cooperation between
sectoral agencies are much more strained. Similarly, a combined wastewater treatment facilities
for the cluster can be provided instead of separate facilities for each plant. For the cluster as a
whole, this may be more cost-effective.

37.             The cluster approach can also be used to address a more sensitive issue
regarding the environmental compliance status of projects related to a Bank-financed project.
For example, some parts of Phase 1 of the Qingdao district heating facility (not funded by the
Bank) do not have up-to-date pollution mitigation measures. While the Bank is funding Phase 2
of the heating plant, it could also fund the pollution control measures needed for Phase 1,
based on the cluster pollution control objectives. A similar example was illustrated with the
Suralaya case study Stack No. 1 which did not meet the emissions requirements (para. 23). The
Bank may consider providing additional funding solely for such pollution control investments on
a case-by-case basis. This type of add-on investments would enable the Bank to avoid the
reputational issues of being associated with a highly polluting sister plant or a complementary
facility such as a transmission line not funded by the Bank.

38.             Another opportunity to be more cost-effective in a cluster arises when the Bank-
funded project with marginal additional funds (though not required under the country's
regulation) can increase the environmental management capability of the cluster. For example,
the Masinloc plant was required to install an ambient air monitoring unit near the plant as well
as one in a nearby residential area. These units generate air quality data on an hourly basis for
several parameters (total suspended particulates, SO2, NOx) and provide a basis for checking
whether the Masinloc plant operates according to regulations. If the permitted limits are
exceeded, the plant and environmental authorities must verify the source of pollution and take
appropriate action. There are other useful applications of monitoring data within the
environmental management system. Better evaluation and analysis of the monitored data
would, for example, help to optimize the O&M procedures for the EMM equipment. In addition,
the EMA can also use such data to do trend analysis of air quality parameters and be more
cost-effective in managing the air pollution of vehicular traffic and other sources in the
surrounding residential areas. However, these ambient air monitoring units in Masinloc do not
have the computer capacity to store the air quality data they generate; data is presently printed
but not stored in digital form. Additional funds to cover the cost of a computer to store the data
and provide training in data analysis would enable more cost-effective use of the data
generated. In the Pagbilao plant, although data storage capacity is available in the monitoring
units, the data is not used for further analysis. Providing funding and training for these efforts to
the plant and provincial EMAs could be more cost-effective.
                                                      21




J.     Revised Bank Environmental Guidelines and Design


39.              The Bank guidelines for environmental management of projects have been
undergoing substantial revision since 1992. Case studies of projects approved before and after
1992 were considered to evaluate whether the design of EMM had improved.1 The Bank
requirement for and support of the EIA process have undoubtedly improved implementation of
the environmental planning and management process in DMCs and have provided desirable,
often cost-effective, EMM in the study projects. This is particularly the case when the executing
agency is a large and powerful agency and the respective EMA is still developing jurisdiction,
capacity, and expertise, and where public awareness and public participation in the
environmental management process is limited. The design of EMM has considerably improved
in the recent projects where public participation, offsetting pollution control mechanisms, and a
cluster approach toward environmental management are emphasized. The Bank's influence on
introducing these concepts is better in some case study countries than others. For example,
several projects in the PRC involve the cluster approach to environment management. For
instance, the Qingdao project itself is an environmental improvement project aiming to improve
air quality in Qingdao City and water quality in the adjacent coastal waters. It is designed to
replace about 1 million tons per year of coal-burning and domestic cooking stoves and small
inefficient burners. In other plants like Masinloc and Pagbilao in the Philippines, other offsetting
activities like reforestation (mangos, mangroves), creation of habitat for marine wildlife (artificial
reef, seagrass beds), and village improvement programs (electrification, water supply, septic
tanks) as required conditions of their environmental compliance certificates are being
implemented.

40.             The revised EIA requirements2 issued by the Bank's Office of Environment and
Social Development improve on previous guidelines. They require greater emphasis on the
consideration of alternatives than the 1993 EIA guidelines.3 The 1998 version emphasizes the
importance of considering the environmental impacts for each alternative or option for
technology, route, and site selection. The best alternative is required to be assessed from an
environmental perspective as well as economic and technical aspects. The Bank environmental
guidelines for thermal power projects4 provides a framework for assessing a project's
environmental and social issues, following the format and the organization of the Bank's EIA
and initial environmental evaluation guidelines. The checklist of environmental issues and
mitigation mitigation measures for coal-fired power plants provided as Appendix 4 to this study,
is intended to augment the Bank guidelines and requirements.




1      Although the Unchahar plant was approved in 1988, due to delays in implementation, a new EIA that
       complied with the revised environmental guidelines was required; therefore, it is considered to be a recent
       project in terms of EMM design.
2      Environmental Assessment Requirements of the ADB, Office of Environment and Social Development, ADB
       (1998).
3      Environmental Assessment Requirements and Environmental Review Procedures of the ADB, Office of the
       Environment and Social Development, ADB (1993).
4      Environmental Guidelines for Selected Industrial and Power Development Projects, Office of the
       Environment, ADB (1993).
                                                      22


41.            Although Bank guidelines for project preparation, design, and monitoring have
progressed recently, there is still room for improvement in guidelines for performance
evaluation. For instance, performance measures or environmental quality criteria for evaluation
of the success of EMM at different stages of a project have not been developed. An evaluation
of EMM should be able to assess whether or not a Bank-financed project is in compliance with
host country environmental protection legislation and if the project is in accordance with the
covenants of the loan agreement.


K.     Incentives for Implementation


42.             A private sector project at Pagbilao was included as a case study to observe
whether the EMM designed and adopted by the private sector operators were substantially
different from those adopted by the public sector plants. In general, it was found that the plant
design and EMM introduced were very similar to those adopted in the other Philippine case study
(Masinloc) operated by the NPC; therefore, no other private sector case studies were added to the
study sample. Although the study cannot comment on the differences in private versus public
project environmental performance, the Pagbilao plant had certain incentives for compliance that
could be replicated in other projects.

43.             In terms of design, the Pagbilao plant's EMM were similar to those in the Masinloc
plant. However, the EMAP of the Pagbilao plant appeared to be more advanced and efficient
than that of all the other case studies.1 It enabled the plant to comply with the conditions
stipulated in the ECC agreed to with the Philippine DENR. The EMAP was well integrated into
the day-to-day operations of the plant. Responsibilities of monitoring different pollution control
parameters were assigned to the general staff who routinely work in the same area. For
example, checking the quality of coal and content analysis was done in the coal laboratory by
the coal handling department staff. All environmental monitoring for physical and chemical
components was done in-house, while external consultants did the required biological
monitoring. The plant's Environment Management Department had an annual work plan, clear
supervisory responsibilities in terms of environmental monitoring, a budget, and instructions to
report directly to the plant manager. The Environment Management Department was also
responsible for implementing the social and environmental improvement programs conducted
outside the plant (mangrove rehabilitation and sustainable fisheries). The plant manager
reported on environmental management issues to the board of directors. The plant's parent
company provided support to personnel. Of all the case studies, this was the only plant that had
undergone a comprehensive annual environmental compliance audit by external auditors; the
need to prepare for the audit may have influenced its implementation of the EMAP.2

44.             Public awareness and public participation is also an incentive for better design
and implementation of EMM. This influence is quite varied across the case study countries.
Public participation in the design phase of the case study projects in India and the Philippines
was stronger than in Indonesia and the PRC. Multipartite monitoring teams established at the
initial stages of a project in the Philippines, in the view of the Mission, provide greater incentive

1      The EMM of some of the study plants (Suralaya, Qingdao) were designed and completed at the same time
       as the Pagbilao plant and, therefore, the differences in environment management of these plants cannot be
       attributed to the age factor.
2      The external audit was required by the International Finance Corporation, which partly financed the Pagbilao
       plant.
                                                      23


for the management to implement and communicate effective EMM. Greater public participation
in the EIA phase resulted in a more transparent review of project impacts and more flexibility in
designing mitigation measures in response to unforeseen conditions facing project construction
and operation. In 1997, India issued a public hearing notification that enhanced the level of
public awareness and public participation in the EIA process considerably and provided greater
incentive to implement and communicate effective EMM in the power sector. The DPW of
Indonesia encourages public participation and also obtains information on willingness to pay for
environmental improvement and sanitation services in urban development projects.1 These
initial public consultations as well as continuous public awareness campaigns done throughout
project implementation were found to be critical to the success of such projects in Indonesia,
and it is likely the case with similar projects in other DMCs. In the PRC, public participation or
NGO involvement is not very apparent. The Bank should continue supporting the
implementation of public hearings and NGO involvement especially during the project design
stage, preferably prior to developing detailed terms of reference for the EIA.



                       IV.      CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



A.     Conclusions


45.             The EIA process required and supported by the Bank has often resulted in
successful identification, design, and mitigation of major environmental impacts as tracked
through the project cycle and verified by the Mission's site inspections. The study projects are
generally in compliance with environmental protection regulations and guidelines of the
respective DMCs, even though the mandate and capacity of each EMA to regulate and monitor
project EMM may be low. Often, these mitigation measures requiring foreign exchange are
undertaken because the Bank provides funding for that purpose. However, related local
expenditure to provide training for maintaining and monitoring these measures are often
delayed until the plant is well into the operational phase. This may be due to lack of counterpart
funds, unrealistic cost estimates, or the lower priority given to EMM than to plant construction
and operations.

46.            Under the existing internal business process and operational procedure, the
Bank cannot routinely assess whether or not a project is in compliance with DMC environmental
protection legislation and, therefore, in accordance with the covenants of a loan agreement, at
any stage of the project cycle. Availability of such a system enables the Bank to advise and
assist executing agencies in selecting and implementing the most effective EMM for existing
and future projects. Key issues for evaluation of the success of EMM of Bank projects would
require clear analysis and reporting of (i) what will be monitored; (ii) what standards or
procedures will be used; (iii) who will do it; (iv) how it will be reported; and (v) what Bank actions
are taken when a project does not satisfy expectations. The goal of EMM evaluation will be to
establish a transparent environmental audit trail through the Bank project planning,
development, implementation, completion, and postproject review cycles. Environmental
performance measurement criteria can be agreed upon on a country, sector, subsector, or


1      Public participation is required to win awards in Indonesia's nationwide Clean Cities (ADIPURA) Program.
                                           24


project basis--within the Bank, with the borrower, and in line with the EMA standards and
procedures of the respective DMC.
                                                 25



47.            Environmental personnel, management plans, and monitoring programs have
had variable success in applying EMM during operations phases in the study DMCs. At the
start-up of operations, the power plants generally did not have all the required mitigation
measures in place, but most plants were working toward this goal. However, environmental
quality monitoring, effluent, and emissions monitoring studies do not always result in significant
changes to plant operations and management, even if noncompliance of required EMM is
noted. For most case study plants, the accountability to take follow-up actions when the plant is
not meeting the required regulations lies with the plant manager. The EMOP would indicate
which actions are necessary, but forcing the plant to take action becomes unrealistic (especially
if this means closure of some plant components) if the EMA is not vigilant. In the study
countries, the provincial EMAs do not have adequate capacity, training, means, or the incentive
to bear such responsibility. Monitoring is also often done to fulfill a legal requirement both by the
plant and by the EMA.

48.            The study concludes that environmental protection needs greater attention in the
planning and feasibility study stage, including broader consideration of technologies and
systems for pollution prevention, by-product utilization, waste minimization, energy efficiency,
water conservation, and system cost-effectiveness and O&M requirements. Site location,
technology, and management expertise are the most important factors affecting the success of
EMM. The scope and timing of the EIA of the study projects indicate that EMM were often
designed after the site and the technologies for the plant had been selected.

49.           Several of the study plants experienced problems due to improper planning.
These included waste (ash) disposal problems as a result of reduced demand; overestimation
of demand for environmental improvements generated by the plant (i.e., district heating,
wastewater, or sewage treatment); and inadequate space to install FGD equipment required by
new regulations.

50.            Implementation of EMM during the construction phase appeared to be weak
especially because the plant operator and the EMA applied little pressure on the contractor to
undertake these measures. Therefore, a lower priority was assigned to EMM. Often, the cost
escalations incurred and emphasis to meet construction deadlines compromised the budget
available for EMM and the monitoring of related activities.

51.             From the plant's perspective, most case study examples (except those in India)
used cost-effective technology to reduce the major adverse impacts of power generation. Even
in the study plants in India, the choice of local coal over imported coal (although not cost
effective), is not excessive when spread over the 25-year life of the plant, and may be justified
to achieve the social benefits of employment generation and savings of foreign exchange. From
the broad perspective of a cluster of industrial plants operating in a watershed or an airshed, the
power plants may be able to provide their excess capacity on a fee-for-services basis to other
users.

52.            The role of public awareness and public participation in EMM compliance differs
in DMCs, sectors, and projects. Public promotion and awareness campaigns during design, as
well as implementation can help realize targeted goals for environmental achievements. Greater
public participation can improve design, operation, and monitoring of EMM, and increased
transparency can lead to greater responsiveness and flexibility in the face of changing
circumstances.
                                                    26


53.           The urban development projects studied had similar problems/issues with
respect to EMM as for the thermal power generation projects. These included inadequate
consideration of alternatives at the design stage, overestimating the demand for environmental
services, as well as problems with monitoring EMM and enforcing compliance with them.


B.     Recommendations


54.            The Bank should consider more detailed itemizing and earmarking greater
portions of a loan or project financing to implement EMM.1 The possibility of doing this in
foreign currency, and/or establishing an escrow in local currency for the implementation of EMM
and monitoring of such, needs to be explored.

55.           The study recommends that the Bank develop and implement an EMM
evaluation and reporting system for sensitive projects on a project-specific basis. The EMM
evaluation and reporting system should become an operational procedure with necessary staff
assignments, budget, evaluation criteria, and Bank review and reporting methods.

56.             The Bank should promote regular (annual) external audits of the large power
plants to ensure actual compliance with the regulations. The Bank should also continue to
develop the institutional capacity and the enforcement, compliance, and monitoring capability of
EMAs in varying degrees catering to each country's needs. Decentralization of enforcement
responsibilities to provinces needs to be accompanied by capacity building of the provincial
EMAs.

57.            The EIA should be done during the feasibility phase prior to finalizing the site and
type of technology. It should also include strategic, regional, and cumulative studies, as well as
risk assessment and emergency response planning for some projects. To the extent possible at
the planning stage, instead of addressing the impacts of specific projects, cost-effectiveness of
using a cluster approach to EMM should be explored; keeping in mind the institutional setup
and the legislative system of the country.

58.            Adequate attention needs to be given at the planning stage to prepare realistic
demand for environmental services and preparing contingency plans for EMM by conducting
public promotion campaigns, willingness-to-pay surveys, and using a forward looking approach
to evolving environmental regulations in DMCs.

59.             Plant operators need to carefully itemize the budget for EMM and build in penalty
schemes for contractors for failure to implement them; and should designate an environmental
inspector with the responsibility for enforcing regulations as indicated in the EMAP. Ongoing
work in the Bank also suggests that EMM be incorporated into the specifications and the bill of
quantities of the tender documents. In addition, the Bank should, for selected projects (i) ensure
that loan covenants relating to EMM are specifically itemized in the procurement documents
used to engage contractors; (ii) prequalify contractors who have demonstrated an ability to
comply with rigorous environmental loan covenants; (iii) ensure that the executing agency has
personnel who are committed to and trained for implementation of EMM; and (iv) engage either

1      Examples of earmarking funds for EMM have been prepared by the Bank's Office of Environment and Social
       Development. See ADB Environment Paper No. 12:Environmental Loan Covenants:Principles, Checklists,
       and Samples (December 1993).
                                               27


consultants or local NGOs to ensure that EMM are implemented as designed. Proper
documentation needs to be maintained to enable external auditors to verify that EMM were
implemented adequately. Establishment of a multipartite monitoring group (similar to that in the
Philippines), which would closely interact with the plant operator during the construction phase,
would further encourage implementation of the stipulated measures.

60.             To be cost-effective in a broader sense, designing of EMM should evaluate the
possibility of common wastewater treatment facilities, solid waste management systems, and
cogeneration plants, etc. However, institutional arrangements, coordination, and trust existing
between the parties sharing the same facilities, needs to be critically evaluated on a case-by-
case basis.

61.            The Bank should support public participation in all aspects of projects, especially
during project planning and design stage, including during the development of detailed terms of
reference for the EIA. Creation of a multipartite monitoring group would contribute to
accountability and transparency, as well as effectiveness of the EMM process. However,
mechanisms to provide funding for these environmental groups to work, travel, and participate
should be clearly determined. There is also a viable role for local NGOs in the participation
process for designing and implementing successful EMM.

62.            A separate study to evaluate the effectiveness of EMM in urban projects is not
required. Although conclusions of this study may not be specifically applicable to urban
development projects, general recommendations on planning, designing, implementing, and
monitoring of EMMs could be applicable to them as well.
