ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK                    SST:REG 99025




            SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY OF

              EFFECTIVENESS AND IMPACT

             OF ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

                 ASSISTANCE TO THE

      REFORM OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT

                          IN

               BHUTAN, INDIA, KIRIBATI,

        AND LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC




                     March 2000
                 ABBREVIATIONS




ADB    ­       Asian Development Bank
DMC    ­       Developing member country
MFEP   ­       Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
NAO    ­       National Audit Office
PDMC   ­       Pacific developing member country
SWOT   ­       strengths, weakness, opportunities, and threats
TA     ­       technical assistance




                         NOTE
        In this report "$" refers to US dollars.



       Operations Evaluation Office, SS­35
                                      CONTENTS


                                                       Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                         ii

I.     BACKGROUND                                         1
       A.    Governance at ADB                            1
       B.    Public Expenditure Management at ADB         1
       C.    Selected Technical Assistance                3
II.    EVALUATION DESIGN                                  1
       A.    Objective                                    1
       B.    Issues and Indicators                        2
       C.    Information Sources and Data Collection      2
III.   CAPACITY BUILDING                                  1
       A.    Ownership                                    2
       B.    Capacity Mapping                             4
       C.    Action Plan for Implementing Change          5
IV.    GOVERNANCE: PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT          1
       A.    Efficiency                                   2
       B.    Effectiveness                                3
       C.    Transparency                                 4
       D.    Accountability                               4
V.     CONCLUSIONS                                        1
       A.    Results                                      1
       B.    Key Issues                                   3
APPENDIXES                                                5
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        Public expenditure management is a key instrument for ensuring sound development
management and good governance. Asian Development Bank (ADB) recognizes that public
expenditure management is a core function of governments and that external assistance needs
to focus on building governments' capacities to fulfill these functions. Therefore, ADB developed
its focus on capacity building concomitantly with its increased attention to governance issues.

        The evaluation was designed to analyze which aspects of the public expenditure
management cycle ADB's technical assistance (TA) addresses and which approaches it uses
for building capacities. The evaluation chose a cross section of TAs from four countries as case
studies for illustrative purposes. In Bhutan, a series of four TAs aimed to strengthen the capacity
of the Ministry of Finance to efficiently monitor, manage, and account for public sector
resources. Assistance to the government of Gujarat, India, was provided to cover resource
generation and expenditure aspects, the latter comprising assistance to improve the budget and
for the reform of state-owned enterprises. In Kiribati, assistance was provided to improve
financial and economic management by addressing the range of macroeconomic policy making,
investment management, and budgeting. In the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR),
a TA grant was given to help with the country's economic and financial management, while a
second TA was provided to set up an oversight function.

       "Ownership" is one of the key ingredients to develop capacities. Little documentation is
available to illustrate the extent of analyses of ownership issues during TA design. Such
analyses should include identifying the "owners" of the reform process and those who might
oppose it, analyzing whether the reform agenda of the owners concurs with ADB's objectives,
and identifying manifestations of commitment to change. In India, the Gujarat State Finance
Commission identified even before ADB's TA was designed that previous budget reform
proposals had not been implemented. These insights should have been used to analyze the
reasons for resisting reforms and whether/how ADB's TA could overcome such hurdles. Failing
to do so resulted in a lack of ownership and commitment to the TA. Counterparts often cannot
determine the need for capacity building. A process of policy dialogue and capacity mapping,
which helps to identify existing capacities and areas that require reform, is essential to build
ownership of the subsequent capacity building process.

        Capacity mapping entails a thorough analysis of the agencies involved in the public
expenditure management process, their functions and tasks, their interaction and
communication, the resources allocated to them, and their normative and societal contexts.
Resources allocated for TA design are minimal, thus a comprehensive capacity mapping
exercise cannot be done. The typical TA design describes the functions of counterparts without
detailed analysis of the causes of shortcomings, process inefficiencies, power structures, and
communication gaps, or a clear description of how the counterparts are expected to function.
On the positive side, TAs tend to recognize the need to involve more than one core agency,
although assistance to others is limited to participation in brief workshops, which are insufficient
to address the range of capacity building issues that need to be considered.

        The TAs typically did not develop a comprehensive action plan for implementing change,
which would include priorities (reforms that are needed before others can be introduced
effectively), sequencing, and interim targets. Instead, the default approach is to recruit
consultants who prepare reports, develop and document tools, and train counterparts. Because
the tools often focus on narrow areas such as macroeconomic modeling or computerization of
                                                iii


budget releases, the extent to which public expenditure management capacities are built is
meager. The TAs usually assist only a small segment of capacity building requirements, which
is largely insufficient to bring about significant improvements in the public expenditure
management process.

        The public expenditure management process involves policy making; budget
instructions; budget proposals; budget approval; budget execution; and controls, such as audit
and evaluation. Governance criteria that ADB adopted and that relate to the budget cycle
include efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability.

        Efficiency can relate to the use of public resources, which is the most common way to
consider efficiency in the context of public expenditure management, or in terms of process
efficiency. ADB's assistance tends to concentrate on process efficiencies, as illustrated by the
following three examples. The TAs in Kiribati and the Lao PDR could increase the efficiency of
macroeconomic policy making by providing modeling tools that could help analyze policy
options. Problems were experienced because the models were implemented in isolation, lacking
capacities on the input side to provide requisite data and on the output side to actually use the
results produced with the modeling tools. The former hampers the extent to which the models
can function, putting staff members who run the models into a difficult situation. The latter
impedes the effectiveness of the TAs. The budget approval process in Bhutan has become
more efficient because the computerized system enables faster comparison of new proposals,
previous allocations, and actual expenditures.

        By introducing an output budget format in Kiribati, the TA increased the potential for
greater effectiveness in resource allocation. However, the absence of costing standards makes
it unclear how programs are designed and how decisions on resource allocations are made.
Effective budget execution requires that actual expenditures do not exceed original allocations.
The TA in Bhutan and a complementary bilateral TA in Kiribati could help improve expenditure
control in that they have computerized the budget execution process, and thus immediately
identify areas of overspending. However, better budget control does not automatically result
from this because overexpenditures can easily be justified with supplementary budget requests
that are typically granted.

        The macroeconomic modeling tools introduced by the TAs in Kiribati and the Lao PDR
could contribute to greater transparency in the policy-making process. However, because the
models do not operate fully due to the lack of input data and policymakers tend to ignore the
models' results, the models have not made the basis for decision-making more transparent. The
output budget in Kiribati can increase transparency in allocating and using funds by linking
financial resources to what they should attain. To achieve this link requires costing standards for
outputs to be transparent and actual results to be evaluated some time after the budget was
executed. The TAs cover neither of these two aspects.

         The TAs in Kiribati and the Lao PDR could increase the accountability of policy making
by illustrating whether and how policy choices were substantiated and whether policies resulted
in expected developmental impacts. The output budget in Kiribati might contribute to greater
accountability in budget preparation and execution provided the output budget is accompanied
by actually giving people the authority required to prepare and implement the portion of the
budget for which they are responsible, and by holding them accountable. The National Audit
Office (NAO) set up through the TA in the Lao PDR should contribute to greater accountability.
The TA is not yet completed; the extent to which NAO will become effective depends on the
resources and authority allocated to it.
                                                iv


        ADB's understanding of capacity building has not evolved to fit the modern concept of
capacity building, which goes beyond institutional development and training (para. 0). This
assessment is more obvious and understandable for older TAs, but the observation applies
equally to the more recent TAs. Among the sample TAs, the design has not changed
significantly since internal reviews (para. 0) were made in 1992 and 1994. One of the main
weaknesses of the TAs in terms of capacity building efforts is their focus on one agency (or
sometimes involving some staff from other agencies but that as participants in workshops),
which is insufficient for building capacities. Failing to identify (through capacity mapping and an
analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) and deal with interinstitutional
relationships (and the normative and societal contexts), the TAs are unable to generate an
understanding of and plan for addressing systemic issues, rendering even technically sound
TAs ineffective. Further compounding the situation is the limited time and lack of resources
allocated for the complex process of capacity building. ADB's initial staff guidelines on capacity
building could have been used to contribute to fostering a broader understanding of the concept
and of the resources required for working in this area.

        None of the TAs took a comprehensive approach to analyzing the budget cycle as a
whole and assessing it against ADB's governance criteria. As a result, the TAs addressed a
variety of issues but overlooked ways in which public expenditure management as a whole can
be improved. The effectiveness of the TAs was limited by their narrow approach, as
complementary activities were required to gain the full potential of improving the budget cycle.
                                    I.      BACKGROUND


A.     Governance at ADB

1.       Governance issues have been an explicit part of Asian Development Bank's (ADB)
agenda since the early 1990s, when strategic planning documents included various aspects that
today fall within the understanding of governance. The various medium-term strategic
frameworks highlight the importance of sound development management, including the effective
and efficient use of public resources, and accountability and transparency of processes for this
purpose. Public expenditure management is a key instrument to ensure sound development
management. Public expenditure management links macroeconomic policy decisions to budget
priorities, and manifests governments' decisions on investments and outlays on regular
operating expenses. Through executing the budget, governments control access to resources
(and power), and determine their distribution, geographically and across sectors. Preparing and
executing a budget involves the ministry of finance at the center; line ministries and agencies to
design and implement their programs; and the head of state and cabinet to approve and
oversee the budget; and oversight agencies, such as auditors and evaluators. This range of
participants involved in national and subnational budget processes necessitates a capacity
building approach (para. 0).

2.      ADB recognizes that sound development management and, by association, public
expenditure management are the core business of governments, even if external agencies
provide advice and assistance for preparing the budget and influence priorities through their
funding choices. Thus, ADB increased its focus on capacity building, concomitantly with its
governance agenda, to provide its developing member countries (DMCs) assistance for
expanding required competencies whenever needed. The evaluation focuses on capacity
building provided through technical assistance (TA).

B.     Public Expenditure Management at ADB

3.      From 1986 to 1989, ADB approved 39 TAs for $20 million for public expenditure
management. ADB's assistance concentrated on small DMCs, largely in the Pacific for which 22
projects worth $9 million were approved. Three countries in transition were assisted with eight
TAs for $7 million. Only one large DMC, India, received TA for public expenditure management
at the state level. Most TAs aimed to address a range of interrelated aspects of public
expenditure management, including policy analysis, results-based budgeting, budget
formulation and management, domestic and foreign resource mobilization and management,
accounting, management information systems, and audit. ADB does not have an explicit
comprehensive program that would define the conceptual framework for providing assistance to
the reform of public expenditure management.

4.      From the 39 TAs, a sample of TAs in four countries was selected (Bhutan, India, Kiribati,
and Lao PDR) that represents, to the extent possible, the diverse institutional settings in which
this type of TA was provided. Bhutan and Kiribati received a series of TAs, allowing longer-term
cooperation to be compared with the short-term one time assistance. India is an interesting case
because assistance was given at the state rather than the national level, as in the three other
countries, thus allowing analysis of linkages between central and decentralized governments as
they relate to ADB's TAs. The TA in India was provided in conjunction with a program loan,
                                                               2


providing insights into the effectiveness of this combination. Kiribati,1 and other Pacific DMCs
(PDMCs), faces special challenges resulting from small institutions where the loss of even one
qualified staff member has a significant impact, making capacity building in any area difficult.
The Lao PDR, as a transition economy, faces similar challenges of staff turnover combined with
the demands of reforming its public administration in an increasingly open economy. ADB
assistance in the Lao PDR included establishing a national audit office to ensure effective
monitoring and control, contrasting the example of India where the revenue side was included.
Table 1 provides basic data on the TAs.

                          Table 1: Basic Data for Selected Technical Assistance
                                                  ($`000)

TA No.         TA Title                               Approved Completed           Estimated Cost              Actual
                                                                                ADB    Others    Total         Costa
0970-BHU       Institutional Strengthening of the     19 Apr       Dec 1990     230         0         230       203
               Department of National Budget and      1988
               Accounts of the Ministry of Finance
1487-BHU       Institutional Strengthening of the     20 Feb       Dec 1993       0       600 b       600       585
               Department of National Budget and      1991
               Accounts (Phase II)
1932-BHU       Strengthening the Ministry of          18 Aug       Jun 1995     100         0         100        94
               Finance                                1993
2691-BHU       Further Strengthening of the           17 Oct       May 1998     100         0         100        96
               Ministry of Finance                    1995
                                                                                430        600       1,030      977
                  Subtotal
2552-IND       Restructuring Program for State-       2 Apr        Apr 1998       0       600 b       600       591
               Owned Enterprises in Gujarat           1996
2668-IND       Gujarat's Reform of Public Finance     23 Oct       Feb 1999     600         0         600       291
                                                      1996
                                                                                600        600       1,200      882
                   Subtotal
1796-KIR       Technical Assistance to the Ministry   7 Dec        Dec 1993     100         0         100        91
               of Finance and Economic Planning       1992
                                                                                                b
1976-KIR       Institutional Assistance to the        10 Nov       Dec 1995       0        503        503       464
               Ministry of Finance and Economic       1993
               Planning
2657-KIR       Strengthening Institutional Capacity   7 Oct        Feb 1999     600         0         600       913
               for Financial and Economic             1996
               Management
               Supplementary TA to TA 2657-KIR        14 Jul                    380         0         380        0
                                                      1998
                                                                               1,080       503       1,583     1,468
                  Subtotal
                                                                                                 c
2047-LAO       Strengthening Economic and             23 Dec       Feb 1999     514        683       1,197     1,172
               Financial Management                   1993
2987-LAO       Establishing the National Audit        9 Feb        ongoing      400         0         400       260
               Office                                 1998
                                                                                914        683       1,597     1,432
                  Subtotal
            TOTAL                                                              3,024      2,386      5,410     4,760
TA = Technical Assistance.
a
  Disbursement up to July 1999.

1
    The evaluation did not include more PDMCs because the Office of Pacific Operations separately reviewed its reform
    programs, resulting in the report Assessment of Bank Assistance for Reform Programs in the Pacific, July 1999. To
    avoid overlaps, the evaluation focused on one of the PDMCs not included in the review. Many of the findings reported
    in the assessment coincide with the evaluation findings presented in this report.
                                                           3

b
 Japan Special Fund.
c
 United Nations Development Programme.
Sources: Technical assistance papers and technical assistance information system.

5.      The TAs were selected as case studies to illustrate which aspects of public expenditure
management and capacity building are addressed through ADB assistance and to analyze how
effective the TAs were in attaining governance and capacity building goals. However, this
evaluation does not follow a typical approach and does not aim to rate the TAs' performance.

C.         Selected Technical Assistance

6.      In Bhutan, a series of four TAs2 aimed to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Finance to "efficiently monitor, manage and account for public sector resources." When the first
project was developed, the Government had introduced a budget format that distinguished cost
centers and overhead costs, specific programs, and identifiable program objectives. The first TA
focused on issues related to human resources needed for budgeting and accounting, and the
management and control of expenditures related to public sector corporations and enterprises
and foreign debt servicing. The second TA aimed to streamline the accounting system,
emphasizing its computerization. The subsequent two small-scale TAs built on the second TA
and had the objective to enhance and maintain the computerized system, with the last TA
completed in May 1998.

7.      Two TAs3 were approved to assist the government of Gujarat, India.4 The first TA aimed
to support the process of overhauling state-owned enterprises, which was expected to positively
affect public expenditure. The second TA aimed, among other things,5 to strengthen the public
finances of Gujarat by building the Finance Department's capacities for budget policy, planning,
management, and control systems. The second TA was not limited to budgeting and
expenditure management, but also aimed to reform the existing taxation system (revenue
generation). The TA's objective was "to support the public finances in Gujarat through structural
reforms of tax and expenditure systems ... by (i) building institutional capacities of the Finance
Department to improve budget policy, planning, management, and control systems; and (ii)
modernizing and computerizing of the tax and expenditure departments to effectively improve
policy enforcement and compliance."6 The TAs were completed in April 1998 and February
1999.

8.       Three TAs7 were provided to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MFEP) of
Kiribati. All three aimed to improve financial and economic management, cutting across issues

2
    TA 0970-BHU: Institutional Strengthening of the Department of National Budget and Accounts of the Ministry of
    Finance, for $230,000, approved on 19 April 1988. TA 1487-BHU: Institutional Strengthening of the Department of
    National Budget and Accounts of the Ministry of Finance (Phase II), for $600,000, approved on 20 February 1991. TA
    1932-BHU: Strengthening the Ministry of Finance, for $100,000, approved on 18 August 1993, and TA 2691-BHU:
    Further Strengthening of the Ministry of Finance, for $100,000, approved on 17 October 1995.
3
    TA 2552-IND: Restructuring Program for State-Owned Enterprises in Gujarat, for $600,000, approved on 2 April 1996.
    TA 2668-IND: Gujarat's Reform of Public Finance, for $600,000, approved on 23 October 1996.
4
    ADB is currently assisting another state in India with TA 2943-IND: Support for the Government of Mahya Pradesh
    Public Finance Reform, for $780,000, approved on 15 December 1997. The TA's implementation was delayed and
    progress was insufficient at evaluation to justify including the TA in this report.
5
    The TA strongly focused on revenue generation and taxation, which are not subject to this evaluation.
6
    TA 2668-IND (footnote 3), para. 9.
7
    TA 1796-KIR: Technical Assistance to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, for $100,000, approved on 7
    December 1992. TA 1976-KIR: Institutional Assistance to Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, for $503,000,
    approved on 10 November 1993. TA 2657-KIR: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Financial and Economic
    Management, for $600,000, approved on 7 October 1996.
                                                       4


such as macroeconomic policy, investment management, and budgeting, including program or
results-based budgeting. Consultants of initial TAs fulfilled staff functions at the ministry. Later
TAs emphasized on developing the ministry's own competencies, which translated into capacity
building assistance for three divisions, two of which were directly related to public expenditure
management. The Macroeconomics and Public Finance Division was expected to provide the
macroeconomic framework for national development planning and annual budgeting. The
division's other responsibilities also included "advising the Budget Management Division on the
fiscal strategy and confirming the reasonableness of the revenue estimates and the expenditure
limits."8 The new Budget Management Division was made responsible for the annual budget
cycle, assisting the Cabinet in setting expenditure priorities, reviewing annual budget
submissions, and monitoring revenue and expenditure levels. The last TA was completed in
February 1999.

9.      In the Lao PDR, the TA for strengthening of economic and financial management9 was
part of an umbrella project financed jointly by the United Nations Development Programme and
ADB. The entire project had five components, with ADB focusing on two: planning and policy
coordination, and public investment programming. The Government was responsible for the
program coordination and aid coordination components, while the International Monetary Fund
was to implement the public expenditure management component. The TA envisaged that ADB
would "assist in the formulation of a coherent, comprehensive, and fully integrated framework
for the country's economic and financial management within the context of a planning,
programming, budgeting, and financing process."10 The TA was completed in February 1997.
The TA for establishing a national audit office (NAO)11 was approved in response to the
recognized need for external audit services "to determine the faithfulness and economy of
expenditures and the correctness of Government receipts. In respect of the Government's
development projects, especially those assisted by external agencies, it has been felt that audit
is needed to validate the effectiveness and efficiency of project performance and to determine
whether value has been obtained for investment....The objectives of the TA are to assist the
Government in its effort to establish an independent [national] audit office (NAO) and to develop
plans to augment NAO's capacity at the initial stage of its operations."12 The TA is ongoing.




8
   TA 1976-KIR (footnote 7), para. 7.
9
   TA 2047-LAO: Strengthening Economic and Financial Management, for $514,000, approved on 23 December 1993.
10
   TA 2047-LAO (footnote 9), para. 4.
11
   TA 2987-LAO: Establishing the National Audit Office, for $400,000, approved on 9 February 1998.
12
   TA 2987-LAO (footnote 11), paras. 3 and 10.
                                II.     EVALUATION DESIGN


A.     Objective

10.     The objective of the evaluation is to assess which governance elements the TAs
covered (para. 0) and the effectiveness of the TAs' capacity building approaches (para. 0). The
insights derived will help to improve the understanding of how ADB's approach to these
dimensions could be enhanced. The findings of the evaluation are expected to help ADB staff
design future assistance of this nature, and counterparts and consultants implement TAs
effectively. This objective corresponds to the concern for the quality of governance projects and
the desire to avoid mistakes and take corrective action, as soon as necessary. The scope of the
evaluation involves 11 TA case studies (paras. 0-0).
                                                            2



B.         Issues and Indicators

11.     Capacity building efforts of the TAs are evaluated against three main aspects: ownership
(participation), an analysis of existing capacities and identification of desired future ones
(capacity mapping or a systematic analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
[SWOT]), and an implementation plan for the reform process. The expression of ownership is
traced in the design and implementation stages, and in the extent to which the government
accepted and implemented suggested changes to the budget system. Capacity mapping and
the action plan for implementing change typically take the form of reports or written statements,
whether as part of the TA design or as a TA output, which is assessed in terms of availability
(whether it has been done), and quality. Appendix 1 provides specific questions concerning
these three dimensions and indicators.

12.    For evaluating the public expenditure management process several dimensions of
governance are considered: (i) efficiency; (ii) effectiveness; (iii) transparency; and (iv)
accountability, the latter two being means for attaining greater efficiency and fiscal discipline.
The four dimensions reflect aspects of ADB's governance concept, expressed in its medium-
term strategic frameworks, which are applicable to public expenditure management. The
evaluation aims to identify on which of these governance dimensions the TAs focused, which
areas of the public expenditure management process the TAs addressed, and what type of
approaches the TAs used to introduce changes. The assessment against governance indicators
involves quantitative analysis (provided baseline and current operating data are available) and
comparative analyses of documents and processes. The TAs performance against these criteria
is evaluated only if the TAs aimed to address that particular area. Appendix 2 provides
performance criteria.

C.         Information Sources and Data Collection

13.     The evaluation started with developing the methodology and revising it as necessary
while reviewing relevant TA papers and reports, correspondence, and other materials that
document governments' follow-up action taken on TA recommendations. The review served as
preparation for visits to the four DMCs, where discussions were held with representatives of the
counterparts and other agencies associated with the public expenditure management process.
The Bhutan case study was conducted in October 1998,13 while field visits to the other countries
were conducted in July 1999. The draft report was circulated to counterparts in DMCs and
within ADB for comments.




13
     This case study was issued as a separate report: TE-24: BHU: Institutional Strengthening of the National Budget and
     Aid Coordination Division of the Ministry of Finance, December 1998.
                                       III.    CAPACITY BUILDING

14.      The concept of capacity building evolved from an earlier focus on institutional
development that comprised systems development (through consultants' services) and training
or human resource development. The concept was developed in recognition of the fact that
individuals and organizations do not operate in a vacuum and their interdependencies have an
important influence on their performance, individually and collectively as a system. Capacity
building is broader than institutional development in that it encompasses a variety of factors
such as participants, functions or tasks, resources, and normative and societal contexts.14 With
this holistic approach, capacity building interventions have the potential to address systemic
issues at macro (political and societal support, and public policy), meso (organizational,
institutional, and interorganizational), and micro (individual) levels.15

15.      Methods for capacity building include participatory approaches to ensure ownership and
to help understand interdependencies between participants. Capacity mapping is one form of
systematic analysis that enables the participants in the capacity building process to arrive at a
strategic option of optimally sequenced actions by the government and interventions by external
agencies. Such a SWOT analysis includes reviewing the network of interrelated organizations
and bottlenecks, and identifying the possibilities for capacity building. The change process
involves building political, public, and institutional support for change, sometimes requiring
attitudinal changes; developing missing or inadequate links between participants, and
enhancing each participant's capability to contribute to the system's overall functioning. A
process approach, rather than a fixed set of inputs and terms of reference, is often needed to
ensure flexibility for responding to changing requirements in a dynamic capacity building
process, and to allow adequately timed sequencing of interventions.

16.      ADB's Interdepartmental Review Committee on Technical Assistance Operations16 and
of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality17 found TAs to be inadequate in attaining
institutional development or capacity building targets as they did not address underlying and
systemic issues. The Strategy and Planning Office subsequently undertook an informal review
and found that requisite analyses were not conducted rigorously, assistance was too short to
have an institutional impact, and TAs rarely identified or monitored tangible measures of
success. In implementing TAs, training and hardware requirements were emphasized too much,
and consultants were not always capacity building specialists. Initial guidelines18 for capacity
building were introduced in 1995 to ensure that this area of critical need in DMCs is addressed
more systematically, professionally, and effectively. These concerns guided the analysis of the
TAs' performance, while adding a focus on ownership as an important ingredient for capacity
building.19




14
   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1995. Development Assistance Committee on Capacity
   Development in the Environment, Developing Environmental Capacity: A Framework for Donor Involvement. Paris.
   Even though the framework was developed for environmental capacities, it can be applied to capacity building in
   general.
15
   Qualman, Ann and Joe Bolger. 1996. Capacity Development: A Holistic Approach to Sustainable Development.
   Development Express 8.
16
   Findings of the Interdepartmental Review Committee on Technical Assistance Operations, July 1992.
17
   Report of the Task Force on Improving Project Quality, January 1994.
18
   Initial Staff Guidelines on Bank's Capacity Building Services to DMCs, April 1995.
19
   The evaluation includes at least one TA in each country that was designed after these guidelines were issued.
                                                   2


A.      Ownership

17.     Ownership is one of the most critical ingredients for capacity building. Without
ownership, suggested capacity building approaches might not be appropriate or acceptable to
the agencies concerned, and thus would not be implemented. In developed countries the reform
of public expenditure management is often driven by the agencies themselves (when they face
financial constraints and are forced to improve efficiency), and by the public at large (when it
demands better but cheaper public services). DMC governments experience several forces that
drive the reform process, including the international agenda and a desire of DMCs to be among
the rewarded champions of change; multilateral and bilateral agencies, through policy dialogue
and interventions; enlightened leaders within a DMC's political and administrative systems; the
public sector; and to an increasing extent, the public at large. Not all these interest groups have
common views on the desired direction of change, which makes it difficult to develop common
ownership (particularly because more than one agency needs to be involved), and ensure
sufficient support for reforms.

18.     As an indication of ownership of the reform process, the evaluation aimed to identify the
origin of the TA ideas, because the originator is the main proponent of reforms. This was
problematic because institutional memory is weak and documentation often does not explain
whether the TA is an outcome of ADB's negotiation during country programming and loan
processing or whether the idea for requesting TA originated from the counterpart. While in both
cases the governments officially requested TA, an important difference exists: if ADB instigates
the TA, ADB may be trying to convince the agency to accept certain reforms, and thus would
need to build ownership. However, the agency that requests TA is likely to be already engaged
in a reform process and seeking additional assistance, indicating stronger ownership and
commitment to change.

19.      As part of its reforms, the Gujarat government appointed the Gujarat State Finance
Commission, which issued a report in 1994.20 The commission suggested, among other things,
implementing a combination of zero-based and output budgeting to ensure optimum use of
limited resources (p. 97, para. 12.4), which is in line with the TA's objectives to develop
budgetary planning, management, and controls.21 The commission noted that zero-based
budgeting had not been implemented despite an earlier effort to do so. This indicates the
Finance Department's limited support of these reforms, which in part can be explained by the
impermanence of senior staff in the lead department, and illustrates the need to build common
support for reforms even when its proponent comes from within the government. None of the
other three countries had such a comprehensive internal analysis of the need for reform. The
first TA in Bhutan (TA 970-BHU) indicated that the need for TA was identified by a counterpart
in the Ministry of Finance. However, once the consultants were appointed, their terms of
reference were changed and none of the original areas to be addressed by the TA were
sustained. In Kiribati and the Lao PDR, ADB and other multilateral agencies played a key role in
initiating the TAs. One of the most explicit examples is TA 2987-LAO, where the TA paper22
specifically states the instrumental role of ADB in determining the need for the NAO.
Counterparts do not always have the capability to identify the need for reform or capacity
building assistance, leaving it to external agencies to determine requirements and possibilities
for providing TA.

20
   This report was used when designing the policy matrix in Loan 1506-IND: Gujarat Public Sector Resource
   Management Program, for $250 million, approved on 18 December 1996.
21
   TA 2668-IND (footnote 3), para 10(v).
22
   TA 2987-LAO (footnote 11), para. 6.
                                                             3



20.     The authorship of TAs rests with ADB. Staff and consultants design TAs in consultation
with the recipient government. The extent to which such consultation requires or allows
counterparts to actively participate in the design process is hard to determine, but the
arrangement that ADB formulates the TA indicates that ADB's takes the lead.23 Counterparts
would be more involved and assume greater responsibility if they were required to prepare a
draft TA proposal when requesting assistance.

21.     The need for building ownership of the reform process is not explicit in the TA design
and during implementation depends on the efforts and attitude of counterparts and consultants.
Typically, workshops are used to present TAs, their objectives, and their outputs to counterparts
and sometimes a wider audience. However, the extent to which such workshops generate
ownership is limited when the consultants (or ADB) are perceived to drive TA agenda rather
than the counterparts.

22.     During implementation, ownership of the TAs evolved with considerable variations. In
Bhutan, there was little institutional memory of the first TA, which had little counterpart
involvement. By contrast, the second group of TAs involved counterpart staff through training in
the use of computers in general and of the budget system in particular, and for system's
maintenance. This extent of ownership resulted from the TAs developing a system that eased
the daily work routines of counterpart staff, thus meeting an identified need. In India, a high-level
committee that was supposed to have supervised and given requisite weight to the consultants'
work under TA 2668-IND was not appointed until the TA had been completed. Counterparts and
offices were not made available until several months into the consultants' contract. This was
contrasted by the experience of TA 2552-IND, where the consultants worked within the
appropriate framework of the technical secretariat. However, the value of the TA lay in
producing reports needed by the technical secretariat with lesser emphasis on institutional
development. In Kiribati, ownership manifested itself differently; consultants typically became
part of MFEP's staff and supported the ministry by producing requisite policy and other
documents. Counterpart staff was assigned to work with the consultants, but their limited
number and high turnover rate were not conducive to developing ownership or building
capacities. In the Lao PDR, the consultants of TA 2047-LAO trained lower level staff to use a
macroeconomic forecasting model without involving higher level staff, which limited their
understanding of and interest in using the projections of the macroeconomic model. The
information system developed under the same TA is suffering from the lack of required data
inputs from other agencies that were not involved in the TA. Stronger ownership exists of the TA
to assist NAO, where staff was assigned to participate in training and case study audits.

23.    The ownership of TA implementation is mirrored in the acceptance of results. Where
TAs produced a tool that was useful to the counterpart, ownership developed. This was the
case in Bhutan, where the computerized system eases daily work routines. To some extent, the
same thing happened with the macroeconomic model developed in the Lao PDR. The
counterparts developed some ownership of the model, but the interest of decision makers was
not the same as in Bhutan, so demand for the model and its results remains low. In Kiribati,
MFEP accepted the output budget format, but the extent to which it has been internalized will
remain unknown until the budget is prepared without external assistance and executed. The

23
      "Participation is sometimes equated with consultation--but consultation often falls short of empowerment which is
     necessary for capacity development. Consultation can range from listening, to dialogue, to debate, to joint analysis,
     and to joint agreed solutions. Empowerment asks stakeholders to take responsibility for change..." Qualman, Ann and
     Joe Bolger. 1996. Capacity Development: A Holistic Approach to Sustainable Development. Development Express 8.
                                                            4


reports produced under the TAs to Kiribati and TA 2552-IND were welcomed and used by the
respective agencies, because the consultants' reports filled an existing reporting gap. However,
this use of reports does not necessarily indicate ownership of a reform process and certainly
does not imply any capacity building. These examples of full or partial ownership are contrasted
with the example of the reform TA in India (TA 2668-IND) that produced reports that will
eventually be reviewed by the high-level committee, which should have been in place during
implementation.24 This review might be useful but is less effective than if the consultants had
been advising a body authorized to make reform decisions and ensure their implementation.
The administration politely acknowledges the existence of the consultants' report. However,
interest in implementing recommendations is limited by their quality (para. 0) and cognizance of
what the recommendations entail.

B.       Capacity Mapping

24.     The holistic perspective of capacity building requires a comprehensive SWOT analysis
of the capacity components and their interrelationship (para. 0) to identify the origins of
shortcomings and their causes.25 Such analyses should entail a review of the functions (such as
service provision, policy analysis, and formulation; networking and information flow; and
decision making); the people who perform such functions; and the normative underpinnings and
the societal context in which the participants operate. For instance, deciding on macroeconomic
policies requires tools for planners to use to improve their understanding of the effects of
various choices and consideration of other influences on the decision-making process that might
render a modeling tool ineffective. Comprehensive capacity mapping would also facilitate
coordination among external agencies.

25.     The TAs26 were reviewed to identify whether they analyzed capacity components. All
TAs described the functions of the counterpart, although shortcomings are discussed in a
cursory manner without detailed analysis of the causes or a clear description of how functions
should be ideally performed. The brevity of these descriptions is in part due to an implicit
assumption that "ideal functions" should be self-understood, and because problems are
attributed to shortages in staff and/or deficiencies in their skills. The analyses do not consider
other potential problems, such as process inefficiencies, power structures, and communication
gaps. This problem is also reflected in the resource analysis, which mentions the lack of staff
and/or skills, but none of the other resources (informational, financial, and technological). None
of the TAs provide details on the resources required to perform the envisaged functions.

26.     On the positive side, many TAs recognized in their design the need to involve more than
the core agency to ensure capacity building, although none of them analyzed whether agencies
interacted in an appropriate and conducive way to the public expenditure management process.
This would be necessary to understand cooperation and communication gaps that impede the
functioning of interinstitutional and intrainstitutional systems. For instance, in the Lao PDR,
controversies among the agencies involved in managing the country's resources impeded the
performance of one of the TAs. This problem could have been identified through capacity


24
   Although it was not, the loan could have been used as leverage to ensure an earlier appointment of the committee.
25
   Mackay, Keith. 1999. Diagnostic Guide and Action Framework. Evaluation Capacity Development, Working Paper
   Series No. 6: World Bank. The publication provides a step-by-step diagnostic process for identifying opportunities to
   develop evaluation capacities and provides useful suggestions for capacity mapping. The guide is directly relevant to
   public expenditure management of which evaluation is integral.
26
   Small-scale TAs were not included in this review because their design is limited to one paragraph, which is insufficient
   to provide details necessary for capacity mapping and designing a capacity building project.
                                                            5


mapping and would have required capacity building assistance rather than trying to enable
individual agencies (or departments within them) to perform specific tasks that might overlap.

27.      Regarding the normative context, most TA papers describe the reform efforts of
governments, but none analyze whether the context is conducive to reform. In India, for
instance, it was clear during TA design that impediments existed to implementing reforms as
evidenced in the report of the Gujarat State Finance Commission (para. 0). But these
impediments were not recognized in the TA, although this would have been instrumental for
assessing the potential for the TA's success. In addition, capacity mapping would have
illustrated the extent to which budget reforms were possible at the state level, as the federal
Government standardizes and prescribes rules for budget preparation and execution. The
societal context of TAs and the reform process typically is not evaluated in detail during the TA
design or early implementation stage. Appendix 3 summarizes the extent to which TAs' mapped
existing capacities.

C.         Action Plan for Implementing Change

28.     The TAs involved only limited efforts to provide action plans for change that identify
requisite interventions and their sequencing. Ideally, such a plan should contain actions that
need to be taken with interim targets and be based on an understanding of which changes must
be introduced first before others can be effective. This observation is particularly relevant to
situations where a series of TAs were extended without having an overall framework for doing
so, which renders the TAs piecemeal. The frequently adopted default approach was to recruit
consultants who prepared reports and sometimes tools (such as computerized systems or
macroeconomic models), documented the systems, and trained counterparts in using the
systems.

29.     In their implementation, the TAs focused largely on their main counterpart, partly
because of resource constraints and possibly due to a limited understanding of the need for
interaction between agencies. This approach is typical for institutional development rather than
capacity building. For instance, an information system based in the central budget office may
remain ineffective if requisite data to feed into the system is not available or unreliable. ADB-
assisted macroeconomic models in Kiribati and the Lao PDR are facing this problem. They
cannot be used fully because input data is missing. Similarly, the preparation of an output-based
budget cannot be limited to the central budget office because line ministries and decentralized
agencies need to be involved in rethinking the budget preparation and execution. Otherwise,
central agencies might insist on or assist in preparing budget documents with declared
objectives and intended outcomes, which remain meaningless for the lack of understanding in
line ministries or at subnational levels. This is the case in Bhutan, where the program budget is
an annotated line item budget.27 In Kiribati, where the program budget was prepared with the
help of consultants, staff of various agencies participated in workshops to generate a better
understanding of the program budget. However, workshops were too short for a complex
management tool such as a program budget, which requires extended training for the concept
to become fully internalized.

30.    The less successful examples occurred where consultants prepared a report that
described or analyzed the current situation and made some suggestions for changes. Such

27
     ADB's TA focused on computerizing the budget system, which helps in keeping track of budget ceilings and
     supplementary budget requests that are frequently approved. The TA did not concern itself with the substance of the
     program budget or in helping to monitor and evaluate whether the intended outcomes were actually achieved.
                                                 6


performance falls short of building capacities as the counterpart is left to analyze, interpret, and
implement reports and their recommendations. This was the case with the first TA in Bhutan, for
which the reports are not available any more. In the budget policies and management part of the
public expenditure reform TA in India, the report makes general comments about the need for
reforms without providing a detailed action plan or concrete suggestions.
                   IV.      GOVERNANCE: PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT

31.    Public expenditure management is important to ensure sound development
management as it concerns the transparent and accountable allocation and use of public
resources. According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, "All
budget systems--reformed and traditional--have three basic budget tasks: (1) to maintain
aggregate fiscal discipline, (2) to allocate resources in accord with government priorities, and (3)
to promote the efficient delivery of services."28

32.     Public expenditure management involves a series of steps that forms an annual budget
cycle. The dimensions of governance considered in this evaluation (efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, and accountability [para. 0]), have different implications for each of the steps. For
instance, transparency in policy making requires documentation of criteria and reasons for
making policy choices, whereas in the budget preparation process transparency manifests itself
in providing details on program choices and reasons for the resources allocated. The common
factor in the examples is the need to reveal underlying reasons for the choices exercised.
Appendix 4 provides an overview of the budget cycle and describes the meaning of each
governance dimension as related to the steps of the cycle.29

33.     Table 2 illustrates the areas addressed by the TAs and shows that no systematic
patterns exist in the types of assistance. Included in the table are areas where TAs have the
potential to assist, although these potentials might not have materialized. The evaluation
recognizes that the sample may not cover all areas, as it represents about 30 percent of the
TAs, randomly selected. The absence of a conceptual framework (para. 0) and related system,
identifying TAs depending on their coverage, would necessitate an in-depth analysis of all TAs
to ascertain which areas they covered and whether ADB assistance helps the entire range of
the public expenditure management cycle.
                                Table 2: Budget Cycle and Governance Dimensions


Budget Cycle                     Efficiency           Effectiveness          Transparency         Accountability

A.     Policy Making             Kiribati             --                     Kiribati             Kiribati
                                 Lao PDR                                     Lao PDR              Lao PDR
B. Budget Instructions           --                   --                     --                   --
C. Budget Proposals              Lao PDR              Kiribati               Kiribati             Kiribati
D. Budget Approval               Bhutan               Bhutan                 --                   --
                                                      India
E.     Budget Execution          Bhutan               Bhutan                 Bhutan               Bhutan
                                 India                India                  Kiribati             Kiribati
                                                      (Kiribati)                                  Lao PDR
F. Evaluation                    --                   --                     --                   --
-- = None.

34.    The above classification of the TAs is based on their design and implementation. The TA
design is not always explicit about the governance dimensions the TA intends to address, but
most often refers to generic efficiency gains. Therefore, actual implementation results were also

28
     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1999. Paris. The Changing Role of the Central Budget
     Office, Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, Public Management Service.
29
     A detailed description of the budget process and related performance issues can be found in Schiavo­Campo S., and
     D. Tommasi. 1999. Managing Government Expenditure. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
                                                                2


considered to classify the TAs. The TAs do not cover the entire budget cycle, and no help was
provided for issuing budget instructions and, more importantly, for measuring the performance
of the executed budget (Table 2). The following details on the performance of the TAs illustrate
a certain lack of a coherent framework, which links up with weaknesses in the capacity building
approach.

A.          Efficiency

35.    The TAs in Kiribati and the Lao PDR had the potential for increasing the efficiency of the
policy-making process. They developed macroeconomic models and databases for use in
analyzing macroeconomic conditions and policy options.

36.     In Kiribati, problems arose (and still do) at several levels. On the input side, the database
depends on information from the national statistical office, which provides data in such intervals
that quarterly economic reports are prepared with considerable delay or not prepared at all.
Staff in the planning office has changed twice since the implementation of TA 1976-KIR, which
introduced the economic reporting function.30 The current planning officer is familiar with the
database and the analytical tool. For example, after analyzing copra trade, prices, and
subsidies, the economic office calculated that funds set aside for subsidizing copra prices will be
depleted shortly. However, even when producing such reports, the policy office finds it difficult to
convince decision makers of the need to reduce subsidies. This difficulty is partly due to political
reasons, because cutting copra subsidies is unpopular politically, and partly due to a lack of
understanding on the part of decision makers. This example illustrates shortcomings that arise
from focusing on one agency without considering interrelationships with other participants. A
comprehensive capacity building approach may have recognized the need to develop the
understanding of the users of policy advice and the capacity to generate input data.

37.     The situation is similar in the Lao PDR, where the TA introduced a macroeconomic
model and trained some staff in its use. Staff turnover reduced the number of people running
the model to one. This person was absent for two years on overseas training, during which time
the model was not used. Apart from that, some of the data needed to run the model are not
available (recognized by the consultants who developed the model), therefore assumptions
must be made. The staff member is not experienced enough to make correct assumptions, so
the projections have been inaccurate, which limits their utility to decision makers who do not
give much credence to the model or policy options suggested with its help. Staff lacking
technical knowledge cannot adjust the model to the situation after the Asian economic crisis.
The second part of the TA introduced a management information system to increase the
efficiency of preparing and updating the public investment program. However, the system is
defunct due to a lack of input data from various sources. Instead of building the capacity of
these sources, assistance is being provided to another government unit to build a similar system
without linkages. Capacities for preparing the public investment program were not built as
evidenced by continued assistance provided for this purpose, such as a TA grant currently
processed by ADB.

38.     Efficiency improvements were experienced in Bhutan, where the TA computerized the
budget system, which helped speed up the comparative analysis of budget proposals and past
allocations and expenditure. The computerized analysis helps the Ministry of Finance to assess
whether budget requests are realistic in terms of spending capacity, and whether line ministries
and agencies propose large variations over their previous allotments. Timely feedback speeds

30
     The office is minimally staffed, which makes institutional development extremely difficult.
                                               3


up the budget preparation process. The second area in which the computer program improved
efficiency is in budget releases. The need to request supplementary budget allocations is
detected immediately, because the budget release system allows expenditure only up to the
approved budget ceiling. In addition, the processing time for issuing budget release letters has
been reduced from two weeks to one day.

39.      In India, the TA to reform state-owned enterprises could ensure more efficient use of
public resources by closing highly inefficient enterprises and reforming others. The TA
consultants analyzed 10 enterprises. The consultants' reports were reviewed by the technical
secretariat and revised for submission to the authorities for decision making. Apparently not all
suggestions were acceptable, and the exit packages for staff layoffs were revised. The process
is politically sensitive, and therefore time consuming. Since TA completion, decisions were
made to close three or four enterprises, and merge others. Actual efficiency gains remain to be
seen once divestments have been concluded.

B.     Effectiveness

40.     In Kiribati, TA 2657-KIR introduced a program budget format that could ensure effective
resource allocation during the preparation of budget proposals. While the 1999 budget
described desired outcomes and outputs and applicable performance standards, submissions
were not prioritized. Because no costing standards were developed (which would have
addressed the efficiency of resource use), it is not clear how programs are designed to fit
effectively within the budget ceiling.

41.    At the budget approval stage, the lack of prioritization necessitates that as soon as
budgets exceed earmarked amounts, they are cut across the board, something that is common
in most countries. Computerized budget systems can highlight when ceilings are exceeded but
cannot help in the setting of priorities or in the negotiation process that requires balancing
complex demands and pressures from various interest groups.

42.     Effective budget execution requires that actual expenditures do not exceed original
allocations. Instead of exercising financial discipline, supplementary budget requests are
commonly used to revise the original allocation, thus authorizing excess expenditure. In Bhutan,
the computer system helps detect when original allocations are exhausted, thus identifying the
need for supplementary budget requests. However, financial discipline is not enforced because
requests for budget releases and necessary supplementary allocations are made only when the
line ministry or agency entered into a contractual obligation. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance
has no option but to approve the request for supplementary allocations. The procedure has
become a time-consuming formality that occupies much of the ministry's time without enabling it
to manage the budget effectively. In Kiribati, ADB's TA does not deal with budget execution
directly. However, TA financed through Australian bilateral aid (complementing ADB's TA) is
computerizing the budget system and is likely to have similar results as ADB's TAs in Bhutan.
Obviously, the structure of the process (line agencies entering into an obligation without having
requisite resources) and cultural norms that make it impossible to reject requests for
supplementary budget allocations have a much greater influence on the effective budget
execution than a tool that can observe overspending. The public finance reform TA in India was
meant to introduce greater fiscal discipline. However, given the TA's poor performance, this aim
was not attained.
                                                4


C.     Transparency

43.     Transparency in the policy-making process requires that the reasons for making policy
choices be clearly stated. Potentially, the TAs in Kiribati and the Lao PDR could have
contributed to greater transparency in decision making because they tried to introduce an
objective means for choosing policy options. This potential has not been realized because the
TAs did not succeed in setting up functional modeling facilities that were recognized and
accepted by decision makers.

44.     The budget is transparent if it provides details on the use of public resources and
outcomes expected from executing the budget. Output or program budget formats are useful
tools, because they require such linkages to be made. However, the tool is effective only if it is
accompanied by costing standards that are equally transparent. Otherwise, the match between
narrative and financial information may not be of much use. The output budget format
introduced in Kiribati records expected outcomes and outputs and links them to resource
allocations, which increases the transparency of the intended use of public resources. However,
several program descriptions need to be more specific, and the costing needs to be clarified.

45.     The requirements of NAO in the Lao PDR should help enforce greater transparency in
the financial accounts of ministries and agencies, as they need to comply with reporting
requirements. While the TA did not provide any direct assistance for this purpose, ADB will
provide additional assistance for enhancing government accounting regulations and procedures
that also should help ensure NAO's functioning, which otherwise could be impeded by the lack
of capacities of line ministries and other agencies.

D.     Accountability

46.     Accountability in the policy-making process requires that policy options are clearly stated
and specific targets are set so that performance can be measured. However, the process also
requires a system within which accountability can be exercised: the accountable person or
parties should have authority to pursue policy goals, and those to whom they are accountable
should have the authority to hold them accountable. The TAs typically do not consider the latter
aspects. The TAs in Kiribati and the Lao PDR had the potential to increase the accountability in
the policy-making process, as they would have illustrated whether and how policy choices were
substantiated, and whether policies resulted in expected developmental impacts or economic
performance. However, the models are not functioning.

47.     Accountability for preparing and executing budget proposals may increase as a result of
introducing the outcome budget format in Kiribati, although this will depend on the extent to
which people responsible for budget submissions will be held accountable for achieving targets
set in the budget. The present perception is that when outputs are not produced in one year,
they are carried forward into the next annual budget with new appropriations made for the same
purpose.

48.     In the Lao PDR, the TA to set up NAO could increase accountability, as the audit
function will identify whether positions or funds have been abused and enforce necessary
repercussions. NAO is not yet fully functional, so it remains to be seen whether any
impediments to fulfilling these expectations exist. One potential problem is that the accounts of
ministries and agencies are not always kept in a manner that is auditable.
                                                V.       CONCLUSIONS


A.         Results


           1.        Capacities Built

49.     ADB's understanding of capacity building has not evolved to fit the modern concept of
capacity building, which goes beyond institutional development and training (para. 0). This
observation is more obvious and understandable for older TAs, but it applies equally to the more
recent TAs in the sample. Among those TAs, the design has not changed significantly since the
internal reviews (para. 0) of 1992 and 1994. One of the main weaknesses of the TAs in terms of
capacity building is their focus on one agency; although sometimes staff members from other
agencies are involved but as participants in workshops, which is insufficient for building
capacities. Failing to identify (through capacity mapping and SWOT analysis) and deal with
interinstitutional relationships and the normative and societal contexts, the TAs are unable to
generate an understanding of and plan for addressing systemic issues. This failure renders
even technically sound TAs ineffective, and is further compounded by the limited time and lack
of resources allocated for the complex process of capacity building. The initial staff guidelines
on capacity building could have been used to contribute to fostering a broader understanding of
the concept and resources required for working in this area.

50.    The TAs come closer to an abridged31 form of institutional development where tools are
developed and staff abilities fostered. The TAs were successful in

           (i)       Bhutan where the TA developed a computerized tool that the staff continues to
                     use;
           (ii)      India, where some skills were developed for analyzing state-owned enterprises;
           (iii)     Kiribati, where the foundation for macroeconomic analysis and program budgeting
                     were laid; and
           (iv)      Lao PDR, where skills were developed in macroeconomic modeling and the
                     potential exists for NAO to function as an independent audit office.
51.     The less successful examples in terms of capacity building, when TAs merely produced
reports, were still useful for Kiribati, where these reports were used by the counterpart,
particularly in international forums. In India, the consultants' reports produced under TA 2668-
IND have greater value for the revenue generation side (not subject to this evaluation) for which
the reports make detailed and practical recommendations. This is not the case for the part of the
TA that dealt with the budget process reforms.

           2.        Public Expenditure Management Reformed

52.  None of the TAs took a comprehensive approach to analyzing the public expenditure
management system or budget cycle as a whole and assessing it against ADB's governance


31
     The reason for calling this an abridged form of institutional development is that TAs are void of analyzing clients and
     the services that institutions should be providing to their clients, service delivery mechanisms, financing and
     managerial issues, and human resource development (as opposed to simple one-time training) questions.
                                                   2


criteria. As a result, the TAs addressed a variety of issues but overlooked ways in which public
expenditure management as a whole can be improved. The effectiveness of the TAs was limited
by their narrow approach, as complementary activities were required to gain the full potential of
improving the budget cycle.

53.    Some of the TAs attained--or have the potential to bring about--process efficiencies,
reducing time and/or effort required for preparing or executing the budget. However, the
potential of TAs that introduced program budgeting to attain greater efficiency in using public
resources was forgone. To achieve improved efficiency in using public resources, TAs would
have had to consider several things:


        (i)     analyzing inputs required to produce a particular output, which involves assessing
                the person-days or person-hours and material inputs needed to deliver a specific
                service or product (such analyses are time-consuming and normally done for
                selected services/products or processes, usually in the context of process
                reforms);
        (ii)    revising existing cost standards to reflect the actual costs; and
        (iii)   introducing evaluation capacities that assess the efficiency of a process or
                program.
54.      The program budget format introduced through ADB assistance in Kiribati could ensure
effective resource allocation, provided supplementary TA is given to build capacities needed to
prioritize budget allocations. Effective budget execution (fiscal discipline) could have been
attained provided the computerization programs had been accompanied by TA for developing
greater discipline of line ministries and agencies and/or providing the Ministry of Finance with
sufficient influence to enforce adherence to original budget allocations.

55.     Possibilities for increasing transparency in the policy-making process could have
materialized if the macroeconomic modeling tools had been complemented by assistance to
create greater understanding of policymakers. Their acceptance of policy advisory tools is
essential to attaining impact. Frequent changes in the incumbents of policy-making positions
(and sometimes the policymakers' backgrounds, which can be politically oriented rather than
based on an awareness of economics), requires long-term involvement in policy dialogue and
TA to build the capacities of policymakers. In addition, it would have been useful to extend
capacity building assistance for generating data required as input for the models. Transparency
of the budget preparation process would have required the revision of costing standards to
better link the narrative description of the program to resources allocated for it. Establishing
NAO in the Lao PDR requires accurate documentation of accounts of ministries and agencies,
and thus could indirectly enforce greater transparency. However, the effectiveness of NAO may
be impeded should these accounting standards not be met, making transactions unauditable.

56.     Opportunities for increasing accountability depend on the extent to which it is acceptable
to hold a person or group of people responsible for their decisions and actions. TAs typically do
not address accountability. Therefore, whether introducing tools such as program budget
formats or an audit function will yield higher levels of accountability remains to be seen.
                                                  3


B.     Key Issues

57.    ADB needs to devise an approach for developing public expenditure management
capacities to ensure ADB interventions take place in a strategic framework that promises
optimal sequencing, synergy, and impact of TAs. The conceptual approach is required for
capacity building and public expenditure management. The Strategy and Policy Office is
developing a handbook on governance issues, which might fill this gap.

58.     Capacity building requires considerable understanding of the existing local capacity and
the bottlenecks that hinder it from working effectively. Capacity mapping is one way to develop
such understanding, which also can be used for building ownership if all the participants are
involved in mapping capacities and conducting a SWOT analysis. Through capacity mapping,
governments and ADB can arrive at a strategic medium-term framework that determines actions
for the government to take (pre-conditions for the TA) and interventions by external agencies,
including ADB. This systematic strategic framework would help programming missions in
deciding on the areas that should receive assistance and enable individual TAs to be designed
in context rather than addressing issues in a separate and ineffective manner.

59.    Capacity mapping or any other systematic analysis is a complex and time-consuming
process that cannot be attained within the framework of the typical short-duration TA fact-finding
mission. Designing capacity building requires an up-front investment of time and resources to
ensure strategic choices are made. The current arrangement for processing TAs is not
conducive to such an approach.

60.     Equally, building capacities takes long-term commitment on the part of governments and
ADB, requiring a longer-term perspective rather than the short-term horizon of TAs, which is
suitable to solve well-defined elements of a capacity building process. Capacity mapping
provides the strategic framework, while the cluster TA is an ideal instrument for implementing
the capacity building action plan.

61.    Capacity mapping should be the first step, after which participants determine the
capacities to be built (shortcomings to be overcome), the type and sequence of initiatives to be
implemented by the government and external assistance required, and the first targets and
externally funded inputs needed to attain the initiatives. At the end of each short-term TA,
progress and medium-term targets in the capacity building strategy should be reviewed and
revised as needed before designing and approving further TA. This review process could
ensure (i) ownership (provided consultants do not drive the process), (ii) appropriate timing of
and flexibility for adjusting required assistance (rather than to work with fixed inputs), and (iii) a
focus on results.

62.    Public expenditure capacity building requires capacity mapping to be combined with
ADB's governance indicators as illustrated in this evaluation (Appendix 4). Combining these
items will help identify the type of governance improvements TAs seek to attain and effectively
channel limited resources toward achieving their goals of increasing efficient, effective,
transparent, and accountable use of public resources.

63.      Even when increasing participation in the design of the capacity building process,
reforms are often perceived as threats, something that cannot always be avoided when
institutions are outdated and need major changes. Capacity mapping cannot eliminate this
problem. However, capacity mapping can help identify those groups that fear losing most and
other forces that are likely to impede a reform process. An orientation toward functions that
                                                             4


need to be fulfilled and assistance to make them more easily attainable might help different
agencies to work together on reform and service delivery.

64.    While indigenous capacity for managing public resources is essential, it also needs to be
understood which functions the government should perform and which activities are better
outsourced to consultants with the help of external assistance. A solution such as this needs to
be considered in particular in countries with small administrations, which should not be
expanded for efficiency reasons, and for functions needed only at medium-term intervals.32




32
     Assessment of Bank Assistance for Reform Programs in the Pacific (footnote 1).
                                        5




                                 APPENDIXES



                                                            Cited on
Number   Title                                     Page
                                                          (page, para.)

    1    Capacity Building Issues and Indicators    19        2, 0
    2    Governance Indicators                      20        2, 0


    3    Capacity Mapping                           21        4, 0


    4    Annual Budget Cycle                        24        1, 0
                                                                                                            Appendix 1



A.      Appendix 1

                         CAPACITY BUILDING ISSUES AND INDICATORS




Capacity Building                   Issues                        Indicators                   Information Sources
  Component

     Ownership           ??   Who is or was the          ??   Origin of TA idea           ??    TA design
                              owner of the technical
                              assistance (TA), and       ??   Role of the government      ??    Correspondence
                              how does this                   in designing the TA
                                                                                          ??    TA reports, and Back-
                              ownership manifest         ??   Need for building                 to-Office reports
                              itself?                         ownership discussed in
                                                              TA design or reports        ??    Discussions and
                         ??   How was ownership                                                 interviews
                              built?                     ??   Level of government
                                                              support and                 ??    Manifestations of the
                         ??   Were the owner's                                                  government's follow-up
                              interests respected in          participation in TA
                                                              implementation                    action
                              TA design and
                              implementation?            ??   Discussion and
                         ??   How was the owner               implementation of TA
                              advised to ensure that          recommendations
                              the owner's interests
                              represented the best
                              interest of government
                              and country?
                         ??   Was the TA relevant to
                              the owners' needs and
                              significant enough to
                              influence a process of
                              institutional change?
Capacity Mapping         ??   Were existing              ??   Availability                ??    TA report containing an
                              capacities analyzed,                                              institutional analysis
                              and if so which            ??   Quality: coverage,
                              aspects?                        specificity, depth of       ??    Government comments
                                                              analysis, identification          on the institutional
                         ??   Who was involved in             of key problem areas,             analysis
                              the analysis?                   and consensus on
                                                              these issues                ??    Discussions and
                         ??   Were requisite future                                             interviews
                              capacities
                              determined, and if so
                              to what detail?
Action     Plan    for   ??   Was a plan for             ??   Availability                ??    TA report containing the
Institutional Change          institutional change                                              recommended plan of
                              developed? If so, what     ??   Quality: coverage,                action (these are
                              did it contain?                 specificity, practicality         mostly TA outputs such
                                                              of recommendations,               as a proposal for
                         ??   Was it pragmatic,               and identification of             streamlining the
                              implementable, well-            potential                         budgeting system or
                              defined, acceptable,            implementation                    computerizing it)
                              and accepted?                   problems and requisite
                                                              countermeasures             ??    Government comments
                         ??   Did it discuss                                                    and implementation
                              explicitly institutional
                                          Appendix 1


explicitly institutional        action on
aspects that might              recommendations
hinder its
implementation?            ??   Discussions and
                                interviews
                                                                                                           Appendix 2



B.       Appendix 2

                                       GOVERNANCE INDICATORS

     Governance                        Indicators                                    Information Sources
Efficiency of the   ??   Processing time: time required to               ??   TA reports
Budget Process           process a particular transaction
                                                                         ??   Records of agencies
                    ??    Process flow: number of steps a
                         process takes, ensuring the flow diagram        ??   Discussions and interviews
                         is as streamlined as possible
                    ??   Process resources: number of person-
                         days and other resources to accomplish
                         a particular transaction
Efficiency in the   ??    Costing systems: specification and             ??   TA reports
Use of Public            rationalization of cost standards;
Resources                identification of cost-output relationships     ??   Instructions for budgeting/costing of
                         to ensure efficiency gains                           outputs
                                                                         ??   Discussions and interviews
Effectiveness       ??    Resource allocation: matching of               ??   Budget document
                         outlays with available revenue and other
                         resources, setting of priorities in line with   ??   Expenditure reports
                         policy objectives, and comparison of            ??   Discussions and interviews
                         stated objectives and priorities with
                         actual allocations
                    ??   Resource use: comparison of
                         expenditure with allocations, analysis of
                         goal attainment with given resources,
                         and assessment of resource reallocation
Transparency        ??    Allocation process: criteria (what are         ??    Process specifications and
                         they, how were they arrived at, how their            requirements, and actual practices
                         application is ensured), and decision
                         makers (who are they, who is informed of        ??   Discussions and interviews
                         decisions, consultation, and consensus
                         building)
                    ??   Release process: documentation, and
                         checks and balances
                    ??   Resource reallocation process:
                         criteria, documentation, and checks and
                         balances
                    ??   Budget documentation: linking
                         objectives and outputs to budget
                         allocations, reporting on budget
                         allocations and actual expenditure, and
                         annual accounts
                                                                                                   Appendix 2


   Governance                       Indicators                               Information Sources
Accountability   ??    Linkage to development goals:             ??   Development plans and budgets
                      allocations in line with development
                      plans, specificity of targets to enable    ??   Financial accounting system: process
                      accountability, and specificity of              specification, manuals, and actual
                      implementation plans                            practices

                 ??    Financial accountability: use of funds,   ??   Performance reports
                      reporting, and audit                       ??   Discussions and interviews
                 ??    Performance evaluation: monitoring
                      and evaluation of goal achievements,
                      reporting, and use of lessons (feedback
                      into planning cycle)
                                                                                                         Appendix 2



C.       Appendix 3

                                            CAPACITY MAPPING


     Capacity Components                   Bhutan                              India                            Kiribati


         Functions              ?? TA 970-BHU contains a           ?? TA 2668-IND discusses          ?? TA 1976-KIR describes           ?? TA 2049
                                general description of the         the symptoms that manifest        the functions of the Ministry of   the importance of the role of
??   Service delivery           functions of the counterpart.      institutional limitations. For    Finance      and     Economic      the Committee for Planning
                                Implicitly, it covers several      instance, the expenditure         Planning (MFEP) regarding          and Cooperation in managing
                                functions of the government:       wing is cited as having limited   macroeconomic         planning,    the economy. It does not
??   Policy    analysis   and                                      abilities to manage and           investment monitoring, and         provide a detailed analysis of
      formulation                                                  control slippages in current      budget preparation. In all         functions that are not well
                                - Providing training to national
                                  accounts staff. The need for     expenditures. The TA paper        cases,       problems       are    performed.
??   Networking                   assistance does not identify     does not identify the reasons     mentioned with the existing
                                      weaknesses and why a         for these shortcomings and        system, but little analysis is     ?? The National Audit Office
??   Strategic planning                  review is needed.         whether they are intrinsic to     provided of the shortcomings.      was newly established under
                                  - Improving the performance      the expenditure wing or                                              TA 2987-
??   Learning                     of public sector enterprises,    induced by the normative or       ?? TA       2657-KIR     details   describes the weakness of
                                  by assisting in developing a     societal context.                 problems related to the            the existing system (ad hoc
??   Decision making              monitoring system. Reasons                                         budget preparation function of     inspections at the request of
                                  for the poor results of public   ?? For TA 2552-IND, the           MFEP and the line ministries.      the Ministry of Finance,
                                     enterprises are not given,    paper discusses the functions     Among other issues, this           insufficient     staff   and
                                    therefore it cannot be said    of the Technical Secretariat,     included     the    need     for   expertise), and those in the
                                      whether the solution (an     but does not reveal why it        "departments to think much         financial    accou
                                 improved monitoring system)       required the support of           more critically about their        management processes.
                                            is adequate.           external consultants financed     activities and the end results
                                 - Managing external loan and      by the TA to fulfill these        they are expected to deliver
                                      TA negotiations, the key     functions.                        (i.e., outputs), and also about
                                      problem being a lack of                                        cost effectiveness" (TA paper,
                                   procedures. The TA did not                                        para. 6). Weaknesses were
                                    identify the disadvantages                                       also observed in the linkage
                                   being experienced and why                                         between policy making and
                                  standardization was needed                                         budget preparation, and in
                                    but suggested developing                                         monitoring of the budget
                                 procedures and documenting                                          execution.
                                         them in a manual.
                                ?? TA 1487-BHU identified
                                the lack of a computerized
                                system for budget preparation
                                and accounting that interfered
                                with the integrity of data and
                                inadequacy to form a reliable
                                financial information system.
                                                                                                          Appendix 2


     Capacity Components                       Bhutan                            India                           Kiribati


     Actors/Participants            ?? The TAs focused on the         ?? TA 2668-IND recognized       ?? Both TAs (1976-KIR and          ?? TA 2049
                                    central      agency       (the    that multiple actors were       2657-KIR) recognized the           the need to train staff of
??    Individuals     (community    department within the Ministry    involved in the budgeting       need to involve MFEP and the       selected line ministries, thus
       leaders, politicians)        of Finance with whom the TAs      process and highlighted that    line ministries. However, TA       to involve more than the core
                                    were    implemented).     The     the Finance Department and      1976-KIR did not specify the       agency.
                                    terms of reference of the         sector       ministries  had    type of capacities to be built
??    Formal       organizations
       (government,         non-
                                    second TA foresaw that a          difficulties enforcing fiscal   at the line agency level.          ?? TA 2987
                                    standardized     computerized     management (again without                                          assistance to other agencies,
       governmental                 accounts package would be         specifying the reasons why).
       organizations,                                                                                                                    such      as      state
                                    developed for use by all          However, the objective and                                         enterprises and the Ministry of
       universities)                government       departments.     the scope of the TA include                                        Finance,     although     ADB
                                    However, the extent to which      only the Finance Department.                                       assistance is focused on the
??    Network or organizations      other government agencies                                                                            National Audit Office alone.
       (associations,   action      had the human and technical       TA     2552-IND     mentions                                       Further assistance will be
       networks)                    resources to implement and        several bodies that would be                                       provided under another TA.
                                    use such a package were not       associated with the TA in
??    Informal       institutions   analyzed in the TA.               support of the Technical
       (pressure        groups,                                       Secretariat, which was its
       political movements)                                           main counterpart.

                                    ?? No detailed analysis was       ?? Resource availability and    ?? TA 1976-KIR does not            ?? TA 2049
         Resources                  done     of   the     resources   constraints are not analyzed    provide a resource analysis.       the shortage of skills as the
                                    available during TA design or     in the TA papers.               TA 2657-KIR determines the         key problem. No other
                                    of the resources required to                                      shortage of human resources        resource   constraints    are
??    Human     (local   skills,
                                    implement and sustain the                                         with requisite educational         discussed.
       knowledge, motivation)
                                    capacity building intervention.                                   background               without
                                                                                                      discussing     limitations    to   ?? TA 2987
??    Informational (technical                                                                        capacity building in the           the shortage of skills as a
       data,         government                                                                       context of minimal institutional   resource problem.
       strategy, intelligence)                                                                        size.

??    Financial (domestic and
       external)

??    Technological

                                    ?? The first TA discusses         ?? Both TA papers discuss       ?? TA 1976-KIR did not             ?? There is little information
     Normative Context              the reform objectives of the      the   government's     reform   contain details on this. TA        other than on previous
                                    Government.       Details   on    attempts but none elaborate     2657-KIR raises the urgency        assistance to the same
                                    factors      supporting     or    on the reasons for delays in    of                 establishing    reforms in TA 2049
??    Values (human       rights,
                                    conflicting with the normative    their implementation. This      macroeconomic policies that
       governance)
                                    context are not mentioned.        would have been useful for      stimulate greater involvement      ?? TA 2987
                                                                      recognizing factors that may    of businesses in the economic      the     Government's   effort,
??    Organizational strategies                                       impede the performance of       sector, increasing skill levels,   assisted by several agencies,
      (devolution, privatization,                                     the TAs.                        and integrating the domestic       to improve audit capabilities
      public sector reform)                                                                           economy into the world             of state-
                                                                                                      economy. The TA paper gives        and to translate accounting
??    Policies      (economic                                                                         some information on these          standards into the local
       reform, strategies for                                                                         aspects, but without analyzing     language, as an indication of
       sustainable                                                                                    the potential for addressing       the ongoing reform process in
       development,      land                                                                         them.                              the field of audit.
       reform)

??    Cultural        (ethnicity,
       religion, art, language,
       gender roles)
                                                                                                           Appendix 2


     Capacity Components                      Bhutan                             India                           Kiribati


     Societal Context              ?? The TA paper does not          ?? The TA papers do not           ?? TA 1976-KIR does not        ?? TA 2049
                                   provide details on this aspect.   provide details on this aspect.   raise these issues, although   provide details   on   these
??   Global     (access   to       However, falling under this                                         they are mentioned in TA       aspects.
     markets, changes in           category is the involvement of                                      2657-KIR    (see    previous
     global governance, role       local levels in identifying                                         paragraph).                    ?? TA 2987
     of donors)                    development projects, which                                                                        that ADB and United Nations
                                   is   useful     for    program                                                                     Development      Programme
                                   budgeting,     although     not                                                                    were instrument
??   Regional (trade patterns,     immediately relevant to the
      sectoral cooperation)                                                                                                           about     the  request   for
                                   TAs with their focus on                                                                            assistance to analyze the
                                   computerizing the budget                                                                           need for and develop an
??   National      (style     of   system.                                                                                            approach to set up the audit
      governance, sharing of                                                                                                          function.
      political           power,
      administrative capacity)

??   Subnational (degree of
      institutional  pluralism,
      ethnic issues)
                                                                                       Appendix 4, page 13



D.         Appendix 4

                                         ANNUAL BUDGET CYCLE

1.     The annual cycle of planning and using public resources involves the following steps,
which are schematic but largely applicable to any budget preparation process.33

(i)        Policy decisions. Based on past performance, current development challenges, and
           opportunities, policy options need to be considered. Macroeconomic policy choices can
           be determined with the help of modeling tools, and economic and social development
           goals stated in five-year development plans influence the choices of investments.

(ii)       Guidelines for budget preparation. The ministry of finance issues instructions, which
           contain an update on recent policy changes or reiterate goals stated in development
           plans. In some instances, line ministries and agencies are advised of budget ceilings
           within which they can plan their forthcoming budget. Member countries of the
           Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development are moving toward multiyear
           frameworks34 to reflect requirements for multiyear investment projects and to anticipate
           increases in the recurrent budget to fund operating expenses of completed investments.

(iii)      Budget proposals. Line ministries and agencies present their budget proposals. When it
           is a line item budget, increases are often justified on grounds of inflation and higher
           expenditure requirements. These increases are determined by using a standard
           multiplier to the current year allocation, the multiplier taking into account cuts expected
           to be exercised by the central government. A well-functioning output or program budget
           implies that achievements against current objectives and outputs are made, and based
           on performance, new targets are developed with associated budget requirements.
           Implicit in this process is the need for an appropriate costing mechanism by which inputs
           (costs) can be associated with outputs, outcomes, and impacts.

(iv)       Approval of budget proposals and appropriation of funds. Budget submissions are
           screened by the ministry of finance to identify trends in requests for resources,
           comparing past with current requirements and actual expenditure. This is a cumbersome
           process when financial systems are not computerized and/or up to date, which makes it
           difficult for the ministry of finance to identify whether requests are reasonable. When
           budgets are prepared in an output budget format, the ministry of finance, sometimes in
           cooperation with the planning agency, may analyze program objectives and outputs to
           assess whether they are in line with national development plans and coherent with
           budget allocations. This is equally if not more time-consuming, particularly when
           programs are ill defined and cost estimates are not well justified. The Cabinet, or its
           equivalent, approves the budget and relevant appropriations are made.

(v)        Budget execution/plan implementation. During plan implementation, line ministries and
           agencies draw down funds from their appropriations. Their expenditures are controlled
           centrally by the ministry of finance, to which vouchers must be submitted to trigger
           budget releases. This mechanism should ensure financial discipline (i.e., adherence to
           allocated ceilings), but in reality many line ministries and agencies submit requests for
           budget releases after entering into a contract obligation that may be above the budget

33
     A more detailed discussion of public expenditure management issues can be found in Managing Government
     Expenditure. Schiavo-Campo, S. and D. Tommasi. 1999. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
34
     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1998. Survey of Recent Budgetary Documents. Public
     Management Service.
                                                                                               Appendix 4, page 14


           allocation for that particular line item. Therefore, supplementary budget requests are the
           rule and are processed routinely.

(vi)       Evaluation of results and feedback into policy making and budget design. Results-
           oriented management, as the underlying rationale for output or program budgeting,
           necessitates monitoring and evaluation of results. Evaluation findings should influence
           all stages of the budget cycle: informing decision makers of their policy choices, helping
           to prioritize and sequence investments, improving program designs, and highlighting
           areas where budget execution and plan implementation require different approaches or
           greater managerial attention.

2.      The following table summarizes how the four dimensions of governance considered in
this evaluation relate to each of the steps in the budget cycle.



     Budget Cycle                   Efficiency                      Effectiveness                        Transparency                         Accountability
1.     Policy decisions   Introducing decision-making      Effective policy making is           Transparency is gained if policy     Assuming that policies and
                          tools that help model various    manifested in the actual             decisions are based on objective     development targets are well
                          options can bring about          implementation of policy             criteria and careful analysis of     defined, account
                          efficiency gains.                decisions, which depends on the      challenges and opportunities,        enhanced in that performance
                                                           quality of policies and on the       and the reasons for making           against these goals becomes
                                                           enforcement mechanisms.              choices are exposed.                 measurable.
2.     Guidelines for     Process efficiency can be        Issuing instructions that ensure     By issuing budget instruction to     The budget instructions can
       budget             enhanced with clear              matching outlays with available      all ministries and agencies,         clarify the allocation of
       preparation        instructions that help prevent   resources can attain effective       informing them for instance of       responsibility and authority. For
                          ministries and agencies from     budgeting.                           their budget ceilings,               instance, if the ministry of
                          submitting proposals that are                                         transparency can be ensured.         finance sets the budget ceilings,
                          outside the government's                                                                                   the ministry is accountable for
                          priorities.                                                                                                the overall distribution of public
                                                                                                                                     resources among sectors.
                                                                                                                                     Within that framework, the
                                                                                                                                     ministries and agencies may be
                                                                                                                                     given authority to allocate
                                                                                                                                     resources to various programs,
                                                                                                                                     and thus are accountable for
                                                                                                                                     priorities within their portfolio.
3.     Budget             To ensure efficient use of       Preparing budget proposals           Transparency can be gained           Program budgets contribute to
       proposals          resources, cost standards need   within allocated overall ceilings    when budget proposals                accountability when they are
                          to be accurate and designed in   by prioritizing programs and         document their objectives and        well defined and contain
                          such a way that the cost of      subprograms ensures effective        illustrate how they plan to attain   measurable targets and
                          outputs can be determined.       budgeting.                           these. An intrinsic advantage        performance indicators.
                                                                                                exists with output or program
                                                                                                budgeting (over line item format)
                                                                                                as it gives the opportunity to
                                                                                                relate resource allocations to
                                                                                                goals.
4.     Approval of        Process efficiencies can be      Effective budgeting exercised        Transparency in the approval         The ministry of finance is
       budget             gained by computerizing          during the budget preparation        and appropriation process            accountable for exercising due
       proposals and      financial data, speeding up      process (1-3) can be unhinged if     depends on the existence of          diligence to assess whether the
       appropriation of   comparative analyses of          arbitrariness is exercised at the    objective criteria for modifying     budget proposals are in line with
       funds              budget requests and past         approval stage.                      budget proposals and of a            the government's policies and
                          performance. Standardized                                             system that ensures                  development plans, and for
                          tools for analyzing program                                           appropriations are made in line      advising the approving body
                          proposals can introduce                                               with approvals.                      accordingly.
                          greater objectivity into the
                          process and make it more
                          efficient with the use of
                          checklists.
                                                                                             Appendix 4, page 15


     Budget Cycle               Efficiency                        Effectiveness                        Transparency                      Accountability
5.   Budget           Efficiency in the budget           Effectiveness in budget              Transparency is ensured when       Monitoring and reporting
     execution/plan   execution process refers to the    execution concerns the actual        documentation shows which          requirements can ensure
     implementation   expedience with which              use of funds in accordance with      inputs were financed with public   financial accountability.
                      resources are made available.      the budget plans.                    resources and for which
                                                                                              program outputs these funds
                      Efficiency in service delivery
                                                                                              were spent.
                      falls outside the budget
                      process and would require
                      reforms of the delivery process.
6.   Evaluation of    Efficiency of evaluation is        Evaluations can verify the           Evaluations can verify whether     Evaluations are an instrument
     results and      ensured through standard           effectiveness of budget              documentation has been             with which to en
     feedback into    evaluation formats and             allocations and use.                 complete and accurate.             accountability as they report on
     policy making    checklists that ensure                                                                                     the use of public resources and
     and budget       expediency of the process.         Performance results (feedback        Evaluation reports add to          identify whether a party has not
     design                                              from evaluation) provide insights    transparency by documenting        fulfilled its responsibility.
                      Evaluation can contribute to       that should help improve             how public resources were
                      efficiency gains when costing      effective budgeting (setting         spent and what has been
                      systems are analyzed and           priorities, resource distribution    achieved with them.
                      improvements recommended.          among sectors, sequencing of
                                                         investments).
                      Management or value-for-
                      money audits can result in
                      gains in process efficiencies.
