                 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
               Operations Evaluation Department




                  SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY ON

          INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT SAFEGUARDS

                             September 2006




In this electronic file, the report is followed by the Management response and
Development Effectiveness Committee Chairperson's Summary of the
Committee's Discussion on 9 October 2006.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: SST: REG 2006-14
Special Evaluation Study
September 2006 (revised in October 2006)




Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards




Operations Evaluation Department
                          ABBREVIATIONS

ADB             ­    Asian Development Bank
AP              ­    affected person
BME             ­    benefit monitoring and evaluation
BP              ­    Bank Policy
CCO             ­    chief compliance officer
DEC             ­    Development Effectiveness Committee
DMC             ­    developing member country
EA              ­    executing agency
EIA             ­    environmental impact assessment
ha              ­    hectare
IADB            ­    Inter-American Development Bank
IFC             ­    International Finance Corporation
IP              ­    indigenous peoples
IR              ­    involuntary resettlement
Lao PDR         ­    Lao People's Democratic Republic
MFF             ­    multitranche financing facility
MRM             ­    Management Review Meeting
MTS II          ­    Medium-Term Strategy II
NGO             ­    nongovernment organization
OCR             ­    ordinary capital resources
OD              ­    operations department
OED             ­    Operations Evaluation Department
OESD            ­    Office of Environmental and Social Development
OM              ­    Operations Manual
OP              ­    Operational Procedure
PCR             ­    project completion report
PPER            ­    project performance evaluation report
PPR             ­    project performance report
PRC             ­    People's Republic of China
RETA            ­    regional technical assistance
RF              ­    resettlement framework
RM              ­    resident mission
RP              ­    resettlement plan
RRP             ­    report and recommendation of the President
RSDD            ­    Regional and Sustainable Development Department
RSES            ­    Environment and Social Safeguards Division, RSDD
SES             ­    special evaluation study
SOCD            ­    Social Development Division, OESD
SPCM            ­    Safeguard Policy Compliance Memorandum
TA              ­    technical assistance
TBD             ­    to be determined
US              ­    United States


                                 NOTE

          (i)       In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
                                          Key Words
asian development bank, development effectiveness, development-induced displacement,
india, involuntary resettlement evaluation, people's republic of china, philippines, social
safeguards policy evaluation, viet nam




Director General:     B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director:             R.K. Leonard, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED

Team leader:          W. Kolkma, Senior Evaluation Specialist,
                      Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
Team members:         A. Anabo, Senior Evaluation Officer,
                      Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
                      A. Alba, Operations Evaluation Assistant,
                      Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED

                         Operations Evaluation Department, SS-71




Note: This revised document was posted on the ADB website in October 2006, one month after
the original version was posted in September 2006. It includes corrections regarding (i) earlier
ADB reviews of resettlement offered to the Board (executive summary; para. 25), and (ii) the
influence of the Director, SOCD (para. 30).
                                              CONTENTS

                                                                                                Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                  iii
I.         INTRODUCTION                                                                            1
           A.   Need for the Study                                                                 1
           B.   Background                                                                         1
           C.   Scope and Methodology of the Evaluation                                            2
           D.   Organization of the Report                                                         4
II.        ADB AND INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT SAFEGUARDS                                             4
           A.   Affected Persons and Infrastructure Projects                                       4
           B.   Informal Dwellers and Squatters in Asian Cities                                    6
           C.   ADB's Policy Framework: A Summary and Some Observations                            6
           D.   Institutional Arrangements for Involuntary Resettlement Policy                    11
                Implementation
           E.   Involuntary Resettlement by Other Organizations                                   13
III.       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT POLICY                                  15
           A.   Resettlement Plans                                                                15
           B.   Affected Persons Registered by ADB Project Proposals                              17
           C.   Resettlement Performance Assessments Made by ADB                                  19
           D.   Inspections, Compliance Review, and NGO Influence                                 28
           E.   ADB Staff Views and Experience                                                    32
           F.   EA Staff Views and Experience                                                     32
IV.        COUNTRY SYSTEMS AND ADB                                                                36
           A.   Review of Country Systems on Involuntary Resettlement                             36
           B.   ADB's Technical Assistance on Involuntary Resettlement                            40
           C.   ADB's Resettlement Policy Measured Against Resettlement Practices in              41
                Developed Countries
V.         MAIN FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES AND COMPLEX ISSUES                                     41
           A.    Procedural and Efficiency Issues                                                 42
           B.    Impact and Added Value for Affected Persons                                      47
           C.    Incremental Costs and Transaction Costs                                          49
           D.    Complex Issues Encountered                                                       51

       This evaluation is based in part on case studies of projects in People's Republic of China
       (PRC), India, and Philippines. The Director General of the Operations Evaluation Department
       (OED) managed the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) operations in the PRC from 1993 to
       2004. OED has adopted guidelines to avoid conflict of interest in its independent evaluations.
       Although the Director General of OED reviewed the report, made comments for inclusion,
       and approved the report, it is considered that potential conflicts of interest were adequately
       managed. The study relied on consultants, some of whom had no prior involvement in ADB-
       supported resettlement operations (Samuel Thangaraj and Jose Antonio League), while
       others did have some prior involvement, either in technical assistance activities (Ping Li and
       Keliang Zhu) or in project resettlement operations (Guoqing Shi, Shaojun Chen, Aqueel
       Khan, Arup Khan)--however, not in the case study projects that they were asked to review.
       The consultants may not necessarily agree with all of the study's views. Mary Grace
       Alindogan and Grace Agnes Sevilla did background research and administered the
       questionnaire surveys. The team leader of the study and his director had no prior
       involvement in resettlement operations in ADB. To the knowledge of the management of
       OED, there were no conflicts of interest among the persons preparing this report.
VI.   ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                     54
      A.   Assessment of the Involuntary Resettlement Policy                             55
      B.   Recommendations for the Update of the Safeguard Policies                      59
      C.   Recommendations for Involuntary Resettlement Implementation                   62

APPENDIXES
1.   Summary of Findings of Earlier Operations Evaluation Department                      65
     Social Safeguard Studies
2.   Shifts in Operationalization of the Asian Development Bank's Involuntary             67
     Resettlement Policy
3.   Involuntary Resettlement by the World Bank                                           75
4.   Asian Development Bank Statistics on Resettlement Plans and Frameworks               76
5.   Asian Development Bank Statistics on the Number and Percentage of                    82
     Affected Persons in Projects with Involuntary Resettlement
6.   Thirty Projects with Highest Number of Affected Persons                              87
     Between 1994 and 2005; Involuntary Resettlement
7.   Dams in Asian Development Bank-Supported Projects                                    88
8.   Land Acquisition and Resettlement Issues Discussed in Project Completion             90
     Reports
9.   Dams and Resettlement                                                                94
10.  Asian Development Bank Inspections and Compliance Reviews                            99
11.  Projects with Resettlement/Land Acquisition Concerns from Nongovernment             102
     Organizations/Community-Based Organizations
12.  Notes on Corruption and Resettlement                                                104
13.  Asian Development Bank Staff Questionnaire Findings                                 106
14.  Asian Development Bank Staff Suggestions for Improving Social Safeguard             117
     Policies and Their Application
15.  Executing Agency Questionnaire Findings                                             120
16.  Review of Country Systems on Involuntary Resettlement                               130
17.  Technical Assistance Regarding Land Acquisition and Resettlement                    138
     Since 1994
18.  Asian Development Bank Technical Assistance on Involuntary Resettlement             140
19.  Compensation and Resettlement in the United States of America                       142
     and in the Netherlands
20.  Main Findings from Project Case Studies: Procedural and Efficiency Issues           146
21.  Impact of Case Study Projects on Housing, Resettlement Sites, and Restoration       158
     of Livelihoods
SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIXES (available upon request)
A.   Notes on the Methodology
B.   Squatters and Squatting Syndicates in the Philippines
C.   Infrastructure Loans Without Resettlement Planning (1994­2005)
D.   Summary of Quantitative Findings of Project Performance Reports in Four Countries
E.   Involuntary Resettlement-Related Missions Conducted in 2005
F.   Costs of Resettlement for Eight Completed Projects Used as Case Studies
G.   Findings of a Desk Study Conducted for the Safeguard Policy Update
H.   Assessment of TA 2735-PRC: Capacity Building for Natural Resources Legislation
     Contribution to the Land Management Law of 1998

Attachments: 1. Management Response on the Special Evaluation Study on Involuntary
                Resettlement Safeguards
             2. Development Effectiveness Committee
                Chairperson's Summary of the Committee's Discussion on 9 October 2006
                                            EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       This report presents the findings of a special evaluation study (SES) of the Asian
Development Bank's (ADB) 1995 Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (IR). The evaluation was
one among three included in the work program of the Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
at the end of 2005 upon the special request of the Development Effectiveness Committee
(DEC) of ADB's Board of Directors. The other two studies concerned (i) the 1998 Indigenous
Peoples Policy, and (ii) the Environmental Safeguards. The studies were intended to provide
DEC with an independent assessment and also to contribute to ADB's ongoing safeguard policy
review, which will lead to a proposal by Management to the Board for consideration of a policy
update in 2007.

        The scope of this SES was to provide an overview of the scale and nature of IR in ADB
operations; examine the extent of application of the IR policy;1 review trends; make pertinent
comparisons with other systems; and give OED's assessment of the IR policy's relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability on the basis of evidence gathered within a tight time
frame to fit the safeguard policy update schedule. The study has also identified some issues for
consideration in the safeguard policy update, and offers recommendations.

        The nature of the Involuntary Resettlement Policy. The IR Policy of 1995 required
that a series of safeguard principles be upheld in the preparation and implementation of projects
funded by ADB: (i) avoid involuntary resettlement where feasible; (ii) minimize resettlement
where population displacement is unavoidable; and (iii) ensure that displaced people receive
assistance, preferably under the project, so that they will be at least as well off as they would
have been in the absence of the project. The Policy specified three types of assistance for IR:
(i) compensation for lost assets and loss of livelihood and income; (ii) assistance for relocation,
including provision of relocation sites with appropriate facilities and services; and (iii) assistance
for rehabilitation to achieve at least the same level of well-being with the project as without it.
Fixed procedures were to be applied, which included early public disclosure of intentions,
consultation processes, the preparation of resettlement plans (RPs) before loan appraisal, and
the setup of grievance redress mechanisms and of monitoring and evaluation systems during
project implementation. The procedures were to be set in motion when a mandatory initial social
assessment identified people who might be displaced by the project. One useful aspect of the
Policy has been that it deals with land acquisition and resettlement in a systematic way and
prior to the start of the project, which facilitates project implementation. OED agrees with the
basic philosophy and general principles of the IR Policy--as a general principle people should
not be adversely affected by ADB-financed projects.

        ADB has expanded the scope of the Policy. This SES argues that the scope of the
original IR Policy has expanded since the issuance of the Handbook on Resettlement in 1998,
and especially since ADB's reorganization in 2002, which brought with it a new Safeguard
Compliance Mechanism and, in December 2003, a new Operations Manual (OM) section F2 on
IR. This consolidated the emerging practices on IR planning, which had put the emphasis on
addressing all adverse impacts that infrastructure projects could have on people. Through the



1
    The term policy is used in a generic way, reflecting current consensus in ADB as to what this comprises,
    approximating the latest Operations Manual version of the Policy and the connected operational procedures, which
    may include elements not expressed in the original 1995 Policy statement. When this study refers to the IR Policy
    of 1995, the capital P is used.
iv


new de facto policy, laid down in OM F2/BP, and the new procedures in OM F2/OP, ADB
practice is now much more inclusive than the title of "IR policy" suggests, as it no longer centers
on addressing only significant displacement, but on addressing as well all kinds of losses
sustained by affected persons (APs). The procedures have also become more elaborate and
prescriptive over the years. Formal compliance with this expanded IR policy has been stressed
as a result of a new safeguard policy compliance memorandum, which requires a sign-off by the
chief compliance officer on the quality of resettlement planning before loan appraisal. A fear
among ADB staff of being "out of compliance," generated by two inspections since 2002 and a
compliance review in 2005, has further raised the profile of IR within project planning.
Experiences with these inspections and review have caused staff to be much more demanding
of executing agencies (EAs), although, in the face of occasional stiff developing member
country (DMC) and EA resistance, compromises have often been made, which raises questions
regarding how rigidly and consistently the new policy and procedures are being applied, and
how much the 1995 Policy still applies (it was not drafted taking into account the new
requirements for compliance).

        The IR policy is now controversial. The IR policy is highly controversial among various
borrowers and EAs, including APs and civil society organizations concerned with ADB delivering
on its stated intents. Most nongovernment organizations (NGOs) hold ADB accountable for not
only the spirit but also the letter of the policy. Some have criticized ADB saying it does not pay
sufficient attention to implementation, and that this leads to unacceptable problems for APs.
Some organizations are now concerned that ADB might revise the IR policy to align more with
country safeguard systems, in which they have less faith.

        The policy is also contentious among many of ADB's client DMCs, but for different
reasons. These DMCs question the IR policy itself, and particularly its present greater
inclusiveness, because of its variance with their country systems for dealing with socially
adverse project impacts. ADB's requirement for compensating land and physical structure
owners for losses at replacement cost or market value may be enshrined in law in most DMCs,
but valuation systems to determine these are at odds with those that ADB promotes. ADB also
requires that the removal of structures illegally built by affected squatters is compensated for,
and that squatters who are affected are assisted to fully regain their previous levels of livelihood.
This is not a mandatory requirement in most DMCs. Most countries do not wholeheartedly
accept the need to provide special assistance to the vulnerable or, more precisely, to assure
that such people are assisted through project-based resettlement operations and budgets,
separately from more general assistance that they may get.

        Among ADB project mission leaders, the policy is contentious because it is labor
intensive and sometimes perceived to take resources away from other necessary and equally
important project preparation tasks. The current procedures require much planning to be
completed at an early stage (i.e., long before detailed design of projects, which is often
completed after loan approval). This sometimes leads to duplication of work later, and can
engender opportunistic behavior (e.g., people moving into the project area in the hope of
receiving compensation). Another reason is that the goalposts have been changing over the
years, which has required staff to attempt to reverse earlier agreements on IR with their clients
at a late stage of implementation.

        It may not be possible to develop a consensus among the many widely divergent and
strongly held views on the policy and its impact.
                                                                                                  v


       Findings

         The SES developed an overview of resettlement planning and operations within ADB
and relied on ADB databases and documents; questionnaire surveys of ADB staff and EA staff;
country visits to People's Republic of China (PRC), India, Philippines, and Viet Nam; and
16 case studies of ongoing and completed projects with resettlement conducted by consultants
in the first three of these countries. There were several limitations to the study. Further work will
need to be undertaken during the update of the IR policy to test the robustness of the
conclusions of the study, particularly regarding the effectiveness of outcomes for APs. The
limitations are explained in Chapter I, but the most important include the limited number of
country and project case studies chosen, the small samples of questionnaires administered to
APs, and lack of details on IR in project completion reports (PCRs). With these provisos, the key
findings are summarized below.

        Many projects now plan for resettlement. Since 2002, half of all ADB-supported
projects have included resettlement planning; the corresponding figure was about 20% in the
period 1994­2001. The proportion has grown because of increasing requirements and more
due diligence on ADB's part, rather than a change in the nature of the projects supported.

        Many people affected by ADB-supported projects. In terms of APs identified, the
differences have not been similarly large, implying that the increase in attention to IR has led
ADB to include RPs and resettlement frameworks (RFs) for many projects with relatively small
resettlement impacts, and which earlier did not generate such treatment. ADB's reports and
recommendations of the President (RRPs) issued between 1994 and 2005 anticipated that the
projects would have an impact on at least 1.77 million APs. Projects approved in the last 5 years
were expected to affect between 100,000 and 150,000 people every year.

         Transport projects have affected the most people by far (76% of all APs; one quarter
of the APs requiring actual resettlement); other sectors in which considerable resettlement was
involved included urban and water (8%), energy (7%), agriculture and natural resource projects
relying on infrastructure creation (6%), and multisector projects (3%). In the last 4 years, almost
all infrastructure projects approved have included resettlement planning. Because of the large
transport portfolio, dense population, and small landholdings, the majority (61%) of all APs of
projects supported by ADB from 1994 to 2005 were in the PRC.

         Weak estimation of the number of APs in the past. A review of all 62 PCRs that ADB
issued until 2005 for infrastructure projects approved since 1994, shows that the performance of
ADB and the EAs in estimating the number of APs was weak in that period. The actual number
of APs recorded was 65% higher than estimated in the RRPs. The estimation problem was less
serious for people who were actually resettled: 10% more people were resettled than
anticipated. The underestimation was much more pronounced for the categories of APs that lost
access to land or assets but did not need to move: over 150% more people were affected than
anticipated. Overall, 40% of APs identified actually needed to be resettled; the other 60% lost a
part of their land or their structures but did not need to be resettled. Some of the APs in the
latter group were affected by loss of economic opportunities that were not land related, such as
shopkeepers, water vendors, and scavengers at dump sites.

         Costs difficult to estimate. Costs of land acquisition and resettlement proved similarly
difficult to estimate and were in practice often underestimated as well. The budgets for these
items ranged from $0.02 million (for only six households) to $214.50 million, with an average of
$24 million, or 6% of the average project budget. The actual expenditure in one case increased
vi


to $333.7 million, and the average project expenditure was almost double the estimate at
$41 million (11%). In the four case study countries, almost half of the projects studied had land
acquisition and resettlement estimates that proved to be at least 50% off; but only 7% of the
projects had total cost estimates that were off by that much, implying that the cost of land
acquisition and resettlement operations are less precisely estimated than other items of total
project cost. This finding has some important operational implications, as policy changes
adopted in 2005 allow ADB to finance land acquisition costs.

        Forty percent of the PCRs for infrastructure projects studied reported on resettlement
issues. Eight suggested the need for follow up actions, such as identification of APs that had not
fully restored their livelihoods, preparation of plans to restore incomes, and continued
monitoring. This SES recommends that the follow-up actions be pursued.

         ADB staff views mixed. The small sample of ADB staff that responded to a call for
filling out a questionnaire believed that ADB does not spend enough resources on EA training,
the investigation of project alternatives, resettlement preparation, or resettlement
implementation. Most respondents, however, believed that ADB added value through the
implementation of its IR policy.

        EA views mixed. The EA project directors who responded to a questionnaire survey
(49% of EAs responded) were generally appreciative of the implementation of the policy, and
saw benefits such as capacity development and better outcomes for APs. Almost two thirds
reported to have had one or more differences with ADB staff on IR, and noted incremental costs
and delays. Some representatives of borrowers in the four case study countries and EA officers
interviewed during field missions pointed out that an important "transaction cost" for them was
that the IR policy forced EAs to go considerably beyond their normal practice. This was believed
to sometimes have a good demonstration value, but also larger, more questionable
consequences such as setting double standards for foreign-funded and other projects, and
diminishing respect for the law and government policy.

        Convergence between country and ADB systems growing. An examination of the
country systems for the management of IR studied in PRC, India, Philippines, and Viet Nam
found some evidence of a trend towards convergence with the ADB standards, especially in
PRC, India, and Viet Nam. In these countries, various new land acquisition and resettlement
policies have been issued or new laws enacted, often with support from ADB. Good
resettlement implementation capacity has been built up in some organizations in India and in
many local governments in the PRC. However, divergence remains in all four countries, given
that ADB is simultaneously raising its standards and due diligence. The divergence requires
close involvement to ensure that the EAs continue to meet ADB's higher expectations.
Interviews with ADB staff and other sources confirmed that in all DMCs there are discrepancies
between the DMCs' resettlement regulations and the ADB policy, even in such countries as Sri
Lanka, whose policy comes close to ADB's. Although many countries allow the award of
compensation for land at replacement cost under some circumstances, for instance, they do not
prescribe this, leaving it to the project to negotiate this with the land authorities. Full alignment
with country systems seems difficult to achieve without ADB relaxing its policy and procedures
and curbing the trend to ever greater inclusiveness. Such relaxation may not be opportune,
although a case can be made, from a broader capacity development perspective, to establish
the principles of the policy as targets to be achieved over a period of time. Close involvement of
ADB in the preparation of RPs and resettlement operations remains necessary for many
agencies in DMCs with low capacity to implement government and ADB policies.
                                                                                               vii


        ADB's TA valuable. The SES assessed that the value of ADB's technical assistance
(TA) in helping countries with IR policy development or capacity development was almost
invariably high. ADB has approved TA worth $7.6 million for this since 1994, a modest amount,
and perhaps too modest.

        Procedural compliance variable in project case studies. Sixteen case studies
conducted by consultants in PRC, India, and Philippines showed that compliance with the IR
policy has been variable, when measured against presently applied standards. All APs were
compensated, and most were assisted in some way. Many APs in the PRC and to a lesser
extent in the Philippines were compensated or assisted at levels much higher than seen in other
DMCs. In many cases, however, compliance with one or more of the many procedures or
special loan covenants was late, partial or questionable, given the lack of clear guidelines on
how to interpret the compatibility of the country's procedures with ADB procedures. In some
cases, RPs were not updated when they should have been; compensation was not provided in
a timely manner, or was not provided based on the best method for determining replacement
cost of lost assets or according to the RP procedure; APs were not consulted sufficiently about
the resettlement sites; external monitoring arrangements were made late; and/or grievance
redress mechanisms were not well organized. Assistance to the vulnerable and for rehabilitation
of APs was mostly provided, but was of variable quality. In the PRC, the compensation for land
loss went through the rural collectives that owned the land, and in the older cases was not
distributed in cash to individual APs in accordance with the spirit of the ADB policy.

       Efficiency and procedural compliance is improving. Overall, efficiency and
procedural compliance have improved over the years--early resettlement operations were
planned and implemented less systematically than those approved more recently. In so far as
the issue of replacement cost is concerned, a rigorous application could not always be
negotiated with the countries concerned (authorities other than the EAs are often responsible for
awarding compensation), and the lower compensation rates achieved were in practice
complemented in part by special assistance packages. This applied also to some other aspects
of the policy and procedures, such as (i) the cost of housing in new resettlement sites for
squatter households, which was in practice often shared with these households; and (ii) the
timing of award of compensation and resettlement, sometimes set more practically than the
procedures required.

       While the policy seems to require total compliance, in practice its application was often a
compromise. This SES in principle supports such a flexible approach, but wonders whether the
policy allows this, and whether ADB's Compliance and Accountability Mechanism would
endorse it when put to the test. This should be clarified as part of the safeguard policy review.

        APs often satisfied with housing. Most APs interviewed in PRC and Philippines
responded that they were by and large satisfied with housing improvements, and many with
compensation and economic rehabilitation. Satisfaction levels were lower in most projects
studied in India, but even there, there was usually appreciation for some aspects of the
resettlement process. This was due mainly to the APs' awareness that they had been
compensated and treated better than would have been the case if an institution like ADB had
not been involved. Even in the PRC this seemed to be the case more recently, where EAs are
now doing more in terms of addressing adverse impacts and assisting APs than previously.

       Incremental and transaction costs high. The study asked the question whether the
outcomes had been sufficiently positive to justify the incremental costs and the transaction costs
associated with ADB's involvement. This study believes efficiency in policy implementation is a
viii


valid criterion. Circumstantial evidence suggests that some of the more identifiable transaction
costs have been too high in at least a few of the project case studies. In one case, an EA that
had been a partner of ADB for decades decided not to go for another loan, due to ADB's
perceived intransigence and insensitivity in that particular case, and because of the changing
goal posts in the area of resettlement. In another case, a loan was cancelled when a
government decided to turn a two-lane highway improvement project into a dual carriageway.
ADB was not requested to provide funding for the new project, partly because of onerous new
resettlement planning required as part of the appraisal process, which the government thought
did not fit its schedule. Overall, OED believes that the bar is sometimes set at a too high level
for countries and EAs, thereby either lowering their interest in requesting assistance from ADB
or, when the loan is already signed by borrowers and EAs, creating resistance and delays at the
level of the implementing agencies.

       Assessment of the Policy and Its Implementation

        The study assesses the policy as relevant to project implementation and to ADB's
aim to reduce poverty. ADB's policy has been practical in many cases, as it promotes early
planning and appropriate compensation to APs to get the land required to implement
infrastructure projects. Treating APs in the manner prescribed in the policy helps to reduce
social turmoil and resistance to the project, and facilitates land acquisition and project
implementation. The study, however, also notes that formal compliance with procedures,
especially those promoted since 2002, has been somewhat at the expense of the goal of
capacity building, which presupposes that the procedural targets need to be seen as
performance standards, to be aspired to by EAs that need to work to improve their IR policies
and procedures. The level of compliance with the procedures needed could have been worked
out better and earlier. The IR policy itself has become a misnomer, as policy implementation
increasingly deals with adverse impacts other than those related to significant displacement of
people. About 60% of the affected people did not require resettlement; rather, livelihood
restoration was their key concern.

        The study tentatively assesses the IR policy as effective in terms of outcomes for
APs, because of the limited number of countries visited and projects examined, although on the
borderline of a "less effective" rating due to the variations encountered among projects and
countries. This assessment is based on the available information about the coverage of
compensation provided to APs and the satisfaction levels often registered with housing
provided, and in spite of the variable compliance with ADB procedures and variable
achievement of economic rehabilitation of APs across projects and countries. The assessment
takes into account the fact that later resettlement operations appeared to be better planned and
implemented than earlier ones. The study expects most ongoing resettlement operations to
achieve a higher level of effectiveness (except perhaps for sector projects). Outcomes for
capacity development in EAs have also been by and large effective. Half of the EA project
directors saw the increase in experience with resettlement safeguards as one of the main
benefits of ADB involvement. ADB TA for IR often had high value in terms of policy development
and capacity building.

       The study assesses inputs, processes, and systems for IR policy implementation
as having been less efficient. Applying the policy has been singularly painful in many cases.
ADB's IR policy, through its changing procedures and the organizational arrangements made to
enforce it, has been gradually setting the bar higher. This tendency was not questioned by
Management in the progress reports on policy implementation submitted to the Board; a formal
review with recommended policy modifications, required after 2 years of Policy implementation,
                                                                                                ix


was never submitted to the Board. In an area as contentious as resettlement, Management
should not have allowed the significant extension of the scope and application of the IR Policy
without drafting another policy paper for consideration by the Board to ensure that these
extensions were consistent with the wishes of ADB's shareholders. In a number of cases ADB
staff have reinterpreted original agreements made (or not made) with clients. Variable
interpretations and attention given to the policy have caused much confusion and upheaval on
the side of ADB's clients over an extended period. A larger effort has gone into resettlement
preparation than into implementation and loan administration. The lack of supervision by ADB
during project implementation has sometimes contributed to less than satisfactory outcomes
and adverse impacts on APs. Many APs have experienced uncertainty, fear of uprooting and
wrong information for short or long periods. In sector projects, where potentially many dozens of
RPs may need to be prepared after loan preparation and with less consultant support, more
challenging subprojects are sometimes excluded because of the time and resource
requirements. These projects in time will most likely go ahead with domestic funding, but without
the benefit of ADB's standards for IR. On a more positive note, in spite of overall lack of IR
specialists in ADB due to the now higher demands, the number has increased compared with
5 years ago, and experience in ADB with resettlement operations has also increased greatly.
ADB's Environment and Social Safeguard Division (RSES) of the Regional and Sustainable
Development Department (RSDD) and the Safeguard Policy Compliance Memorandum have
helped raise the profile of resettlement in ADB's operations, but RSES lacks staff to be fully
efficient in ensuring quality assurance within the context of the current IR policy and procedures.
More resources allocated to capacity development rather than short-term compliance within
ADB-supported projects may yield better long-term results.

        The study assesses ADB's IR policy approach as less likely to be sustainable,
given the high costs for ADB and clients and the widely diverging views held by various
stakeholders. Sustainability is defined here as replicability, and is shown by a growing
acceptance of ADB's approach by clients. Both incremental and transaction costs weigh against
maintaining and expanding relations with clients, even though a survey of EAs also registered
many positive reactions; but many of these EAs did not have to pay all the associated costs.
What is more, those that declined or would decline ADB loans when offered were not included
in the coverage of the survey. Incremental costs can be summarized as high consultant costs,
costs of the socioeconomic surveys to determine levels of vulnerability and need for
rehabilitation, additional costs borne by some governments due to award of replacement value
for land and structures when their system for establishing a property's value is different from
ADB's preferred method in principle or practice, compensation for structures and income lost of
nontitleholders (if this was not mandatory in the DMC), and assistance to the poor and
vulnerable when DMC law gives them no rights to this. Transaction costs are apparent in delays
due to preparation of intricate RPs, which lead to longer involvement of government staff than
otherwise normal, extra costs due to contract extensions, and higher commitment charges for
ordinary capital resources loans when there are delays due to differences between ADB and the
EA. Ultimately these translate into lower economic and financial returns of projects. They are
also apparent in risk avoidance behavior by ADB staff, or clients losing interest in ADB, leading
to ADB having less influence on IR processes. A policy that will not be adopted for locally
financed projects cannot be called replicable and is therefore not sustainable in a wider sense.
While there are transaction costs associated with the policy, there are also transaction costs
associated with not adequately addressing resettlement and livelihood restoration issues (e.g.,
social unrest, reputational issues for ADB and the DMC, delays in acquiring land, unacceptable
adverse impacts on APs).
x


       Recommendations Considered During the Safeguard Policy Update

       The team in RSDD working on the policy update should consider the following
recommendations and expand the evidence base as deemed needed, in order to arrive at a
strengthened assessment of past experience, and a well justified proposal for policy update.

       (i)     Management and the Board need to reconcile the differences between the
               1995 Policy and the currently applied policy, as laid down in the OM F2
               section. In OED's view, the three key principles of the policy remain valid, but
               ADB needs to decide whether to endorse the greater inclusiveness of the IR
               policy and procedures, or return the current OM and IR practice back to greater
               focus on displacement of APs.

       (ii)    Whatever the nature of the policy adopted, it should have a results-based
               framework--distinguishing desired impact, outcomes, outputs, activities,
               and inputs both at macro (country) and micro (project) level. At the macro
               level the impact should be a good country system of safeguards, at the micro
               level of individual projects the restoration of livelihoods of APs. At the micro level
               of an individual project, ADB and EAs and related local organizations can only
               contribute to the achievement of the desired impact and outcomes; the EA would
               be fully responsible for outputs, and ADB and EA for an agreed set of activities
               and inputs.

       (iii)   The updated policy should highlight a set of performance standards.
               It should set standards for both ADB and EA in terms of vulnerability
               assessment, public consultation, disclosure of information, reporting, monitoring,
               and grievance redress.

       (iv)    The updated policy should elaborate on the objective of greater reliance on
               country EA systems for land acquisition and resettlement safeguards. The
               common objective should be for ADB's operations to rely more on country
               systems for IR. This would need to be accompanied by certifications, preferably
               by ADB working jointly with other aid agencies, of sufficient convergence with the
               IR policy and effective implementation capacity.

       (v)     There should be clearer guidelines and procedures regarding the
               identification of resettlement operations needed, such as those for (i) the
               consideration of project alternatives, (ii) retroactive compliance with the policy,
               (iii) different types of operations and lending modalities, (iv) the minimum number
               of APs, and (v) RFs.

       (vi)    There should be clearer guidelines and procedures regarding
               compensation and assistance within resettlement operations. The issues
               and recommendations concern (i) procedures for ADB-financed acquisition of
               land, (ii) use of the replacement cost method for the determination of
               compensation and assistance, (iii) ADB approaches in squatter situations,
               (iv) definition of the period after which economic rehabilitation should be
               achieved, (v) public consultation and disclosure requirements, and (vi) external
               monitoring. The detailed recommendations regarding resettlement planning,
               compensation and assistance are presented in Section B of Chapter VI, Boxes 3
               and 4.
                                                                                                   xi


       Recommendations for Involuntary Resettlement Implementation

         ADB is facing a dilemma. The IR bar has been continuously raised. Staff dedicated to IR
have increased but not sufficiently. The policy is equivalent to that of the World Bank, but staff
resources available for its enforcement are not. The record shows that ADB is giving insufficient
attention to supervising the administration of RPs and monitoring their implementation.
However, ADB shareholders have also made it clear that ADB staff numbers should not grow
significantly. Management must find ways to balance the staff resources and the IR policy.
Options include some combination of the following: (i) allocating more resettlement specialists,
either through reallocation of existing positions or creating more positions; (ii) identifying ways to
focus ADB's scarce resettlement expertise in areas of greatest value added; and/or
(iii) changing the policy in ways that will be less staff intensive for ADB. This may involve making
greater use of country systems.

       The study made three major recommendations regarding IR implementation issues:

       (i)     Formulate a time-sequenced implementation plan to complement the IR
               safeguard policy update. This should fully identify the required resource
               requirements, staffing and organizational implications, and perhaps benchmark
               staffing against that of the World Bank for the implementation of its policy.

       (ii)    Improve IR monitoring. Loan covenants regarding IR need to be more
               consistent across loan agreements. ADB monitoring of resettlement
               implementation, including post-resettlement rehabilitation, needs to improve,
               particularly during review missions, and reporting needs to be updated more
               regularly and made more detailed in project performance reports. Partnerships
               with NGOs and civil society organizations should be strengthened with a greater
               involvement in project monitoring arrangements. ADB should develop a better
               system to follow up on actions recommended in PCRs.

       (iii)   Deepen the involvement in building country systems and capacity for IR.
               ADB should accord a higher priority to training programs for EA staff, as the
               payoff may be high in terms of improved resettlement operations. A country
               review on safeguards should be undertaken as part of country planning, to
               assess which aspects of the procedures should be instituted over and above the
               country's own safeguard systems. ADB TA on country systems, led by RSES,
               could feed into this. Other than this, policy dialogue with countries needs to
               continue, as does the harmonization dialogue with other aid agencies. Under the
               IR policy, ADB is required to build capacity for resettlement, but only modest
               resources have been directed towards this area. A greater effort can be justified.



                                                              Bruce Murray
                                                              Director General
                                                              Operations Evaluation Department
                                             I.       INTRODUCTION

A.        Need for the Study

1.      This study concerns an evaluation of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) 1995 Policy on
Involuntary Resettlement (IR).1 The IR Policy is one of ADB's three safeguard policies,2 the
other two being the 1998 Policy on Indigenous Peoples (IP),3 and the 2002 Environment Policy.4
Other safeguard issues are embodied in various sector policies.

2.      ADB's Regional and Sustainable Development Department (RSDD) announced a
simultaneous review of all three safeguard policies in a concept paper issued on 22 October
2004.5 This was to be carried out to determine appropriate revisions to the three policies, to be
approved by ADB's Board of Directors. Significant consultation with a broad range of
stakeholders was planned as part of that process. In November 2005, RSDD posted a
discussion note on the ADB website.6 In late 2005, the Development Effectiveness Committee
(DEC) of ADB's Board of Directors requested that the Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
contribute to the review process by providing independent assessments of the three safeguard
policies. It was recognized that the special evaluation studies (SESs) would have to be carried
out under a tight time constraint so that they could be completed in a timely manner and feed
into the process leading to the revision of the safeguard policies. DEC also requested that
RSDD postpone its review so that it could take into account the findings of the studies and the
views of DEC. The tight timeframe limited the depth, coverage and amount of field work
undertaken for the evaluations. The OED evaluations were not designed to duplicate the broad
country and civil society consultation processes initiated by RSDD. Rather, they were designed
to concentrate on reviewing compliance with the policies during implementation and assessing
results on the ground, within the timeframe and budget available. RSDD will submit a draft
paper for consideration by the Board in April­May 2007, incorporating the review.

B.        Background

3.     The IR policy7 mandates that a series of principles be upheld, and that fixed procedures
should be followed to safeguard the interests of affected persons (APs): (i) IR is to be avoided
wherever feasible; (ii) if resettlement is unavoidable, population displacement is to be minimized
by choosing alternative viable project options; and (iii) APs need to receive assistance,
preferably under the project, so that after IR they will be at least as well off as they would have
been in the absence of the project. Key procedures include early public disclosure of intentions,



1
    ADB. 1995. Involuntary Resettlement. Manila.
2
    The ADB website on safeguards (http://www.adb.org/Safeguards/default.asp) states: "Safeguard policies prescribe
    "do no harm" requirements that must be met for all ADB projects." ADB has not elsewhere defined the use of the
    term "safeguards", but has grouped the three policies under this heading in the table of contents of its Operations
    Manual. The Operations Evaluation Department takes it to mean "those principles, procedures, and guidelines that
    make sure `no harm is done' through the projects ADB supports."
3
    ADB. 1998. The Bank's Policy on Indigenous Peoples. Manila.
4
    ADB. 2002. Environment Policy. Manila.
5
    ADB. 2004. ADB Policy Statement on Environment and Social Safeguards. Manila.
6
    ADB. 2005. Safeguard Policy Update. A Discussion Note. Manila. Available: http://www.adb.org/Documents/
    Policies/Safeguards/discussion-note.pdf
7
    The term policy is used in a generic way, reflecting current consensus in ADB as to what this comprises, and which
    usually approximates the latest Operations Manual version of the Policy and the connected operational
    procedures, sometimes also including policy elements not expressed in the original 1995 Policy statement. When
    this study refers to the IR Policy of 1995, the capital P is used.
    2


consultation processes, and preparation of full or short resettlement plans (RPs) or frameworks
(RFs) in case the scope of resettlement cannot be defined before loan approval. The
procedures also prescribe grievance redress mechanisms and monitoring and evaluation
systems for the implementation period. The procedures are set in motion when a mandatory
initial poverty and social analysis has identified one or more persons who might be adversely
affected by the use of land by the project.

4.     ADB has historically supported IR activities in the context of its projects, but much of this
was not systematic until the mid-1990s. Before 1994, resettlement was addressed as part of
social impact guidelines applied in the preparation of projects. In February 1994, ADB's
President decided that World Bank IR guidelines were to be followed in the preparation and
implementation of ADB supported projects. In September 1995, ADB approved its IR Policy,
and a Handbook on good practices was issued in 1998.8

5.      The IR Policy called for a review after 2 years of implementation (i.e., around 1998), but
this did not take place. OED, however, carried out two evaluations, one on safeguards for
hydropower projects in 1999,9 and one on the impact of the policy in 2000.10 The former studied
four hydro projects and concluded that, despite the controversies widely associated with dam
projects, they had not resulted in disastrous social or environmental impacts. However, several
shortcomings had occurred, particularly in the older projects, most of which could have been
avoided or mitigated with more diligence on the part of ADB and executing agencies (EAs).
Based on a desk study of eight and a field study of another eight transport and water projects,
OED's 2000 study on IR corroborated that there had been improvements in the preparation and
implementation of resettlement operations since approval of the 1995 Policy. It also noted that
there were many problems that needed to be addressed to achieve satisfactory resettlement
results (Appendix 1 summarizes the findings of the two studies).

6.     Much has happened since 2000. In line with suggestions in OED's 1999 study, ADB's
reorganization in 2002 led to new business processes, new procedures for safeguard
compliance, and changes in the location of safeguard specialists within ADB. In mid-2005, new
lending rules, lending modalities, and business processes changed the context in which RPs will
be designed and implemented.11 In developing member countries (DMCs), and sometimes with
the support of ADB technical assistance (TA), national policies, laws, and regulations on IR
were introduced or strengthened over the period.

C.       Scope and Methodology of the Evaluation

7.      The scope of this SES is to provide an overview of the scale and nature of IR in ADB
operations; examine the extent of application of the IR policy; review trends; make pertinent
comparisons with other systems; and provide OED's assessment of the policy's relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability--all on the basis of evidence gathered within a tight



8
   ADB. 1998. Handbook on Resettlement. A Guide to Good Practice. Manila.
9
   ADB. 1999. Special Evaluation Study on Social and Environmental Impacts of Hydropower Projects. Manila.
10
   ADB. 2000. Special Evaluation Study on the Policy Impact of Involuntary Resettlement. Manila. Available:
   http://www.adb.org/Evaluation/reports.asp?s=1&wp=2&ps=25&type=4
11
   For instance, land acquisition costs incurred for projects are now reimbursable under ADB loans. The piloting of the
   new multitranche financing facility, introduced in 2005, may allow the preparation of RPs to become part of the first
   loan tranche for the project so that these RPs can be finalized less hurriedly and draw on the results of detailed
   project design. Implementation of RPs could be linked to the approval of subsequent loan tranches.
                                                                                                                  3


time frame to fit the schedule of the safeguard policy update. The study presents OED's best
approximation of what has happened and how the Policy worked out. The level of compliance of
projects with the policy is assessed, as is its probable impact on APs and on institutional
development. Attention is paid to incremental costs and transaction costs for ADB and its
clients. OED furthermore provides some options for consideration during the safeguard policy
update, and recommendations on implementation issues. The study is intended to provide DEC
with an independent assessment and also to contribute to the safeguard policy review, which is
currently planned to lead to a proposal by Management to the Board for consideration of a
policy update in November 2007.

8.       Information Sources for the Study. The study drew on (i) information in ADB
databases and project documents, (ii) interviews with ADB staff, (iii) questionnaire surveys,
(iv) country and project case studies, and (v) interviews with APs and other key stakeholders.
The databases and project documents were used to generate aggregate data on projects with
APs, and to analyze trends over the period 1994­2005 (1994 being the year when the IR policy
was informally first applied, and the first year for which categorized data are readily available).
The questionnaire surveys covered ADB staff, and EA staff involved in ongoing projects
categorized as having impacts on APs. The surveys had 61 and 67 responses respectively,
reflecting 10% of concerned ADB operational staff and 49% of EAs contacted. The case studies
involved visits to four countries: Peoples Republic of China (PRC), India, Philippines, and Viet
Nam. ADB-supported projects in these countries had significant resettlement activities: they
covered over 50% of all ADB projects with resettlement planning, and 80% of all APs. PRC and
India received only ordinary capital resources (OCR) loans, whereas Philippines and Viet Nam
received both OCR loans and loans from the Asian Development Fund. In PRC, India, and
Philippines, from two to eight projects were studied in more depth; all of these projects had
some IR activities, and covered one of four main sectors in terms of IR: (i) transport; (ii) energy;
(iii) urban (i.e., water supply and sanitation, and multisector projects); and (iv) agriculture and
natural resources. Eighteen completed and ongoing projects were visited, and consultants
prepared 16 project case studies in all.12 Information regarding this study and case studies
selected was disclosed on the OED website for the first time, and a request for communication
of experiences of stakeholders was made.13

9.      Limitations of the Study. Due to time limitations, the study does not constitute a full
impact evaluation of the IR policy. Significant resources and time are needed for a rigorous
evaluation covering hundreds of ongoing and completed projects in many sectors. The sample
of 16 project case studies chosen was far too small for this. File studies were relied on, and
rapid field assessments by consultants, aided by limited surveys of APs, mostly consisting of
30­60 questionnaires per project (around 600 in all). The assessments were sometimes used
as validations of earlier studies and surveys done for project completion reports (PCRs). The
project case studies were conducted in 3 of ADB's 42 DMCs and do not represent the level of
compliance with the policy in other countries, or the policy's overall impact. Capacity in the case
study countries with respect to resettlement operations is perhaps higher than the average
across all DMCs. Smaller DMCs were not included in the field missions, and regions such as
the Pacific and Central Asia were not represented, except through study of secondary sources.
The case study projects were selected irrespective of their performance, and without prior




12
   In Viet Nam, two projects were studied that included IR, but no detailed IR case studies were prepared; the focus
   was on IPs. The field visits contributed to both the IR and IP Policy evaluation studies.
13
   This, however, did not generate a large number of responses.
 4


knowledge of the projects' performance. Ongoing projects were included to look at the effects of
the newer procedures and practices, although the full impact had not always materialized at the
time of the fieldwork. The study analyzed the breadth of IR issues rather than focusing on any
issue in great depth. An attempt was made to address the shortcomings of any single research
instrument through the use of triangulation. Aggregated findings of PCRs, project performance
reports (PPRs), and project performance evaluation reports (PPERs) were compared with those
of the project case studies and other sources. The study did not address all issues raised in
RSDD's discussion note (footnote 6)--particularly those regarding lending for the private sector,
credit lines, and program loans. The study could not take into account the findings of a parallel
evaluation by the NGO Forum on ADB, as these were not yet published at the time of finalizing
this evaluation.14 Given time constraints, civil society views were not systematically canvassed,
although the ADB and OED websites included requests for feedback. Upon OED's approval,
this study will be sent for comments to the concerned DMCs and the NGOs tracking the
safeguard studies, and the comments will be posted on the OED web site, together with
Management's response and the summary of the DEC chairperson. More information on the
methodology is in Supplementary Appendix A.

D.         Organization of the Report

10.      Chapter II discusses the nature of IR and its relative occurrence in various sectors like
dams, transport, and township development, to indicate the large variation in circumstances
under which the policy has to be applied. The chapter also analyzes ADB's IR Policy and
changes made in the procedures over the years, examines ADB's organizational setup for the
implementation and control of IR, and compares policy and organization with that of some other
institutions. Chapter III analyzes the importance of resettlement within ADB's loan and TA
portfolio, the number and nature of people affected, and their distribution across sectors and
countries. The chapter also analyzes ADB's performance in resettlement planning and
operations by studying a variety of sources, such as progress reports and PCRs. Chapter IV
analyzes the country contexts and country systems in the four case study countries selected.
An important question is the level of convergence with ADB IR policy. ADB's TA portfolio on IR,
which focuses on both policy and capacity development, is also assessed. Chapter V evaluates
the findings of the case study projects in terms of procedural and substantive compliance with
aspects of IR policy, and assesses the impact on APs, the added value of ADB support to IR,
and the associated transaction costs. Chapter VI assesses the policy in terms of relevance of
the policy and procedures; effectiveness of outcomes on APs and on EA capacity; efficiency of
inputs, processes, and systems; and sustainability of the policy's approach. It also discusses a
number of options for ADB to consider and provides recommendations.

                   II.      ADB AND INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT SAFEGUARDS

A.         Affected Persons and Infrastructure Projects

11.    ADB's Handbook on Resettlement (footnote 8) includes a comprehensive table showing
that most types of infrastructure projects that ADB helps finance can require land acquisition
and resettlement of people. However, it is widely acknowledged that the most severe dislocation



14
     Unlike the present study, the NGO Forum on ADB study is focusing on controversial projects. Its terms of reference
     indicate the following objectives: (i) to expose the gaps/failures of ADB policies, and (ii) to exemplify impacts if ADB
     policies were not used and to show the costs of no strong ADB safeguard policies.
                                                                                                                      5


events are caused by the creation of new dams with large reservoirs. Such dams are generally
created for purposes of irrigation of agricultural land, storage for drinking water supply, flood
protection, and hydropower generation. PRC and India are among the countries with the most
dams in the world. By their very nature, dams can cause the IR of remote mountainous peoples
that, in accordance with ADB's definitions, are often classified as IP and are poor. Resettlement
in the context of dams generally needs to be conducted across longer distances, and whole
communities can be uprooted, losing not only homesteads and villages, but also all natural
resources (communal lands), cultural resources (places of burial or religious worship or
symbols, ancestral lands or domains), and income and employment resources (land, water,
proximity to employment centers). Dams usually also have important upstream and downstream
effects that need to be taken into consideration.

12.     A second type of public sector infrastructure investment that often causes large-scale
displacement and uprooting of communities is the development of large tracts of land around
urban areas for government-supported industrial, commercial, or housing sites. In these cases,
resettlement impacts are similarly severe but can be somewhat mitigated by providing housing
for the displaced in new townships, and by providing employment to APs on the new estates.
Given the frequency with which township development and sites and services projects are
supported by governments through compulsory land acquisition operations in rural areas around
towns, urban development is likely to be among the most important causes of IR.15 A third type
of public investment with large impacts on the need for IR is also related to urban development
but deals with slum clearance and urban renewal, often in the centers of cities. Due to the
density of urban populations in Asia, even the clearance of small areas can cause displacement
of large groups of people from one area of the city to another, or out of the city altogether.

13.     Most other types of projects do not usually require the resettlement of communities
across longer distances out of their usual environment, so that they can be preserved better,
and their proximity to places of worship, work, communal lands, and employment nodes
retained. Although railway and highway construction projects can require significant land
acquisition and can dislocate many people, good planning can mitigate most of the negative
impact on APs and their communities. The same is true for other linear projects such as canal
alignments, embankments, and reticulation systems. These may lead to a relatively large
number of people losing part but not all of their land and moving either to another location on
their own land or to other land nearby. More compact nonlinear projects requiring land involve
the construction of airports and ports; water and wastewater treatment plants; pumping, power,
and transmission stations; and sites for schools, hospitals, and offices. These usually lead to
loss of houses and land for a number of APs but generally have less severe impacts on
communities and do not result in long-distance relocation away from sources of income.




15
     Examples of this are provided by a study of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
     Pacific (UNESCAP) regarding municipal land management in Asia, which drew on case studies in Bandung,
     Dhaka, Hué, and Kandy. It found that large tracts of land had been expropriated within a short period of time. In
     Hué, Viet Nam, as much as 8% of the total municipal land area had been expropriated during the latest 3-year
     period (560 hectares [ha]). The equivalent figure for Kandy, Sri Lanka, was 3% (90 ha), and it was 1.5% (252 ha) in
     much larger Bandung, Indonesia. All municipalities had instruments to expropriate private land owners in the public
     interest, subject to approval by the national government. The study observed that the urban population in Asia
     increases daily by the equivalent of one city of 140,000 people. UNESCAP. 1995. Municipal Land Management in
     Asia: A Comparative Study. Available: http://www.unescap.org/huset/m_land/index.htm
 6


B.       Informal Dwellers and Squatters in Asian Cities

14.     In many Asian countries, the combination of unequal distribution of land and wealth, and
lack of proper land registration and administration in both rural and urban areas creates special
problems. Large populations live on unregistered land without formal titles, or have occupied
public or private land illegally. Most governments do not fully recognize claims of squatters (i.e.,
nonlegalizable nontitleholders as they are called in ADB's Operations Manual [OM]), and the
implementation of the IR Policy, which states that title to land is not a bar to compensation, is
often a matter of dispute with DMCs.16 The DMCs where land is mainly a public good have had
fewer problems of this nature, but illegal occupation of land is on the increase in these countries
as well. Implementation of ADB's IR policy requires that vulnerable people be identified and
given special assistance; the determination of their land rights and their actual vulnerability in
the context of squatter syndicates, essentially criminal syndicates, can severely complicate the
needed surveys and can delay projects. ADB's policy requires the payment of compensation for
squatter housing and livelihood restoration, but most of the livelihoods are in the informal sector.
This can provide incentives for organized crime in the form of squatter syndicates to target ADB
projects, such as has happened in the Philippines.17 ADB's policy and handbook lack clear
guidance under what circumstances ADB would support or not support forcible eviction of
squatters that arrive after the census has taken place for people living in the project area. Areas
of informal dwellers not infected by criminal organizations can also engender social discontent
when ADB's policy requires payment of compensation in accordance with the highly variable
replacement costs of big and small illegal structures and the level of vulnerability of such usually
highly mobile people. In countries where special rights are not granted to squatters, courts often
rule against precedents created through projects, as this interferes with the principles of the rule
of law and the sanctity of property rights, on which the investment climate in a country is often
based. It is clear that the application of the IR policy in the context of squatters and squatter
areas needs extreme care and highly situation-specific approaches. Supplementary Appendix B
elaborates on the squatter problem in the Philippines to illustrate some dimensions of this
complex issue.

C.       ADB's Policy Framework: A Summary and Some Observations

         1.       Assessment of Need for Social Development Action in Projects

15.     ADB's concern for social impacts of the projects it helps fund and implement has set it
apart from many local and commercial funding sources in the region. ADB's operational policies
have mandated the conduct of initial social assessments during preparation of projects since
1991; earlier these were considered good practices but were not mandatory for all projects. In
1993 and 1994, guidelines were issued. Since 1999, specific poverty analysis was added to the
required assessments, and a mandatory initial poverty and social assessment was instituted,
applicable to all kinds of lending including policy-based lending. The report and
recommendation of the President (RRP) routinely contains a number of appendixes on social
assessments such as poverty impact analysis and social and poverty assessments, apart from
those on IR and IP. Addressing impacts on vulnerable people is the key aspect of all these



16
   There are exceptions, such as in Pakistan, Philippines, and Thailand. Under Thai law, squatters can apply for legal
   title to a plot of land after 10 years of continuous occupation. In practice, few succeed, and millions of people in the
   country continue to live on what is technically public land without papers and clear rights.
17
   The problem was so serious that a National Police Task Force on Squatting Syndicates and Professional Squatters
   was created under Executive Order 178 in 1999.
                                                                                                                     7


analyses. In addition to APs and IPs, they can include people affected by projects economically,
female-headed households, households of elderly people without family support, orphaned
children and street children, disabled people without supporting families, landless and casual
laborers, as well as immigrants and international refugees. In some cases where land issues
play no role in the potentially adverse impacts of projects, and where a need for enhancement
of certain groups is established, social development action plans are prepared.

16.    A related measure of importance to IR is the mandatory inclusion since 1992 of ADB's
Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation (BME) System in the project implementation process, which
had an explicit focus on baseline and follow-up socioeconomic surveys. The Project
Performance Management System, which succeeded it in 2003, requires projects to be
monitored at all stages with a focus on its results and socioeconomic outcomes.

17.    The IR Policy gained in prominence when ADB issued its Poverty Reduction Strategy in
1999 as its new overarching objective. The implication was that ADB was required more than
before to ensure that it would not impoverish the lives of any in the name of larger development
goals sought for the majority. The approval of the Inspection Policy in December 1995, and
subsequently revised as the Accountability Mechanism in May 2003 led to most of ADB's
operational policies being subjected to the possibility of special compliance reviews.18 The result
of the measures taken since 2002 has been an emphasis on poverty reduction and
accountability, and with these two the attention to IR has increased greatly within ADB.

           2.       ADB's Involuntary Resettlement Policy

18.    ADB's IR Policy principles are sensible. The Policy requires projects to avoid or mitigate
adverse impacts on people and to pay special attention to the problems of vulnerable people.
A practical aspect of the Policy for ADB operations has been that it deals with land acquisition
and resettlement in a systematic way and tries to handle the associated planning as much as
possible prior to the start of the project, which facilitates project implementation.

19.     Any evaluation of the 1995 IR Policy as a social safeguard policy must, however,
compare it with the successive OM Bank Policy (BP) sections of 1997 and 2003 on IR, and the
evolution of resettlement practice. Although the principles and broad goals of the 1995 Policy
may arguably have been retained in the OMs (approved by ADB Management), there have
been shifts in emphasis, up to the point that some specialists in ADB consider that the latest OM
has increased the requirements to be met by more than a third. In essence, the argument is that
the focus of the 1995 Policy document and the 7 January 1997 OM was on significant
displacement and resettlement, especially in the context of large infrastructure works, while the
focus of the OM Sections BP/F2 and Operational Procedure (OP)/F2, issued on 29 October
2003 (as a result of a review of the inspection function), is on recognizing and addressing all
kinds of losses that people affected by projects can sustain, including those that do not generate
involuntary displacement and do not require actual resettlement, or even loss of part of the land.
Box 1 highlights some shifts in the guidelines regarding the need for a RP from the IR Policy to
the Handbook, and later to OM/F2. Appendix 2 elaborates on the differences and also includes
Figure A2.1 showing the steps to be taken sequentially first to obtain approval for IR planning in




18
     At the time of writing this evaluation, the revision of the old Operations Manual section on the incorporation of
     social dimensions in ADB operations, covering social screening through initial poverty and social assessments, had
     yet to be completed.
8


a project, and then to implement IR after loan approval. The diagram illustrates that much
attention is paid to the formulation of plans and approval procedures, but less to
implementation. Obviously, APs benefit only if resettlement plans and other mitigation measures
are actually implemented.

            Box 1: Shifts in Guidance Regarding the Need for a Resettlement Plan

 Involuntary Resettlement Policy, 1995

 Where population displacement is unavoidable, a detailed resettlement plan with time-bound actions
 specified and a budget are required. The contents and detail of resettlement plans will vary with
 circumstances, especially the magnitude of resettlement. To assist staff and project sponsors, a set of
 guidelines and an annotated outline of a resettlement plan will be prepared and issued after the
 resettlement policy is approved by ADB (pages 11­12).

 Handbook on Resettlement, 1998

 A full RP is required when resettlement effects are significant. "Significant" is defined as meaning that
 200 people or more will experience resettlement effects; 100 people or more who are experiencing
 resettlement effects are indigenous people or vulnerable as defined in the policy (for example, female-
 headed households, the poorest, isolated communities, including those without legal title to assets, and
 pastoralists); or more than 50 people experiencing resettlement effects are particularly vulnerable, for
 example, hunter-gatherers. The projects department concerned decides, in consultation with Social
 Development Division, if a full RP is required.

 The Handbook defines effects as "Insignificant" if they are below the AP thresholds mentioned. Projects
 with insignificant resettlement effects, as determined by the Projects Departments concerned and
 SOCD, will have a short RP. In the case of minor resettlement matters, this plan needs to be from half a
 page to two pages in length. ADB may assist in the preparation of the RP (pages 11­13).

 OM Section OP/F2 Issued on 29 October 2003

 Projects are assigned an IR category depending on the significance of the probable IR impacts.

 a. Involuntary Resettlement Category A: Significant. "Significant" means 200 or more people will
 experience major impacts, which are defined as (i) being physically displaced from housing, or (ii) losing
 10% or more of their productive assets (income generating). Category A projects require a full RP.
 Some of these projects may require a RF prior to the full RP.

 b. Involuntary Resettlement Category B: Not Significant. Category B projects include IR impacts that are
 not deemed significant and require a short RP. Some of these projects may require a RF prior to the
 short RP.

 c. Involuntary Resettlement Category C. No IR effects are foreseen in category C projects. They neither
 require an RP nor an RF (paras. 18­21).


20.      Some specialists consulted justify the "Policy Plus" elements over the years as being in
line with evolving best international practice, notably World Bank practice, and increasingly less
passive reactions by persons adversely affected by large projects. The growing realization of
practitioners that displacement has consequences above and beyond loss of house or land,
affecting livelihoods and social networks has led to greater rigor in examining the social
dimensions of projects, and an urge to treat displacement processes as development projects in
their own right. Certainly, if the gradually increasing inclusiveness of the IR procedures had not
                                                                                                                9


been endorsed within the realm of resettlement operations, the indirect adverse impacts that
almost every project may have on certain individuals or groups would have had to be
considered under another cover, i.e., the Guidelines for Incorporation of Social Dimensions in
Bank Operations,19 and perhaps since August 2001, ADB's Social Protection Strategy.20
Certainly also, the OM F2/OP section has provided many useful clarifications that are in line
with the spirit of the original Policy, such as on nonlegalizable nontitleholders and on land
donation. However, others are more debatable, such as the rules that (i) the policy applies to
the entire project as handled by the EA, including components not financed by ADB; (ii) the
policy requires due diligence investigations to be conducted on actions performed by the EA in
anticipation of ADB operations; (iii) all eligible affected people are covered, including tenants
and employees of affected businesses who stand to lose their jobs, incomes, or livelihoods
because of project impacts; and (iv) loss of community and public resources is also eligible for
compensation.21 All of these expanded the inclusiveness of the policy.

21.     However, in some cases, the new policy is more restrictive than the old. The 1995 Policy
stated that "the absence of formal legal title to land by some affected groups should not be a bar
to compensation," implying that their loss of access to land should be compensated. The OM of
2003 changed this to: "Where land and assets are lost, titled and legalizable affected people are
entitled to compensation, in the form of cash at replacement cost or replacement land," meaning
that nonlegalizable nontitleholders (squatters) would not have right to compensation for loss of
access to land--only to assistance.22 The new rule contradicts the approved Policy and could
lead to confusion with stakeholders regarding what applies, and to request ADB to practice what
it preaches in the 1995 Policy.

22.     A consequence of the increasing coverage of the policy through its procedures has been
that the census and socioeconomic survey of APs required for RP have had to become more
and more elaborate in order to register not only the losses of each AP at the level of below or
beyond 10%, but also the level of vulnerability and whether this is above or below a
predetermined level. Such people are now regularly targeted for special assistance, including
cash lump sums. Particularly as a result of these latter additions to the OM, a larger number of
RPs has become necessary since 2003 to deal with all the cases where people are affected but
would not need to move, a reality that has led to much misunderstanding by EAs, which take
ADB's IR Policy to apply principally to APs in need of actual resettlement.

23.     The increased rigor in application of the policy and its OM sections has contributed to a
practice whereby RPs have expanded in size and detail, and the distinction between full and
short RPs has largely disappeared, with many "short RPs" now much longer than the two pages
anticipated originally by the Handbook on Resettlement (footnote 8). "Short RPs" of
considerable length are prepared for sometimes a handful of APs who experience only small
losses. Another consequence has been the introduction of the RF in case the adverse impact of
the project was still in doubt at the stage of loan approval and in the case of sector projects.



19
   ADB. 1993. Guidelines for Incorporation of Social Dimensions in Bank Operations. Manila.
20
   ADB. 2001. Social Protection Strategy. Manila.
21
   OM F2/OP para. 15 mentions: (i) water bodies, forest, woodland, pasture, and community recreation, and cultural
   sites; (ii) public structures such as markets, health and educational facilities, water and washing points, and
   meeting houses; and (iii) infrastructure such as roads, bridges, and other transport lines; power facilities;
   telecommunication lines; and water sanitation and drainage facilities.
22
   OM F2/OP para. 11 states: "Resettlement assistance to nontitled affected people may also include replacement
   land, although there is no entitlement to this for such affected people."
10


24.      The effects of the expansion of the original policy have drawn opposition from borrowers,
implementing agencies, and ADB project officers. Current resettlement planning has evolved
into full assessments of all possible losses that people in the direct influence of projects could
sustain as a result of the project. RPs are now required for projects that do not displace people,
such as rural roads projects that follow existing alignments but that may require a small slice of
private land along a road to be expropriated. RPs are prepared for projects that do not have
resettlement but have other socioeconomic impacts. For example, RPs have been prepared for
projects providing piped water supply to households, not because people are relocated but
because of diminished business for water vendors. These people are now assisted. Another
example includes assisting scavengers of waste dumps through RPs when a landfill project is
financed to replace the dumps. For ADB project officers, the work load has increased, and there
is a perception among some ADB staff that a "disproportionate" amount of the limited resources
available for project preparation goes to safeguard issues.

25.     A question that must be raised is whether it was appropriate for ADB staff and
Management to significantly expand the requirements of the implementation of the 1995 Policy
without asking for formal approval by the Board. In OED's view, such expansion was not
appropriate, although some elaboration of guidelines in a handbook was announced in the
original policy document. The IR Policy document required annual progress reports for the
Board and a policy review including recommended modifications after 2 years. Management
submitted two progress reports,23 one in 1997 and one in 1999, but these saw the expansions
as good practice. No review with recommended policy modifications was offered to the Board,
even when ADB reorganized its business processes in 2002. During a Board seminar on the
policy in July 2003, some Board members suggested that a new policy paper should be drafted
because of discrepancies between the IR policy and the new procedures.

26.     Some of the friction that the policy and procedures cause within ADB is due to their
wording. The IR Policy, the OM, and the Handbook on Resettlement do not seem to allow for
compromises with national laws, policies, capacities and budget constraints. Neither the Policy
nor the OM sets out how to deal with the existing country or borrower/EA laws, systems, and
practices. The implication is that these are superseded by the ADB policy and project
agreements that are built on it. However, this is at odds with the commitment ADB has recently
made to align its system with country systems in the context of the 2005 Paris Declaration.24
The procedures or Handbook do not address what level of violations will have to trigger what
kind of response by ADB staff, implying that every violation is equally serious. The level of
noncompliance with various principles and procedures that is still acceptable or excusable in
terms of the policy is not spelled out. Indeed, the tone of the operational procedures leaves little
room for anything other than a somewhat confrontational approach during implementation.
For instance, para. 55 of OM Section F2/OP expresses as rule 1 regarding the preparation and
review of resettlement planning documents: "All ADB requirements must be met." The irony is
that ADB is generally expected to develop capacity in the DMCs, which would imply that
variable targets need to be set based on the existing capacity, and that a certain amount of
noncompliance would be condoned as part of the learning process. The apparent non-
negotiable nature of the policy, however, implicitly works against such capacity development,
and instead encourages more punitive behavior towards EAs by ADB staff who are fearful of a




23
   ADB. 1997. Policy on Involuntary Resettlement: First Annual Report to the Board of Directors. Manila; ADB. 1999.
   Policy on Involuntary Resettlement: Second Report to the Board of Directors. Manila.
24
   OECD. 2005. Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Paris.
                                                                                                       11


compliance review. This is especially the case when missions are scarce and there is no day-to-
day collaborative relationship. The Policy is for the EAs, but the OM is for ADB staff. However,
ADB staff find themselves enforcing OM requirements that go well beyond the explicit level of
detail of the Policy of 1995 approved by ADB's Board, representing all ADB shareholders. RP
preparation is the direct responsibility of the DMC, not ADB. This is reinforced by the fact that
the documents placed on the website must contain the statement on the front page: "This is not
an ADB document."

27.    The policy, procedures, or Handbook give no indication over what period rehabilitation of
APs is expected to take place, making it difficult to assess how much in fact needs to be done
over what period. No clear guidance is given about the level of public consultation required.

28.     Interviews with ADB staff found that the changing goal posts and increasingly strict
application of the policy were in part due to evolving experience with project induced loss of
land, assets, and displacement, and the uncertainty with respect to the extent of compliance
needed and the fear of noncompliance, triggering the application of the accountability
mechanism. RPs have become longer due to the need felt by operations departments (ODs) to
protect against the negative fallout of vagueness and ambivalence in the guiding documentation
on the IR policy, which, if interpreted too loosely, may trigger compliance reviews. OM F2/OP
reinforces this: "However, in case of doubt in the early stages of project preparation, a
resettlement-planning document must be prepared."

29.     ADB's diligence continues to increase, witnessed most lately by the approval of ADB's
new Public Communications Policy.25 As per the new Policy, a covenant in a recent loan
agreement now reads that not only do RPs need to be disclosed to APs but also draft RPs:
"Draft RPs and draft updated RPs shall be disclosed to affected people prior to submission to
ADB for review and approval." The text in the Public Communications Policy pertaining to social
safeguards is reflected in Box 3 of Appendix 2, as it sets the bar higher than before. There are
also new requirements to make social and environmental monitoring reports publicly available
upon their submission to ADB, which requires more quality control by ADB, and that EAs and
private sector sponsors are required to make such reports available directly to APs.

D.        Institutional Arrangements for IR Policy Implementation

30.     Before ADB's reorganization effective 1 January 2002, safeguards were part of the
broader responsibilities of the Office of Environmental and Social Development (OESD). That
office had two divisions, the Environment Division and the Social Development Division
(SOCD). All ADB's social development specialists, except one, were integrated in SOCD. In
2000, SOCD had 11 social development specialists, a director, and 2 analysts. The SOCD
specialists performed many tasks, for some of them including assisting project team leaders in
the ODs with initial poverty and social assessments and subsequent RPs. The institutional
arrangement mixed operational and compliance tasks, which were later separated as part of the
2002 reorganization. However, the old arrangement also had its advantages. The Director,
SOCD had significant influence on the preparation of RPs for projects of ODs as many were
prepared by SOCD specialists. The reorganization moved most of the social development
specialists to five new ODs where they were distributed mainly among the infrastructure
divisions--not all divisions were assigned a social development specialist. They thereby



25
     ADB. 2005. The Public Communications Policy of the Asian Development Bank: Disclosure and Exchange of
     Information. Manila.
12


became responsible to the heads of the ODs. The Environment and Social Safeguards Division
(RSES) was created within RSDD. The shift of many social development specialists to the ODs
was designed to ensure the buildup of greater sector and regional specializations, and enabled
provision of more direct assistance to the project mission leaders in their divisions. This had
some clear advantages. Regional departments had dedicated staff who could take the lead in
addressing resettlement issues. However, in practice, the independence of the specialists
became somewhat compromised by their subordinate position in the project teams, where
formal and informal pressures exist to meet loan approval schedules. Some ADB staff
interviewed for this evaluation thought this affected the due diligence for RPs, as they needed to
be submitted by the government by the time of ADB's Management Review Meeting (MRM).

31.     ADB's reorganization also led to the introduction of a chief compliance officer (CCO)
within the new RSDD and the subsequent issuance of an Instruction on the Safeguard Policy
Compliance Memorandum (SPCM) and Related Procedures on 27 February 2002. The SPCM
requires a sign-off on the existence in the project proposal of a satisfactory (i) environmental
assessment, (ii) initial poverty and social analysis, (iii) IR planning, and (iv) IP planning. All
project and program proposals have to receive RSDD's SPCM certification before the MRM,
which is held within ADB before appraisal of a project. A categorization of the project in terms of
high (A), low (B), or no (C) impacts in terms of IR, environment, and IP was also introduced, as
well as a category of "impacts to be determined" (TBD). Category A projects need full RPs, Bs
need short RPs, and TBDs need RFs. The requirements increased the attention of the ODs for
safeguard policies during project preparation.26

32.     Apart from safeguard compliance functions, RSES is mandated to support the
development of capacity within ADB and within EAs on safeguards. RSES helps ODs to
interpret the policy requirements for specific projects, provides operational support to ODs, and
monitors compliance with the policy. RSES is also responsible for overall policy development,
training and capacity building, and dissemination of best practices in the form of guidelines and
handbooks. To avoid a conflict of interest, RSDD staff are not normally involved in the design of
individual projects or in operational work. Within RSDD, another division was created to handle
more general crosscutting social issues within ADB: the Gender, Social Development, and Civil
Society Division. This division had five of the social development specialist positions after the
reorganization, three more than RSES, which in 2006 only had two social development
specialists and a consultant to ensure and monitor compliance with ADB's IR and IP policies in
hundreds of projects. The changes in numbers of specialists are reflected in Table 1. It has to
be cautioned that not all specialists deal full-time or even part-time with resettlement issues.

    Table 1: Social Development and Poverty Reduction Specialists in 2000 and 2006
 Specialists                                                          2000      2006
 Social development/resettlement specialists outside operations        11         7
 Social development/resettlement specialists inside operations          1        12
 Poverty reduction specialists outside ODs                              3         3
 Poverty reduction specialists inside ODs                               9         1
   Total                                                               24        23
OD = operations department.
Source: Data assembled from Asian Development Bank human resources database for this evaluation.




26
     By mid-2003, the then-CCO in RSDD was appointed Secretary of the Office of the Compliance Review Panel, a
     function with the much wider mandate to ensure the compliance of ODs with all Board approved policies and
     decisions. The responsibility of the CCO to sign the memo was transferred to the DG, RSDD.
                                                                                                                  13


33.     The 12 social development specialists in 2000 had become 19 in (June) 2006, some of
their designations combining the term with resettlement or poverty reduction. This would
indicate growth, but in 2000 there were 12 poverty reduction specialists in ADB ODs (including
1 in OESD); in 2006 there remained only 4.27 If the average project needs the equivalent of
1 month of mandatory attention from resettlement specialists per year, and if there are perhaps
200 such projects ongoing and under preparation at any time, this would require the equivalent
of 20 specialists for IR alone. The overall number of specialists in poverty and social
development has not grown over the years, although much more time of these specialists is
now dedicated to IR, and the overall experience has grown.28

34.     Some staff interviewed have criticized ADB's institutional arrangements. The criticism is
that RSES is performing the role of a clearinghouse but has to rely completely on ODs, with no
serious opportunity to countercheck the RP documentation provided by them through site visits.
The SPCM includes the following proviso, added to qualify RSDD's responsibility for certifying
compliance with the policies: "This Memorandum was prepared based on information provided
in the first draft RRP for MRM, and discussions between the project team leader and RSES
environment and social safeguard specialists." With only two social safeguard specialists and
two national officer staff responsible for reviewing the compliance of all documents in ADB with
the IR and IP policies, RSES finds itself unable to devote time to check the veracity of the
information submitted.

E.       Involuntary Resettlement by Other Organizations

35.     Organizations such as the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and
the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) all have similar IR policies. This is not surprising
since ADB modeled its policy on that of the World Bank, and others have done the same.

36.     World Bank. A principal difference with the World Bank is its considerably larger pool of
social (and environmental) safeguard specialists who are available to help with project
administration, both at headquarters and at the regional and national levels. They are seen as a
separate team, unlike in ADB, where they are integrated in the ODs. The World Bank India
Country Office, with a portfolio of projects about double that of ADB, has 12 social safeguard
specialists (most of whom are national officers, some on contract); the ADB India resident
mission has only 1 person, hired on a temporary basis. The World Bank office in the PRC has
four (plus a full-time consultant); the ADB PRC resident mission (RM) has one. The World Bank
Viet Nam Office has at least three; ADB's RM has none. The World Bank also has a different
system for employing its safeguard specialists, which ensures in a more organic way that their
work load is commensurate with the demand. All World Bank projects require the involvement of



27
   Some ODs in ADB still do not have a social development and/or resettlement specialist in each infrastructure
   division. Central and West Asia regional department has one specialist, while there are two in East Asia regional
   department, one in Pacific regional department, four in South Asia regional department and six in Southeast Asia
   regional department. Most, but not all of these 14 specialists cover resettlement, as they can also be responsible
   for other aspects of social development, such as IP, gender, and social protection.
28
   The 1995 IR Policy expected that 8­10 professional expert years might need to be devoted annually to adequately
   address IR aspects in projects under processing, and another 4­6 expert years annually for monitoring and
   administration of ongoing ADB-financed projects. It was stated that some of the expert years required in project
   preparation could be incorporated in project preparatory technical assistance grants, and some needed for project
   processing and administration could be provided by consultants. "However, in-house expertise in this area needs
   to be expanded by recruiting 3­4 additional staff with requisite expertise. These requirements could be met through
   reallocation of staff positions." These modest targets can safely said to have been met.
14


social and environmental specialists; project task managers have to book the services of these
specialists for specific periods in annual work plans for project administration; nonperforming
specialists automatically get booked less. In practice, these arrangements mean that the World
Bank can devote appropriate amounts of time to capacity building of the EAs, and that
differences can be resolved in close collaboration through regular contact with country offices,
rather than becoming confrontations, partly because of infrequent ADB missions, which then
take on a more punitive character. The availability of appropriately qualified staff in RMs also
makes it possible to interact more frequently with NGOs and to react more appropriately when
NGOs raise resettlement issues during implementation. At World Bank headquarters, the
organization of the work is also different. Compliance certification remains within the operational
vice presidencies. Country office staff would normally be relied on for the certification. RPs are
continuously updated at the country office level, and not every RP needs to be submitted to
headquarters for approval. Only for contentious cases do headquarters staff become involved
more frequently. The Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit in the Environmentally and
Socially Sustainable Development Network checks and clears RPs. Due to more staff being
available, there is more opportunity for teamwork and less reliance of headquarter staff on
written documents about situations with which they are unfamiliar. In spite of all this, the World
Bank also experiences similar problems concerning its safeguard policies, which are perceived
as inclusive and more strictly enforced, and therefore reinforcing tendencies among clients to
avoid financing from the World Bank for certain types of projects.29 This is perhaps one of the
reasons why the World Bank has decided in 2005 to pilot test the use of country safeguard
systems in some of its projects, although little progress with this has been made so far.
Appendix 3 provides further information on the IR policy of the World Bank.

37.      International Finance Corporation. The experience of IFC is instructive, and not only
for ADB's practices towards private sector projects. IFC has thoroughly reassessed its
procedures for the 10 safeguard policies it has and converted them into one set of "policy and
performance standards on social and environmental sustainability." On 30 April 2006, IFC's new
Environmental and Social Standards came into force. Some commentators30 have said that the
novelty of the IFC Performance Standards31 is not that the `bar' might or might not be lower in
places than it was--rather, the standards represent a new mechanism for deciding, investment-
by-investment, where the "bar" on environmental and social performance should lie. The
approach works by exploiting the "moment of maximum leverage." Closing a project financing
deal is made conditional on the applicant committing to a series of environmental and social risk
management measures. These measures might include a particular level of compensation for
families relocated due to land acquisition. Performance Standard 5 on "Land Acquisition and
Involuntary Resettlement" has four objectives, of which the characteristics relevant to ADB are
that (i) a link is retained with the "impact from land acquisition or restrictions on affected parties'
use of land" (i.e., other impacts do not fall under this standard), and (ii) the standard does not
state that APs are entitled to economic rehabilitation but rather that the objective is "to provide
opportunities to displaced persons to improve or at least restore their livelihoods and standards
of living" (i.e., a focus on opportunities, on displaced persons, and furthermore, next to



29
   World Bank. 2002. Safeguard Policies: Framework for Improving Development Effectiveness. A discussion note:
   Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development and Operations Policy and Country Services.
30
   Warner, Michael. 2006. The New International Benchmark Standard for Environmental and Social Performance of
   the Private Sector in Developing Countries: Will It Raise or Lower the Bar? Overseas Development Institute.
   Available: http://www.odi.org.uk/publications/opinions/ 66_standard_Feb06.pdf.
31
   This defines clients' roles and responsibilities for managing their projects and the requirements for receiving and
   retaining IFC support. The standards include requirements to disclose information.
                                                                                                          15


livelihood, on standards of living). IFC has a specific focus on mechanisms of public disclosure,
consultation (free prior informed consultation), and the gaining of well documented "broad
community support." Adoption of the latter principle in ADB would clarify somewhat the issue of
what constitutes adequate consultation with APs. IFC, however, does not give guidance on
thresholds for broad community support, and how to prove such support. For squatters, perhaps
the most important aspect of displacement is adequate housing with security of tenure. In these
cases, legal resettlement of displaced persons is required in areas where they do not face the
risk of eviction, as part of IFC's effort to improve their living conditions.32

38.     Inter-American Development Bank. IADB also has an IR policy,33 but it is worded less
prescriptively than ADB's policy, and especially the OM. Thresholds in terms of numbers of APs
triggering short or full RPs are absent. IADB's policy objective is to minimize the disruption of
livelihood of people living in the project's area of influence, by avoiding or minimizing the need
for physical displacement, ensuring that when people must be displaced they are treated
equally and, where feasible, can share in the benefits of the project that requires their
resettlement. The Policy does not have the same focus on full restoration or improvement of
livelihood as the IR policies of ADB and the World Bank.

        III.    IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT POLICY

A.      Resettlement Plans

39.      Safeguards against adverse effects of involuntary resettlement are often invoked for
projects that ADB supports. Of the 923 public and private sector loans approved since 1994,
23% had full RPs; 4% had short RPs; and for 2% the need was to be established after project
approval, as they were sector projects or credit lines (Appendix 4, Table A4.1). This means that
one third of all loan projects or programs approved by ADB involved the risk of adverse impacts
on livelihoods of at least some people, including their involuntary resettlement. However, the
number has increased over the years, particularly since 2002; since then it has fluctuated
between 41% and 56%% of all public sector projects approved in a calendar year. Before this
time, it was between 7% and 34% per year (Figure 1).




32
   International Finance Corporation. 2006. Progress Report on International Finance Corporation's Policy and
   Performance Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability and Disclosure Policy. Washington D.C.
33
   Inter-American Development Bank. October 1998. Involuntary Resettlement Operational Policy and Background
   Paper. OP-710 (July). Washington D.C.
16


        Figure 1: Percentage of Public Sector Projects with Resettlement Plan (RP)

                  60

                  50

                  40

                  30

                  20

                  10

                   0
                       1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005


                           % Full RP               % Short RP                % Only RF
                RF = resettlement framework.
                Sources: (i) 2002­2005 approved public and private sector projects (IR
                          categorization A, B, C, and TBD); and (ii) 1994­2001 public sector
                          projects (IR categorization "with full RP" = A, "with short RP" = B).


40.     Most RPs and RFs covered projects in the public sector. Few were prepared for private
sector projects. Only 4% of the private sector projects approved between 1994 and 2005 had
either a full or a short RP, although for another 8% the need for an RP was to be determined
after loan approval (mostly sector projects and hybrid projects) (Appendix 4, Table A4.1). One
reason for RSDD's initiative to update the policy has been to improve the consistency of
resettlement planning in the context of private sector loans. It may be that the number of RPs
should have been higher. However, a significant proportion of private sector operations are in
the financial sector, where RPs are usually not needed. Some infrastructure projects involving
private sector financing are likely to involve negotiation on land acquisition and resettlement.

41.     Distribution of RPs Across Countries. There are some indications of differences
between countries in the rigor of resettlement categorization of projects, although these are
smaller compared with those found for environmental categorizations by the SES on
Environmental Safeguards, and have become smaller over time (Appendix 4, Tables A4.3 and
A4.4; Supplementary Appendix C). Indonesia, Philippines and to some extent Pakistan had
relatively fewer RPs and RFs in their infrastructure projects than other countries, particularly
Bangladesh, Cambodia, PRC, India, Lao People's Democratic Republic (PDR), and Viet Nam.
The nature of the portfolio, focusing on either rehabilitation or completely new infrastructure,
may play a role; the number of rehabilitation projects may have been somewhat larger in the
three countries mentioned. The difference has persisted over many years, as there are
significant differences in both earlier and later periods. Standards may have been applied with
more rigor in certain countries than in others. Varying IR capacity in DMCs may be one of the
reasons. However, the exact nature of the differences was not fully examined. When looking at
the case study countries, it can be observed that in India, rural road projects rely significantly on
land donation procedures, which, if agreement with the APs is well documented, obviate the
need for provision of compensation. In PRC and Viet Nam, all land taken for a project is
compensated for. As is shown by Figure 2, country performance has become more even over
time as measured by the proportion of infrastructure projects for which there was resettlement
planning.
                                                                                                                             17



      Figure 2: Percent of Infrastructure Projects with Resettlement Planninga in Selected
                                Countries, by Period of Approval

                      People's Republic of China                                                                 100
                                                                                                       81
                                          Nepal                                                                  100
                                                                                             70
                                    Bangladesh                                                              90
                                                                                        65
                                      Cambodia                                                                   100
                                                                                        64
          Countries




                                       Viet Nam                                                        83
                                                                                   60
                                           India                                                                 100
                                                                             50

                                       Lao PDR                                                                   100
                                                                        42

                                      Philippines                                                                100
                                                                   33
                                      Indonesia                                              71
                                                              24

                                       Pakistan                                                             90
                                                              23

                                       Sri Lanka                                                                 100
                                                             20

                                Percent             0   20         40             60              80         100       120

                                                        1994­2001                 2002­2005

 Note: (i) Percent of projects for all infrastructure sectors except agriculture and natural resources (i.e., energy,
        multisector, transport and communications, and water supply and sanitation sectors); (ii) Thailand has only
        one project for the period 2000­2005; (iii) 2000­2005 projects were filtered to remove those without
        significant civil works component.
 a
    Projects with resettlement plans/frameworks/land acquisition and resettlement plans, as per project's report
    and recommendation of the President.
 Sources: Regional and Sustainable Development Department Database, Project Coordination and Procurement
            Division List of Loans, and reports and recommendations of the President.

B.            Affected Persons Registered by ADB Project Proposals

42.     Projects approved between 1994 and 2005 were expected to affect at least 1.77 million
persons in terms of their access to, or use of, land and often also in terms of loss of house or
other structure. Tables specifying numbers of APs by country, year, and sector are in
Appendix 5. However, it must be cautioned that the estimates were often wide of the mark,
particularly in the older RRPs. According to the available PCRs for these projects, the total
number of people actually affected was 65% higher than the estimates of APs in the RRPs.34




34
     One project was excluded from this calculation: Loan 1305-PRC: Jing-Jiu Railway Technical Enhancement,
     approved 14 July 1994 for $200 million, where ADB provided only railway equipment, and the project was actually
     not directly involved in resettling APs. However, due to ADB's definition of due diligence on resettlement activity, it
     was included in other tables on APs. As against an estimate of 212,000 people affected, the PCR recorded
     211,174. This resettlement was undertaken in conjunction with the construction of the permanent way for the route.
     ADB financing was not used for those parts of the project.
18


This calls into question the rigor of RPs in the past and the quality of information on which they
were based. This could lead to situations where the resettlement costs included in the project
estimates are insufficient to mitigate the actual impact of the project on resettlement and
livelihood restoration.

43.     Trend in Numbers of APs. As per RRP figures presented, there seems no clear trend
towards more APs over the years. The overall yearly average of APs reported in ADB projects
seems to be around 150,000, with fairly large variations between years. However, it may well be
that the type of infrastructure projects financed by ADB in the 1990s affected more people than
did the projects approved in the period 2001­2005, as there is likely to have been more
underestimation of the more minor impacts on APs. The number of people actually displaced
may have gone down in the last decade. If such a finding is correct, the trend may be reversed
by ADB's recent decision in favor of more focused support to infrastructure development in Asia,
as reflected in the support by the Medium-Term Strategy (2006­2008)35 (MTS II) for core
infrastructure such as transport, energy, water supply, and urban and rural infrastructure.

44.     Skewed Distribution of APs Across Projects. Seventy-five percent of all APs were
affected by only 30 of the 174 project resettlement operations approved since 1994
(Appendix 6). Numbers of APs in this range varied between 210,000 and 13,000. This means
that the 80­20 rule can apply to resettlement planning (i.e., giving 80% of resources to the 20%
of projects with higher resettlement impact). Applying a threshold to the detail required of
resettlement planning could give a good efficiency dividend in terms of focusing ADB's limited
staff resources on projects with significant resettlement. This finding raises questions as to
whether the rule that requires a full RP for all projects that affect 200 people or more leads to
the most efficient use of ADB's limited human resources.

45.     Transport Sector. Over 75% of all APs counted in the PCRs were affected by road and
railway projects. Securing the right-of-way for expressways, construction of new roads, and
upgrading and improvement of existing roads all cause population displacement. However, only
a minority of APs needed to resettle far from their old location (in fact, three quarters of the APs
in the transport sector did not need to move). APs in rural road or road rehabilitation projects
generally only lose part of their land, and do not need to relocate. They can rebuild their house
on their own plot or in the vicinity. The MTS II has specified transport as one of the core sectors
in which ADB operations are expected to grow.

46.     Other Sectors. Next to transport projects, projects involving agriculture and natural
resources (3% of all APs), energy (7%), urban development and water supply and sanitation
(8%) were most affected by the need for resettlement of people. Some special attention needs
to be paid to dam reservoir projects and to sites and service development projects. These types
of projects are the most invasive types of resettlement operations.

47.    Dam Reservoirs. ADB's involvement in dam reservoirs from 1970 to mid-2005
comprised around 4% of its portfolio, and the proportion decreased over time (Appendix 7,
Table A7.1). In the late 1990s and early 2000s, when the IR policy was operational, ADB
financed fewer dams than before. Only seven projects involving large dams were approved
between 2000 and 2005, against 11 in the period 1990­1995. In 2006, however, there is a
surge in the number of dam reservoir financing proposals under consideration: ADB is



35
     ADB. 2006. Medium-Term Strategy II (2006­2008). Manila.
                                                                                                            19


considering financing eight new dams over the period 2006­2007 (Appendix 7, Table A7.2).
Some 27,000 people may be affected by these projects. There are two dam projects in the
lending pipelines for PRC and India (Appendix 7, Table A7.3).

48.     Sites and Services Developments. ADB's involvement in township expansions was
limited in the past and had almost been abandoned in the new millennium, due in part to a lack
of success.36 Housing and housing finance was deemphasized in the MTS II.

49.     Distribution of APs Across DMCs. Country distribution of resettlement planning
demonstrates a large bias toward certain countries. The PRC accounted for 37% of projects and
61% of APs. The densely populated areas in which many ADB-supported projects are planned,
in combination with the infrastructure (particularly road and railway) focus of the projects in the
PRC, explain this result in part. Another part of the reason may be that resettlement planning is
better integrated into the domestic PRC project approval procedures and must be done for
water reservoirs and urban development projects, whether or not ADB funding is involved.

50.     In countries like India, with density of population and sector focus similar to the PRC,
ADB anticipated far smaller impacts on people (6% of all APs were in India). Two explanations
can be thought of here: (i) lower ADB lending program in India in the 1990s; and (ii) the nature
of the road projects in India in the past, which has focused more on rehabilitation of roads than
on construction of highways along new alignments. Other countries with significant numbers of
APs were Bangladesh (9%), Viet Nam (9%), Nepal (4%), and Philippines (4%).

51.     In summary, ADB projects affect many people but the largest groups comprise people
living around planned road and railway works. These APs often lose only part of their land, are
involved with businesses that are affected by the project during its implementation, can often be
moved a few meters back from the alignment but then have to rebuild their houses or shops,
and in some cases need to be moved to resettlement sites in the vicinity. So far, a large part of
the overall impact has been on rural areas and village collectives in the PRC, where until very
recently the method of land consolidation was employed to spread the effects of a loss of land
among all members of the collective. This method can have the advantage of spreading
adverse impacts and retaining farmers within the rural collective, with slightly less land for
everybody. But the method has also been criticized as, in some cases, the leaders of the
collective decided on the method of redistribution of the cash compensation and not those
actually affected. Some APs would like the compensation paid directly to them. In the last years,
APs in rural collectives seem to have been able to exercise more choice regarding how they will
receive the compensation.

C.         Resettlement Performance Assessments Made by ADB

52.    This section discusses various perspectives on resettlement implementation based on a
review of the PPRs for ongoing projects, RSDD's safeguard compliance reporting, PCRs,
PPERs, and a desk study report prepared recently for RSDD.




36
      An example is the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project, which created a number of sites and
     services areas around Mysore and Channapatna, but progress was slow, and the speed of their occupation
     modest. ADB. 2006. Project Completion Report for the Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Project in
     India. Manila.
20


       1.      Project Performance Reports

53.     ADB staff check progress of ongoing projects in a variety of ways, the most important of
which are annual or semiannual review missions, and quarterly or semiannual progress
reporting by EAs and consultants. Day-to-day loan administration, including providing ADB
concurrence for procurement and consultant recruitment, is another source of information, as
are email and other types of correspondence with EAs and consultants. Pertinent information
reported through all these sources is to be entered in ADB's online PPRs, so that operational
staff can keep track of progress, and portfolio reviews held. This study surveyed the information
contained in all 68 PPRs for ongoing infrastructure projects in PRC, India, Philippines, and Viet
Nam and drew the following conclusions (see also Supplementary Appendix D):

       (i)     Sixteen of the 68 PPRs (24%) for projects with resettlement planning did not
               mention resettlement progress in any way, either under implementation progress,
               as part of the monitoring of social covenants, or elsewhere.
       (ii)    All of the PPRs of projects reviewed reflected compliance with the social
               covenants in the loan agreements. The range was 1 to 10 covenants per project,
               with an average of 5. These covenants, as culled from the loan agreements,
               were of a widely differing nature. Some stated only that the ADB policy (and
               sometimes the Handbook on Resettlement) needed to be followed; others had
               many covenants regarding specific requirements to be taken into account, for
               instance regarding the type and level of compensation to be offered, and the
               external monitoring to be organized. The rationale for the wording of social
               covenants was not fully clear: Some projects with serious IR impacts did not
               have explicit covenants, while others had very detailed covenants. Consistency
               would be desirable.
       (iii)   The PPRs reported that 21% of all social covenants were complied with; only 2%
               of the social covenants were partly complied with; 58% of the covenants were
               simply reported as "ongoing" or "being complied with". Another 16% were not yet
               due. The PPRs also rated compliance with social covenants: 91% of the
               345 social covenants reported by the PPRs were deemed satisfactorily complied
               with, while only 4% were judged as partly satisfactory. The remainder were "not
               yet due," so no rating was provided.
       (iv)    Thirty-one percent of the PPRs reviewed reported changes to the RPs. These
               were due mainly to detailed measurement surveys conducted during project
               implementation. Nineteen percent of the PPRs indicated that no changes were
               needed to the RPs. The remaining 51% gave no information on the need for
               updating of the RP.
       (v)     Only 12% of the PPRs provided quantitative information on land acquired for the
               project, structures demolished, or APs compensated or assisted.
       (vi)    Issues related to resettlement operations were indicated only for seven projects
               (10%). These concerned delays in land acquisition and resettlement of the APs,
               the lack of counterpart funds to finance land acquisition and resettlement,
               difficulties encountered in negotiating for the compensation rates related to land
               acquisition, alleged discrepancies between the compensation paid by the project
               implementation agency to local governments and the amount received by the
               affected villages/persons (one project), the need to fast track the implementing
               agency's compliance in providing the needed social services facilities, and other
               services in the resettlement sites.
                                                                                                                      21


54.     The conclusion from this review of PPRs is that ADB does not monitor resettlement in
much detail, and does not systematically report on it. The PPRs lack information regarding
procedural and substantive compliance and, most importantly, on the impact of the
implementation of the RPs on the APs. The related finding of this study that few internal and
external EA monitoring reports are available regarding resettlement was corroborated by the
experience of RSES, which reports receiving only a few for review. OED's annual reports on
loan and TA portfolio performance have registered a decreasing number of days of ADB's
professional staff spent per project on project administration missions since 1995, despite the
fact that the ratio of the number of professional staff to projects increased by 30% from 1.6 in
1995 to 2.1 in 2004.37 Time is spent on project processing including preparation of RFs and
RPs, but less so on project administration. In 2005, 13 social development/resettlement
specialists working on resettlement spent 244 days on mission to help prepare perhaps 25 new
loans, but only 187 mission-days to administer the ongoing 193 loans with resettlement.38 There
are some benefits associated with the procedural compliance efforts at the time of project
approval (e.g., integrating resettlement planning in the early phases of the project cycle; more
consultation with APs; greater disclosure of information). However, the conclusion is that ADB
does not monitor resettlement implementation intensively, compared with the energy it invests in
resettlement preparation before loan approval. In effect, ADB delegates implementation of the
RPs to the EAs without significant supervision. ADB has failed to implement the measures
needed to confidently say that mitigation measures related to resettlement are being effectively
implemented, that APs are not disadvantaged, or that problems can be identified so that
remedial measures can be taken. More mission information is in Supplementary Appendix E.

         2.       CCO's Safeguard Compliance Control

55.     With the creation of the safeguard compliance mechanism in 2002, it was agreed that
CCO would report annually to the President on the achievement and maintenance of social and
environmental safeguard compliance. Internal reports issued from 2002 to 2005 show that the
safeguard compliance mechanism has been successful in achieving procedural compliance39
between the stages of MRM and Board approval. The CCO reported that it had succeeded in
this in all 3 years, although at the stage of the MRM, procedural compliance with resettlement
documents varied between 70% and 75% over the 3 years, figures that did not improve over the
years. RSES could field only three missions per year for independent resettlement supervision.
The reports called for greater attention to substantive issues to ensure that safeguards
contributed positively to achieving development impacts. Key challenges identified in these
reports were to (i) ensure an appropriate complement of safeguard specialists across ODs,
(ii) enhance awareness of safeguards among project teams, (iii) increase the emphasis on
ensuring implementation of safeguards after Board approval, (iv) address rigidity in existing
safeguard procedures that do not allow flexibility in application, and (v) clarify policy and
procedural provisions.



37
   ADB. 2005. Annual Report on Loan and Technical Assistance Portfolio Performance for the Year Ending
   31 December 2004. Manila.
38
   Three hundred ninety-two mission days were spent for other purposes, mainly TA administration; a portion of this
   could have been related also to TAs preparing resettlement operations in new projects. All of these data exclude
   private sector loans.
39
   Procedural requirements of OM F2 are defined as (i) correct and timely project classification, (ii) submission of draft
   RPs or RFs, (iii) borrower endorsement of RPs or RFs, (iv) confirmation of disclosure of resettlement information to
   APs, (v) submission of satisfactory resettlement planning documents before appraisal, (vi) inclusion of loan
   covenants on resettlement, and (vii) public disclosure of resettlement planning documents on ADB website upon
   Board approval.
22


56.     It was clear from discussions with staff that RSES finds itself sometimes in a conflict of
interest position with the ODs that have insufficient social safeguard staff. The Pacific
Department and the Private Sector Operations Department do not have designated specialists;
consequently RSES staff have become involved in managing consultants and preparing RPs
and then certifying that they meet ADB requirements.

          3.       Findings from a Review of All Completed Projects Approved Since 1994
                   with PCRs

57.     ADB's performance in IR can also be gauged from a review of the PCRs for projects with
resettlement impacts. There have been improvements over the last 5 years, in terms of both
resettlement operations and information on this in PCRs. Many PCRs now include separate
appendixes in which an account is given of the implementation of the RP(s).

58.     This SES reviewed all 62 PCRs issued for completed projects that had anticipated land
acquisition and/or resettlement impacts and were approved in 1994 or later. The PCRs had a
large bias towards the PRC: 33 were for projects in the PRC, but only 2 were for India, 4 for the
Philippines, 4 for Viet Nam, and 19 for other countries. Fifty-one enabled comparison of
estimated and actual numbers of APs. The bias reinforces the overall predominance of ADB
involvement in resettlement work in the PRC and the speed of project implementation in the
PRC. Because of the large sample of PCRs for projects in the PRC, there was also a bias
towards road and railway projects (47% of all PCRs). The following conclusions can be drawn
with respect to the resettlement performance of the projects approved and completed over
1994­2005.

59.     APs and Land Acquisition. The number of people affected that required resettlement
was 10% higher than the initial estimates before the projects started.40 The number of APs that
were affected by land losses but did not require resettlement was over 150% more than
originally estimated (Appendix 5). In part, the underestimate was due to less attention for
impacts that would not lead to displacement in the past, and in part to past estimation practices
in road and railway projects in PRC, where land acquisition estimates were routinely divided by
the average land holding to get the number of APs--in reality many more APs were affected
than the number obtained from this division, as there were many cases where only part of the
land was affected by the project, and land loss was often shared among all members of a rural
collective. The underestimation of APs in RRPs and RPs was, however, not reflected in a
similar underestimation of land acquisition requirements. Overall, 25% less land was required
than anticipated. Opportunities were taken during detailed design to make minor changes in the
route alignment to reduce the amount of resettlement in local areas for many road projects in
the PRC. This also indicates that ADB's second policy principle (minimizing resettlement) often
needed little reinforcement during implementation, as land acquisition and resettlement are
expensive and time consuming.

60.     The error in estimating number of APs is large. Of the 43 PCRs reviewed for the
four case study countries, 21 recorded numbers that show that, on the average, the estimate at
appraisal was off by more than 50%: 16 found that the actual number of APs was over 50%
larger than anticipated, and 5 that the actual number was smaller by 50% or more.



40
     Actual and appraised number of APs used in the comparison was based on 51 cases as the other 11 did not
     provide enough figures to allow such a comparison.
                                                                                                                      23


61.     Budget and Expenditure. In most cases, ADB has not included allocations for
resettlement costs in its loans, but has left the financing to DMC governments. This has been
partly because the expenses of resettlement generally have to be paid in local currency, and
many governments prefer to borrow for foreign currency expenditure. Until 2005, ADB's policy
stipulated that land acquisition costs could not be financed by loan funds, but since the approval
of a pilot phase for new lending modalities, such costs can now in principle be financed by ADB
loans. PCR data show that land acquisition and resettlement budgets varied greatly between
projects, with an average of 6% of estimated total project cost. The average actual expenditure
was 60% higher, at 10% of project cost. The average land acquisition and resettlement budget
was $24 million per project, with a range of $0.02 million for an Emergency Restoration Project41
to $214.5 million for the Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation Project42 in a densely populated part of
Shanghai. The average relocation expenditure recorded was $46.3 million, with a range of
$0.47 million to $333.7 million (for, again, the Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation Project).43

62.     In the PRC, for which more PCRs were available, resettlement costs for the
eight completed projects used as case studies increased by 35%, whereas total project cost
went down by 6% (Supplementary Appendix F). The average cost of compensation went up
from an estimate of $6,646 per AP to an actual expenditure of $9,882 per AP. The resettlement
cost in the two dam projects, both involving the relocation of nearly 40,000 people, was fairly
close to the original estimate and was relatively low, as it was based on different legislation. The
compensation in the transport projects in the sample increased considerably. The compensation
for the two urban projects in the sample was particularly high and increased sharply, from an
anticipated $12,000 to $19,000 per AP for the Suzhou Creek Project in Shanghai and from
$21,790 to $31,031 per AP for the Fuzhou Water Supply Project. Relocation in urban areas is
expensive because of the high cost of land and housing. For a family of four, compensation
ranged from $15,000 to $124,000 in the eight projects. However, the land compensation was
not distributed to the APs in all cases,44 as sometimes a portion was invested in the rural
collectives in the PRC (but see para. 51).

63.     Resettlement Package Provided. Almost half of the PCRs reported that compensation
had been paid in cash to APs for losses in agricultural land, house plots, crops and/or trees;
12% reported that APs were provided a combination of cash and in-kind assistance (i.e.,
replacement land, training for new livelihood sources, housing materials, etc.). Twenty-
four percent of the PCRs did not elaborate on the kind of compensation provided. Whether
compensation met with the requirements as provided in the RP (replacement value or actual
amounts) was also often not indicated. As the case study countries (with the exception of the
Philippines) generally did not base compensation on the replacement value of land or
structures, it is unlikely that this aspect of the ADB policy was applied rigorously by the projects.
A quarter of the PCRs mentioned that APs were provided some form of rehabilitation assistance




41
   Loan 1852-TAJ, for $3.6 million, approved 30 October 2001. The resettlement budget was meant only for the
   six households to be moved from the site.
42
   Loan 1692-PRC, for $300.0 million, approved 29 June 1999. The budget was to resettle an estimated 17,552 APs,
   and comprised about 24.5% of the total project cost of $875.8 million.
43
   This included $32.9 million for land acquisition and $300.8 million for resettlement, or 39.6% of total project cost at
   completion ($841.3 million). The actual resettlement expenditure was equivalent to $19,012 per AP, most of which
   was related to the construction of new apartment blocks.
44
   This was mainly the case in the two urban projects, although APs obtained the compensation for the house
   structures on an individual basis, and this was sufficient for them to acquire good apartments elsewhere.
24


to restore their income to their preresettlement levels. However, two thirds of the PCRs which
reported on resettlement did not indicate this.45

64.     Relocation of APs to New Sites. Many PCRs were not exact about the nature of
relocation, for instance registering the number of APs who stayed on their site but had to rebuild
their houses, the number of APs that moved to a site selected by themselves, and how many
moved to a resettlement site prepared by the EA. Seventy-four percent of the PCRs indicated
that some form of resettlement was occurring for APs away from their old location, but distances
between the relocation sites and the APs old villages were indicated by only 30 PCRs.
Two thirds of these indicated that APs had moved within 1 kilometer from their old locations.
Only one third indicated that APs were relocated beyond 1 kilometer from their original location.

65.     Public Consultations, Disclosure, Grievance Redress, and Benefit Monitoring.
More than half of the PCRs reported that public consultations had been held; the rest did not
report on this policy requirement. Disclosure of information regarding resettlement
implementation was often combined with public consultation. Less than half of all PCRs
reported that some kind of grievance redress mechanism was in place in the projects; the other
half did not report on this aspect. Fifty-five percent reported on the existence of BME, while 16%
reported that this was not established. The remaining 29% did not report on this aspect. Sixty-
eight percent of the PCRs indicated that resettlement activities were carried out by specific
resettlement units that had been established by either the government or the EA.

66.     Status of APs After Resettlement. More than half of the PCRs did not assess APs'
satisfaction with their new lives after resettlement, but 37% reported that APs felt better off after
resettlement. For instance, the PCR for the Changchun-Harbin Expressway46 indicated that the
APs were able to restore their preproject incomes. Among the PCRs completed for the four
case study countries, two indicated some serious concerns about the postresettlement
situation.47 APs in the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project48 indicated that they were generally
satisfied with their new houses, but were dissatisfied with the halving of their agricultural land as
a result of the project, which reduced their income. In the Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower
Project,49 an external assessment of IR implementation in April 2002 reported that most of the
APs had not restored their preproject income levels.50




45
   Eight percent of the PCRs had no information on resettlement at all, although the RRP had indicated the need for
   it.
46
   ADB. 1998. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   People's Republic of China for the Changchun-Harbin Expressway: Changyu Expressway. Manila (Loan 1642-
   PRC, for $220 million, approved 27 November 1998).
47
   One PCR reported no resettlement (only land acquisition), and one PCR did not report anything on the
   resettlement process.
48
   ADB. 1994. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   People's Republic of China for the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project. Manila (Loan 1318-PRC, for $116 million,
   approved 27 September 1994).
49
   ADB. 1994. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   People's Republic of China for the Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower. Manila (Loan 1417-PRC, for $170 million,
   approved 14 December 1995).
50
   These findings are, however, disputed. The survey was done while rehabilitation was still under way. It only
   surveyed people around the reservoir and not the younger adults who had moved to cities for jobs. A government
   survey conducted in 2003 estimated that 25% had still not restored their incomes. This was the reason that ADB
   pressed the EA to provide further assistance, even though the loan had already been fully repaid.
                                                                                                 25


67.     Compliance with Social Covenants. All PCRs reviewed addressed the social
covenants stipulated in the loan agreements. Similar to the observations made in the review of
PPRs, these social covenants covered different requirements, i.e., some covered specific terms
on compensation rates, while some discussed only general conditions (such as implementing a
comprehensive RP). The PCRs reported that 73% of the 122 social covenants were complied
with, 21% were partly complied with, and 2% were not complied with; 5% of PCRs did not
specify the compliance status. In comparison with other covenants, this level of compliance is
rather low.

68.      Issues. Issues related to IR implementation were reported in 25 (40%) of the
62 projects. Among the more common were (i) slow disbursement of the funds for
compensation of APs, (ii) budget shortfalls in resettlement funds, (iii) dissatisfaction with
compensation provided, (iv) lack of income/livelihood opportunities in the resettlement sites, and
(v) failure of APs to restore their preproject income levels. The issues are reflected in more
detail in Appendix 8. The other PCRs either mentioned that there were no issues encountered
or did not indicate whether there were any issues at all.

69.     Lessons. Among the PCRs for the four case study countries, 18 provided lessons
regarding resettlement implementation. These included the need for (i) closer supervision in the
early stages of resettlement that would help enable timely actions to resolve funding problems
and disbursements for livelihood rehabilitation; (ii) social safeguards to be clearly defined in the
loan and project agreements; (iii) establishment of compensation rates that reflect replacement
values, and obtaining early endorsement by the EA and local governments; (iv) getting
compensation rates agreed to by APs before project implementation; (v) ADB to play a more
effective role in resettlement supervision and monitoring; (vi) prioritizing resettlement monitoring
and submission of monitoring reports; and (vii) considering the distance of the relocation sites
from the original location of the APs to prevent or minimize livelihood problems. All of these
lessons could also be drawn from the project case studies.

70.     Follow-up Actions. Eight of the 62 PCRs suggested follow up actions to the
resettlement implementation (Box 2). Some of the proposed actions included identification of
APs that had not fully restored their incomes and livelihoods; preparation of a mitigation plan to
restore incomes or, if needed, to provide additional postproject livelihood support; and
continuous monitoring of the EA to ensure that the final settlements of the compensation
packages were been paid. ADB does not have a system to track and follow up on the
recommendations made in PCRs. Thus, it is not clear whether, or how, ADB followed up on
these outstanding IR matters.
26


             Box 2: Follow-up Resettlement Actions in Six Project Completion Reports

      Loan 1318-PRC: Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower: Affected households should be investigated to
      determine the number that have not fully restored their incomes and livelihoods. Mitigation
      measures should be prepared and implemented, and a resettlement completion report submitted.

      Loan 1417-PRC: Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower: Households that are still facing difficulties
      should be identified, an implementation plan prepared and results monitored. A final external
      evaluation should be conducted to verify that all households have restored their livelihoods.

      Loan 1544-PRC: Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply: The postrelocation support plan needs to
      include the households that have not achieved their previous income level. It needs to be
      implemented by the Wenzhou Resettlement Office with funding support from Shanxi Economic
      Development Company, which should contribute immediately to the fund.

      Loan 1691-PRC: Southern Yunnan Road Development: Delays in land compensation payments
      should be investigated. Reimbursement to local governments should be speeded up. Local
      governments should make all remaining payments to collectives (mainly for forest land) and state-
      owned entities. Local residents should be considered for job opportunities.

      Loan 1367-PHI: Regional Municipal Development: The local government of Iligan City must
      monitor the social and economic situation of the people relocated due to the drainage project, and, if
      needed, provide additional postproject livelihood support in 2006.

      Loan 1398-PHI: Northern Luzon Transmission and Generation: The National Power Corporation
      should ensure that the compensation packages have been paid.

      Loan 1306-THA: Regional Roads: An action plan on IR was to be implemented after project
      completion, but it was unclear whether this was done, as at the time of the PCR mission, the unit in
      charge had already been dissolved.

      Loan 1852-TAJ: Emergency Restoration of Yavan Water Conveyance System: The EA was to
      conduct an impact assessment study in 2004 to determine the social and environmental impact of
      the project 1 year after completion.


71.    Overall Assessment Made by PCRs. Most of the completed projects reviewed were
broadly successful in achieving their overall development objectives. Almost all PCRs also rated
both ADB and government/EA performance as successful or satisfactory. The predominance of
PCRs for projects in the PRC may be part of the reason for the high success rates found, as
PCRs and PPERs for this country have mostly rated project performance as successful.

72.     Twenty-seven PCRs also reflected the results of independent assessments of the
projects' resettlement implementation, usually as part of BME.51 They revealed that over half of
the projects had rated the implementation of the projects' resettlement component as either
successful or satisfactory. Notably, no resettlement operation was specifically rated as
unsuccessful or even partly successful. However, a rating for the resettlement implementation,
is not normally a requirement for the preparation of a PCR. Because of the domination of the



51
     These independent assessments were often commissioned by EAs to validate their own assessments of the social
     and/or environmental impacts of the projects. The other 35 PCRs either had no rating for resettlement
     implementation or offered no information regarding the assessment of the resettlement implementation.
                                                                                                               27


sample by projects in the PRC, and the generally adequate performance of the resettlement
activities, it is not clear whether these generally positive findings are representative of ADB
operations as a whole.

73.     Conclusion. This SES concludes that many PCRs did not fully cover IR activities. In
many cases, they do not have sufficient evidence to determine whether IR activities were
implemented in a manner that was consistent with the IR policy or whether IPs are no worse off
because of the project. This is an unsatisfactory state of affairs. The assessments available in
the PCRs focused on overall impact and added value for APs,52 and less on transaction costs
incurred (meaning all not directly budgeted and even quantifiable costs), procedural compliance
during implementation, grievance redress, and public disclosure. The PCRs implicitly compared
outcomes with the situation of no resettlement planning or no ADB involvement, and then mostly
concluded that resettlement had improved the lives of APs compared with this alternative.

        4.       Findings of Project Performance Evaluation Reports Issued by OED

74.       The findings of the PCRs were broadly validated by seven PPERs issued by OED,53
generally 3 years after the end of the projects. Six were for projects in the PRC, and the other
was for a project in the Philippines.54 Six of the seven confirmed the resettlement findings of the
PCRs; the other did not have comments on the resettlement process. However, only three
PPERs55 had an appendix on the assessment of the land acquisition and resettlement
implementation. The Anhui Environment Improvement Project56 was the only case where the
findings of the PCR were not confirmed, but only because the PPER did not assess IR. The
PPERs for the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project (footnote 48) in the PRC and the Sixteenth
Power Project in the Philippines (footnote 54) mentioned several issues encountered during
resettlement implementation: (i) APs having lower incomes than people in neighboring villages
not affected by resettlement, due to shortage of farmland and ineffective production
rehabilitation; (ii) dissatisfaction with the livelihood restoration and compensation policies;
(iii) strong sentiment that the APs should have been consulted, not just the village leaders;
(iv) lack of awareness by APs of the standards used for compensation; and (v) delay in
awarding the titles of property ownership. The PPER for the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower
Project recommended that the follow-up actions mentioned in the PCR needed to be
implemented. The lessons identified in the PPER for the Sixteenth Power Project indicated that
resettlement should be based on a time-bound action plan of documented measures, be
founded on a sound legal basis and a cogent assessment of the pre-project socioeconomic



52
   Defined here as the difference between outcomes for APs of IR operations with and without ADB involvement.
53
   ADB. 2003. Project Performance Audit Report on the Dalian Water Supply Project in the People's Republic of
   China. Manila; ADB. 2006. Project Performance Audit Report on the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project in the
   People's Republic of China. Manila; ADB. 2001. Project Performance Audit Report on the Heilongjiang Expressway
   Projec in the People's Republic of Chinat. Manila; ADB. 2006. Project Performance Audit Report on the Fangcheng
   Port Project in the People's Republic of China. Manila; ADB. 2005. Project Performance Audit Report on the
   Second Industrial Energy Efficiency and Environment Improvement Project in the People's Republic of China.
   Manila; ADB. 2006. Project Performance Audit Report on the Anhui Environment Improvement-Water Project in the
   People's Republic of China. Manila; ADB. 2002. Project Performance Audit Report on the Sixteenth Power
   (Masinloc Thermal Power) Project in the Philippines. Manila.
54
   The Sixteenth Power (Masinloc Thermal Power) Project is the first stage of the Masinloc Power Project
   (Loan 1042- PHI, for $200 million, approved 30 October 1990).
55
   Loan 1042-PHI (footnote 54); Loan 1313-PRC: Dalian Water Supply Project, for $160 million, approved
   20 September 1994; and Loan 1318-PRC (footnote 48).
56
   Loan 1490-PRC: Anhui Environmental Improvement Project for Municipal Wastewater Treatment, for $28 million,
   approved 26 November 1996.
28


situation, and be fully communicated to all affected households to facilitate its acceptance. The
four other PPERs mentioned that APs were satisfied with their relocation arrangements, and
that these were consistent with ADB's policy.

75.     Dams. OED's 1999 SES on dams has already been referred to (footnote 9). OED's
project evaluation findings on Theun-Hinboun Hydropower Project57 and the Nam Leuk
Hydropower Project58 in the Lao PDR reported on the very complex nature of resettlement and
the underestimated indirect impacts on upstream and downstream areas in the context of dam
construction. The conclusions were similar to those reached by the World Commission on Dams
in 200059 and the NGO Forum on ADB in 2005.60 More information on dams in relation to
resettlement is in Appendix 9.

        5.      Findings of a Desk Study Conducted for the Safeguard Policy Update

76.     In preparation of the safeguard policy update (footnote 6), an internal desk study was
prepared for RSES.61 The study was based on a review of 15 ongoing and completed projects
with significant resettlement. Six of the projects were selected for field study for this evaluation.
The author's conclusions are of special interest, as he was the main consultant used for OED's
earlier evaluation of the policy impact of IR in 2000 (footnote 10). The main finding of the desk
review was that the resettlement processes and outcomes were mostly unsatisfactory. The
assessment was more severe than that made in most PCRs and PPERs examined for this
study and than that made based on the project case studies. For this reason the findings are
summarized in Supplementary Appendix G.

77.    The difference in the assessments is partly explained by the fact that half of the case
studies concerned projects that were ongoing, so outcomes were not yet finally determined; and
they could have concerned more contentious cases. Another reason for the difference seems to
be that many PCRs look more at overall impact, and compare this with the counterfactual. The
assessments thus concentrated on added value and often recorded AP satisfaction, as APs
seemed to be aware that under conditions of no ADB support, less attention would have been
given to resettlement. The RSES report compared outcomes with RP targets, and generally
assessed procedural and substantive compliance with ADB's IR policy. Chapter V in this report
looks extensively at procedural compliance and impact issues in the 16 project case studies.

D.      Inspections, Compliance Review, and NGO Influence

78.    The establishment of the ADB Inspection Function on 5 December 199562 and its
replacement on 29 May 2003 by the ADB Accountability Mechanism63 have played a role in




57
   ADB. 2002. Project Performance Audit Report on the Theun-Hinboun Hydropower Project in Lao People's
   Democratic Republic. Manila.
58
   ADB. 2004. Project Performance Audit Report on the Nam Leuk Hydropower Project in Lao People's Democratic
   Republic. Manila.
59
   World Commission on Dams. 2000. The Report of the World Commission on Dams. Dams and Development: A
   New Framework for Decision-Making. Earthscan Publications Ltd, London and Sterling, VA.
60
   Nuera, Arturo. 2005. The Asian Development Bank and Dams. NGO Forum on ADB. Manila.
61
   Zaman, Mohammed. 2006. Taking Stock: Ten Years of Involuntary Resettlement Experience in ADB Operations.
   Draft. Manila: ADB.
62
   OC. R225-95: Establishment of an Inspection Function, 10 November 1995.
63
   OC. R79-03: Review of the Inspection Function: Establishment of a New ADB Accountability Mechanism, 8 May
   2003. The mechanism became effective by 12 December 2003.
                                                                                                              29


raising the bar for safeguard compliance. ADB's first inspection--of the Samut Prakarn
Wastewater Treatment Project64 from April 2001 to March 2002--involved environmental, land
and resettlement issues. Since then, the inspection of the Chashma Right Bank Irrigation
Project65 in 2003 and 2004 and the compliance review of the Southern Transport Development
Project in 2005 have reinforced the preoccupation of ADB staff and Management with
procedural compliance (see Appendix 10 for a summary of these cases). As acknowledged by
many staff interviewed, the perceived threat of the repercussions of compliance reviews to
investigate noncompliance with ADB policies drives much of the current focus on safeguards
and the concomitant interaction between ODs and RSDD, aside from the more general
concerns of "getting things right". The Accountability Mechanism is concerned not only with
procedural but also with substantive compliance with all of ADB's policies and Board decisions;
this means that aspects of the IR policy unpopular with EAs, such as the enforcement of
awarding compensation at replacement value for land acquisition, the provision of
compensation of structures to nontitleholders, and rehabilitation measures ensuring restoration
of livelihoods of APs, can be subjected to compliance review. In the Samut Prakarn case, the
Inspection Panel endorsed a very wide interpretation of adverse impacts of projects on the
grounds of the IR Policy and ADB's guidelines on the incorporation of social dimensions. This
led it to criticize the institution of an exclusion zone around a wastewater treatment plant, which
led some mussel farmers to lose their business.

79.     As is clear from the cases described, NGOs play a role in raising compliance issues, and
many are keeping a close watch on some projects in ADB's program. NGO concerns are
sometimes raised in letters to the President or communications to members of ADB's Board of
Directors, and are given attention during ADB's Annual Meetings. Every year ADB receives
letters from civil society parties as well as stakeholders directly affected by ADB-supported
projects. Resettlement issues were raised for 14 projects in 2004 and 2005, and are
summarized in Appendix 11. Eight of the projects were located in the Southeast Asia region
(1 each in Cambodia, Greater Mekong Subregion, and Lao PDR; 2 in Indonesia, and 3 in the
Philippines); 6 were in the South Asia region, including 2 in Pakistan, 2 in Nepal, 1 in India and
1 in Sri Lanka. Most of the concerns revolved around the adverse impact of projects on APs in
terms of their livelihood. Many complaints are about ADB not checking resettlement progress
and impacts on APs sufficiently during implementation. The evaluation findings summarized
earlier support the contention that ADB devotes insufficient attention to monitoring resettlement
during implementation.

80.     ADB responded by pursuing dialogue with concerned NGOs and APs. In cooperation
with other concerned government agencies, ADB took steps to address the concerns related to
12 out of the 14 projects. For instance with regard to the Pasig River Environmental and
Rehabilitation Management Program, ADB and the Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission
worked with NGOs and affected communities to develop and fund alternatives to off-site
relocation. Sites were identified in the vicinity of some areas that required resettlement. ADB's




64
   ADB. 1995. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
   Kingdom of Thailand for the Samut Prakarn Wastewater Management Project. Manila; ADB. 1998. Report and
   Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Supplementary Loan to the Kingdom of
   Thailand for the Samut Prakarn Wastewater Management Project. Manila.
65
   Loan 1146-PAK(SF) approved for $185 million in December 1991; ADB additional financing for the Project in the
   amount of $33.5 million was approved in June 1999. ADB. 1991. Report and Recommendation of the President to
   the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan and Technical Assistance to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the
   Chashma Right Bank Irrigation Project (Stage III). Manila.
30


NGO Center has provided a platform for communication between ADB and civil society. While
much correspondence has taken place and many meetings have been held, many of the
complaints were found not to be eligible for compliance review.

81.     Serious resettlement cases raised were those that NGOs alleged were tainted by
corruption, for instance related to land acquisition and major changes in the location and design
of large infrastructure projects. Two such cases were the Samut Prakarn Wastewater
Management Pollution Control Project in Thailand and the Southern Transport Development
Project in Sri Lanka, earlier mentioned because they were subjected to inspections and
compliance review. The Thai press printed numerous articles alleging that the costly site change
was linked to a land fraud conspiracy among various Thai Government officials. A committee of
the Thai Senate found corruption in the project, and the Thai Prime Minister stated that the
project was riddled with corruption. With regard to the Sri Lanka project, press reports alleged
that bribery was used to facilitate the winner's victory during the bidding process; this then led to
the government dismissing the project director and a parliamentary committee confirming the
allegations. ADB's auditor general, however, did not substantiate the claims. The NGO Forum
on ADB has nevertheless criticized the lack of follow-up to the reports on corruption by the
inspection of the Thai project and the compliance review of the Sri Lankan project, perhaps
partly attributable to differences in terms of reference with that of ADB's then Anti-Corruption
Unit. More information on the subject of corruption is in Appendix 12.

E.         ADB Staff Views and Experience

82.       The questionnaire to gauge staff views regarding safeguard and safeguard performance
was posted in ADB Today, ADB's online daily magazine. A good portion of the questions
focused on those answerable by project team leaders, which is perhaps one reason why there
were only 61 responses out of the over 600 staff included in a response population consisting of
(i) professional staff in ODs, RSES, and the Office of the General Counsel in headquarters, and
(ii) all RM operational staff. In spite of the low response, a wide cross section of staff positions
responded, and the findings correspond with those of many staff interviews held. The
quantitative results are given for all three safeguard policies in Appendix 13, and summarized
below for the IR policy:66

83.        About the usefulness of ADB's systems and procedures:

           (i)      Only 11% of respondents thought the OMs usable to resolve all their issues.
           (ii)     Twenty-one percent of respondents reported never to have attended any training
                    on the application of the IR Policy.
           (iii)    Although the project team leaders generally thought sufficient consultant inputs
                    were planned for safeguard assessments and plans, most had variable
                    experiences with their quality, particularly in the case of resettlement consultants.
           (iv)     Most of the project team leaders thought ADB gave either always or sometimes
                    insufficient resources and time to properly consider project alternatives with less
                    adverse social impacts.
           (v)      Most of the respondents thought ADB either occasionally or always gave
                    insufficient time and resources for IR planning. Overall, both time and resources
                    were seen as seriously in short supply for social safeguard planning.




66
     Some ADB staff did not fill out the questionnaire because of perceived methodological problems.
                                                                                              31


      (vi)    Regarding the stage at which social safeguard issues should receive more
              attention, a majority thought (a) the project preparatory TA stage (over 60%),
              (b) review missions (30%­33%), and (c) processing missions (29%). Most
              thought the MRM and Board stages need no further focus on safeguards.

84.   About the effectiveness of the safeguards:

      (i)     Forty-five percent of the respondents answering the question whether they had
              experienced problems with resettlement during project administration stated that
              problems had occurred in some of their projects. A minority stated that problems
              had occurred in all projects (7%) or that no problems had been experienced so
              far (16%). (Thirty-two percent have no answer to this question.)
      (ii)    From a preset list of factors related to ADB, respondents chose the following four
              as contributing most to better IR outcomes: (a) more time for preparation (52%),
              (b) ADB streamlining its policy (50%), (c) more time/staff for project
              administration (43%), and (d) more training provided to EAs by ADB (36%).
              Assigning more consultant input was deemed relatively less important.
      (iii)   From a preset list of factors related to the country or the EA, ADB staff chose the
              following five as contributing most to better resettlement policy outcomes:
              (a) better enforcement of government policies/regulations (63%), (b) more
              political will and less political interference (41%), (c) combating corruption or
              other irregularities (41%), (d) more internally consistent government regulations,
              and (e) more time taken for project preparation.
      (iv)    Almost three quarters of respondents thought ADB's resettlement safeguard
              procedures added value to all or at least some projects they had been associated
              with. Only 9% thought the resettlement procedures had added no value. The type
              of added value of the IR procedures was seen mainly as reducing the suffering of
              APs (50% mentioned this). Other factors ticked in the questionnaire were
              improved project design (23%), more due diligence (23%), more experience in
              the EA (20%), and the demonstration effect beyond the project (20%). Half of the
              respondents, however, did not answer this question.

85.   About other issues:

      (i)     The two main factors responsible for delays associated with resettlement
              safeguard issues were seen as (a) the country or EA system being different from
              that of the ADB system, and more time being needed as a result (34%);
              (b) consultation processes being difficult to manage; (c) misdiagnosis of
              safeguard issues at the preparation stage (18%); and (d) the EA not being really
              committed to implementing the RP (18%).
      (ii)    A question was asked about the incremental/transaction costs incurred as a
              result of applying the ADB safeguards (beyond the requirements of the country
              system). The responses registered on the preset answer categories are given in
              Table 2. Among the three safeguard policies, staff recorded most types of `costs'
              for the IR policy.
32


           Table 2: Incremental Costs Marked by ADB Staff as a Result of Applying the
                ADB Safeguards Beyond the Requirements of Country or Agency
                                        (% of responses)
 Response                                                             Environment       Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                                        Resettlement         Peoples
 Have not added to cost of project for country                               7                5                  6
 Have added 1%­3% to cost of project for country                            18                9                 17
 Have added 4%­10% to cost of project for country                           11               16                 11
 Have added more than 10% to cost of project for country                     7               14                  4
 Do not know what was added to cost for country                             24               21                 17
 Usually add to project delays                                              33               54                 24
 Unusual amount of ADB time and mission cost                                20               32                 17
 Unusual amount of consultant cost PPTA                                     11               14                 11
 Do not know about cost for ADB                                              7                5                  9
 Unharmonized donor safeguards are confusing                                13               14                  9
 More inconsistent application of country system                             5                7                  6
 No answer                                                                  16               18                 15
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Questionnaire survey for ADB staff, 2006.

86.    In summary, the questionnaire survey showed that ADB staff have mixed views and
experiences with resettlement OMs, training, and resources made available for consultants and
missions. Almost half had experienced problems during implementation. Yet almost three
quarters also thought ADB support for resettlement operations added value for APs.

87.     Narrative views provided by ADB staff surveyed regarding improvements in the
resettlement policy and its application are given in Appendix 14. Twelve responses referred to
the need for changes in the IR policy; 10 to the need for harmonizing country and ADB IR
policies; 8 to greater emphasis on RFs at the preparation stage, rather than RP production; and
7 recommended increasing capacity building efforts.

F.         EA Staff Views and Experience

88.     Government Views. Although the SES did not hold systematic DMC consultations,67 the
study team sought the views of representatives of the borrowers regarding ADB's IR policy
during its visits to three case study countries. The team met with government officers charged
with ADB affairs in the ministries of finance in PRC, India, and Viet Nam. The officials of the
Ministry of Finance in the PRC were appreciative of ADB's added value in the field of
resettlement planning. A representative from the Ministry of Finance in India criticized the
discrepancies between the ADB policy and the national laws, expressing the view that ADB
policy cannot supersede national laws. Delays were stressed as caused by what was perceived
as multiple checks by ADB staff in RMs and headquarters on resettlement planning, some of
which were deemed redundant. The representative had less difficulty in accepting delays
caused by slow national processes connected with land acquisition and award of compensation.
It was suggested that resettlement safeguards should be managed through RMs, and requests
were invariably made to strengthen RMs in resettlement preparation and administration. In Viet
Nam, the representative mentioned that ADB's policy was more a deterrent than an attraction
for the government to borrow from ADB, especially in the energy sector, where the safeguard




67
     RSDD will hold more official country consultations in the framework of the safeguard policy update.
                                                                                                    33


issues were larger than those of IR only. These views coincided with views recorded in
2004/2005 by missions undertaken for the middle income country framework initiative.68

89.     Executing Agency Views. EA views and experiences were recorded through a
questionnaire survey. Sixty-seven EAs (49%) of projects with either IR category A, B, or
uncategorized (for which RF were prepared and for which the resettlement effects were to be
determined after project approval) reached by the survey responded. The EA survey differed
from the ADB staff survey in that some of the questions were specific to a project managed by
the EA. Similar to the ADB staff survey, it was designed to enable comparison of the response
for the IR policy with the environment and the IP policies. Some of the questions for the EAs
were the same as those for ADB staff, allowing a comparison of the responses. The tables
giving the results of the EA survey are in Appendix 15, and the main findings are summarized
below.

90.       About NGO assistance, ADB training, guidelines, and missions:

          (i)      Only 26% of projects with resettlement had engaged an NGO for aspects of
                   implementation or monitoring; consultants were engaged more frequently (60%).
          (ii)     Almost half of the project offices included staff that had received training on
                   ADB's IR policy; and around one-third of the project offices implementing IP
                   plans had had some training in ADB's IP policy.
          (iii)    Nineteen percent of project directors indicated that the ADB IR guidelines did not
                   resolve all of their issues, with a majority (53%) saying they were somewhat
                   usable. Only 19% said they were fully usable.
          (iv)     Relatively few (9%) project directors indicated that there were insufficient
                   missions from ADB project officers regarding safeguards, although around half
                   did not answer this question. A larger proportion felt that they received sufficient
                   assistance from the RMs.
          (v)      The large majority (78%) of project directors thought ADB's IR requirements were
                   not easy to meet, and either did not follow them, followed their own agency
                   system (23%), or followed them with difficulty (55%).
          (vi)     Thirty-one percent acknowledged there was something wrong with their reporting
                   on safeguards to ADB. Either they were not reporting at all, not regularly, and/or
                   not adequately.
          (vii)    Coinciding with the perception of ADB staff, a large majority of the project
                   directors (89%) listed more training as one of four factors related to ADB that
                   would contribute most to better safeguard policy outcomes. This training factor
                   was deemed relatively less important for environmental plans or IP plans. Half
                   (51%) felt that ADB should fund land acquisition costs. The third most common
                   response was for ADB to use the country system.
          (viii)   Also coinciding with ADB staff perceptions, most project directors (74%) listed
                   the creation of more capacity in their EA as the most widely mentioned country-
                   or EA-related factor that could contribute to better resettlement policy outcomes.
                   Better enforcement of existing government resettlement policies or better
                   policies/regulations were mentioned by 49% and 43% respectively. Many project
                   directors of projects requiring land are aware that a main reason for




68
     ADB. 2006. Enhancing Asian Development Bank Support to Middle-Income Countries and Borrowers from
     Ordinary Capital Resources. Manila.
34


                 implementation delays is not ADB procedures but the protracted national
                 compulsory land acquisition processes; they are also aware that ADB
                 procedures, which prescribe the award of market value or real replacement cost
                 of land, can speed up implementation, if they are followed by local authorities.
                 Fifty-five percent of project directors stated that their governments should make
                 more funds available for resettlement.

91.     About delays and costs:

        (i)      Twenty-six percent of the project directors felt that ADB headquarters was
                 responsible for short or long delays; 10% indicated that ADB's RMs were
                 responsible for delays in resettlement planning or implementation. Twenty-one
                 percent stated that ADB headquarters was responsible for extra consultant costs.
        (ii)     Regarding non-ADB related delays: 20% of the project directors felt that their
                 own agency was responsible for long or short delays, and another 25% that other
                 agencies were responsible for (mainly long) delays.
        (iii)    Most project directors, like ADB staff, mentioned the difference between the ADB
                 and the country system as a reason for delays, and the fact that consultation
                 processes were difficult to manage.
        (iv)     Project directors were more moderate in their reaction to the incremental costs of
                 the safeguard measures (Table 3)­23% stated the ADB IR policy did not add
                 incremental costs to the RP; 19% stated it added 1%­3% to the cost of the
                 project; and 20% stated it added more than this. Fewer project directors (17%)
                 than ADB staff (54%) thought that the IR policy somehow added to project
                 delays.

  Table 3: Incremental Costs Marked by EA Project Directors as a Result of Applying the
             ADB Safeguards Beyond the Requirements of Country or Agency
                                    (% of responses)
 Response                                                         Environment       Involuntary    Indigenous
                                                                                    Resettlement     Peoples
 Have not added to cost of project for country                          44               23             54
 Have added 1%­3% to cost of project for country                        13               19              8
 Have added 4%­10% to cost of project for country                       10               11              4
 Have added more than 10% to cost of project for country                 2                9              4
 Do not know what was added to cost for country                          5               15              4
 Usually add to project delays                                           7               17              4
 Unusual amount of ADB time and mission cost                             2                6              0
 Unusual amount of consultant cost PPTA                                  0                9              0
 Do not know about cost for ADB                                          8               11              4
 Unharmonized donor safeguards are confusing                             3                4              0
 More inconsistent application of country system                         3                9              4
 No answer                                                              16               15             21
   Total                                                               100              100            100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Questionnaire survey for executing agencies of projects with resettlement impacts, 2006.

92.     About the effectiveness of the safeguards:

        (i)      Project directors were generally positive about the way ADB's safeguard
                 procedures had improved their projects or components of their projects. Only 6%
                 saw no improvement. However, 15% gave no answer.
                                                                                                               35


         (ii)     A higher proportion of project directors (47%) than ADB staff (20%) saw as one
                  of the main benefits the increase in experience with resettlement safeguards in
                  their project. Less suffering by APs (40%), improved due diligence (43%), and
                  more transparency (28%) were considered important benefits by the project
                  directors. Fewer project directors (13%) felt that the demonstration effect of
                  ADB's involvement in resettlement work was important.
         (iii)    Almost a third of the project directors thought the resettlement procedures had
                  been effective in mitigating unfavorable impacts of the project; more directors
                  thought the environmental safeguards had been effective. Seventeen percent of
                  the project directors thought the effectiveness had been limited.

93.      About disputes:

94.      There were greater differences between the project directors and ADB staff related to
disputes (Table 4). ADB staff had the impression of more disputes. Most were about the
definition of encroachers/squatters, and levels of compensation. However, 64% of project
directors reported one or more disputes.

     Table 4: Differences Between ADB and EAs, as Reported by EA Project Directors and
                              ADB Staff in Two Questionnaire Surveys
                                          (% of responses)
         Response                                            EAs     ADB staff
         Cost of RP preparation in sector projects            17        20
         Cost of RP implementation                            21        32
         Definition of encroachers/squatters                  30        34
         Treatment of encroachers/squatters                   15        45
         Extent of consultation process                       11        39
         Definition/level of compensation                     28        43
         Determination of rehabilitation program              19        27
         No answer                                            13        36
        ADB = Asian Development Bank, EA = executing agency, RP = resettlement plan.
        Source: Questionnaire surveys for (i) EAs of projects with resettlement impacts, and (ii) ADB staff,
                2006.

95.     Twenty-one percent of the project directors reported that ADB had declined to fund part
of the project on account of the resettlement safeguards; 17% reported that the EA had decided
not to borrow for projects or certain project components because of ADB's resettlement
safeguards. ADB staff indicated that only a few countries were denied funding by ADB of either
a project or a part of a project due to resettlement issues.69 Similarly, few concrete cases were
mentioned of DMCs declining to borrow for prepared projects or project components on account
of ADB's IR policy (Question C6 in Appendix 13).70

96.     In summary, the survey showed that EA staff, like ADB staff, have mixed views and
experiences with IR procedures and provision of missions and training. Many wanted more
training from ADB, but some viewed missions as concerned with pushing the ADB agenda.



69
   Three respondents mentioned Indonesia and one respondent each mentioned Bhutan, India, Philippines, and Viet
   Nam.
70
   Two respondents each mentioned Bhutan, India, Indonesia, and Viet Nam, and one respondent each mentioned
   Kazakhstan, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.
36


Almost half saw some potential in ADB funding land acquisition costs. Three quarters stated
that ADB's policy requirements were difficult to meet. Nevertheless, many saw positive impacts
for APs, and also saw more resettlement capacity in their organizations as a result of ADB
involvement. Indicating difficulties for EA project directors to make up their minds, it should be
noted that a smaller number of directors than ADB staff opined that the IR policy had mitigated
adverse impacts for APs; EA directors were relatively more positive regarding the effects of the
Environment Policy. Yet there had been many differences with ADB, and a minority reported
either ADB declining to lend or EAs to borrow for project components involving IR. With respect
to the latter point, it needs to be kept in mind that agencies that had fully declined ADB support
were not in the sample, as they did not have ongoing loans with ADB.

97.     EA project directors provided a number of suggestions, summarized in Box 1 of
Appendix 15. Nine indicated a desire for a change in the nature of the policy, eight a usually
related desire for harmonization with the country's system or the EA's system, and six a desire
for more ADB effort in capacity building for resettlement.

                                IV.     COUNTRY SYSTEMS AND ADB

98.      This chapter addresses the current debate regarding alignment of ADB's safeguard
systems with country systems. The debate on this issue has intensified with the release in 2004
of the World Bank's discussion paper71 on the use of country systems. In March 2005, the World
Bank announced a program to pilot test 12 projects worldwide with respect to their use of
country systems in financial management, procurement, and environmental and social
safeguards (no case has yet been publicized on social safeguards, however). The international
community stressed the need for greater use of country systems in the 2003 Rome Declaration.
In the 2005 Paris Declaration, donors including ADB committed to "use country systems and
procedures to the maximum extent possible. Where use of country systems is not feasible,
establish additional safeguards and measures in ways that strengthen rather than undermine
country systems and procedures." This chapter reviews (i) current country systems for IR, with
emphasis on the four case study countries; (ii) ADB's capacity development program; and
(iii) elements of safeguard systems in some developed countries. Due to its length, the
substantive discussion of country systems in PRC, India, Philippines, and Viet Nam has been
placed in Appendix 16. A summary and the main conclusions are presented below.

A.        Review of Country Systems on Involuntary Resettlement

99.     ADB's list of IR compliance requirements is long, especially when taken in combination
with related operational guidelines on social assessments and with the 2005 Public
Communications Policy. It would be surprising if the relevant laws and regulations in any DMC
matched ADB's standards in all respects. ADB's safeguard policies have evolved partly for the
reason that ADB's experience over many years pointed to a need for supplementing the DMCs'
legal and policy frameworks to help ensure that APs are not adversely affected by ADB-funded
projects. Another reason has been the changing international context and pressure on the
World Bank by NGOs, which ultimately resulted in changes in World Bank safeguards, and
subsequently ADB safeguards.




71
     World Bank. 2004. Issues in Using Country Systems in Bank Operations. Operations Policies and Country
     Services. October 8, 2004, Washington DC.
                                                                                                               37


100. The ADB staff survey included a question on whether staff felt there were any countries
that had safeguard systems that could be followed. Of the 61 replies, 14 indicated such a
country: 6 for PRC and 4 for India (although one added: "with modification for how to handle
squatters/encroachers").72 The lack of response may indicate that (i) many staff were not sure
about whether country systems had evolved sufficiently to be relied upon, (ii) country systems
could not as yet be fully relied on, or (iii) many staff did not feel sufficiently familiar with the
country systems to make an informed judgment.

101. ADB's IR policy is uniform and does not specify how it is to be applied across very
different DMCs. But there are large differences among DMCs.

        (i)      The organization of public and private ownership in the DMCs varies. In the PRC,
                 for example, all land is owned either by the State or by rural collectives;
                 replacement cost cannot be calculated in the spirit of the policy, as farmers losing
                 land cannot acquire it elsewhere. In the PRC, most farmers have access to small
                 parcels (1/3 hectare per family) with few disparities in the local area, and many
                 already have experience with off-farm employment. Many of the densely
                 populated countries outside the PRC have large squatter populations,73 and
                 private land ownership is the norm. ADB's Policy may have profound
                 repercussions with its requirement that governments need to offer replacement
                 value for structures, as such compensation leads to claims that squatters may
                 subsequently wish to convert into rights in court. Countries with relatively fewer
                 squatters may be able to provide better assistance than countries that have large
                 populations of squatters.
        (ii)     Basic systems for land acquisition and compensation differ among DMCs. This
                 influences the degree to which the compensation given for assets lost differs
                 from their replacement cost.
        (iii)    Basic implementation arrangements for resettlement differ among DMCs, as do
                 implementation capacities. The PRC has relatively more experience with
                 resettlement due to the government's exclusive responsibility for land, housing
                 assets, and jobs until recently. The situation in Viet Nam is somewhat similar. In
                 many other countries, resettlement as such is not recognized as a policy area or
                 field of implementation in itself.
        (iv)     Policies on land acquisition and resettlement operations are in a state of change
                 in a number of countries. Several DMCs have adopted, or are in the process of
                 adopting, new resettlement policies or new laws. This means that not only has
                 ADB's policy evolved but many DMCs are also changing. This provides some
                 justification for looking at the question of where, and to what extent, country
                 systems can be adopted. As it turns out, at least three of the four case study
                 countries have adopted policies and practices recently that, on paper at least,
                 have narrowed the gap between country systems and the ADB IR policy.

102. India adopted a National Policy for Involuntary Resettlement and Rehabilitation in
February 2004, a major step forwards from the situation in which the Land Acquisition Act of
1894, amended in 1984, was the main legislation. In the PRC, the Land Administration Law was




72
   Other countries that one or two respondents mentioned were Fiji Islands, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Sri Lanka,
   Thailand, and Viet Nam.
73
   In the Philippines, a conservative estimate is that 10% of the population are squatters.
38


revised in 1998 with some technical inputs from an ADB TA. A new Government Decision
(Nr. 28) in 2004 allowed the raising of the upper limits of the compensation levels for rural land
to a maximum that could be seen as theoretically equivalent to the value of a land contract in
the rural collective. Unfortunately for APs, the lower limits (16 times the annual average gross
output value) have not yet been raised, but this is also under consideration. Compensation rates
for expropriation of arable land in the PRC have improved steadily in the past few years. Even in
remote areas, they are routinely equivalent to between $15,000 and $50,000 per hectare of
arable land; around urban areas values can double. Recently, a new regulation was approved
for large and medium-sized reservoirs; the minimum compensation has become 16 times
annual average gross output value, up from 10 times. Resettlement legislation for house
demolition for urban areas is still under revision.

103. In Viet Nam, the system for compulsory land acquisition has undergone significant
change since the approval of a new Land Law in 2003, as in the PRC helped by ADB TA.
A number of decrees have been adopted that make it possible for ADB standards to be
enforced in the country. If the law and decrees are implemented as intended, APs can be
compensated and assisted to at least the standard that they experienced before their land was
taken. The Philippines is an exception; there has been no recently approved new national
legislation specifically on IR. The existing legislation is fragmentary and incomplete.
Nevertheless, for many years courts have, if requested, been able to enforce compensation for
loss of private land at replacement value by using independent assessors. Specific legislation
(Republic Act 8368, 1997) also covers rights of illegal squatters to some extent, something that
is not available as yet in most other countries. The government is taking a development
approach to housing the homeless through an extensive socialized housing program. The
Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992 prohibits demolition of or eviction from illegal
settlements unless resettlement sites acceptable to the APs are available.

104. These developments seem to point to gradual convergence with ADB's policy and
procedures. In many cases, additional standards or assistance can increasingly be negotiated
with governments without setting controversial legal precedents. In PRC, India, and Viet Nam,
there is recognition of the need for rehabilitation of APs in large relocation events. Yet there
remain divergences with some elements of the ADB Policy in the four countries. None of the
four DMCs require comprehensive RPs for cases where there are no actual relocation effects.
Even the PRC does not as yet require elaborate resettlement or even land acquisition plans in
road and railway projects. Most countries do not require RPs to be approved before the start of
works. Most do not require the award of compensation to be completed before the start of civil
works in all cases (for linear projects, this SES agrees that such is appropriate; yet
compensation needs to be paid before the relocation of the individual). Most do not advocate
publicly tendered external monitoring contracts as a matter of good practice, most do not
prescribe grievance redress beyond the usual government system, and most do not specify
public communication of RPs and RFs with the same rigor as ADB prescribes. Although public
consultation clauses are present in most resettlement policies, they usually cannot reverse
decisions or delay works, and they do not involve the same level of documentation as ADB
requires.

105. In India, existing laws do not make the payment of relocation and transfer expenses
mandatory, nor assistance for transition and livelihood support; special assistance to vulnerable
people; reestablishment of agricultural and business production; assistance for income
restoration; and restoring social services, social capital, community property, and resources,
although this is partly covered by the Urban Development and Housing Act. The policy, in fact,
mainly refers to large resettlement operations, significantly different from ADB's criterion of
                                                                                                   39


mandatory need for an RP and special measures in case of anticipation of 200 APs that will
experience a loss of livelihood greater than 10%. District collectors award compensation for land
at registered market value (perhaps 40% of actual market value), not actual land replacement
value, as could be calculated by independent assessors. Courts in India in the last few years
have been quite specific in opposing any "reward" of assistance to squatters when this is
demanded by them, which poses a special problem for the application of the ADB Policy.

106. In the PRC, continuing divergence from ADB policy includes the absence of fixed rules
for the calculation of compensation for demolition of structures, crop losses, and loss of access
to forested lands or grazing lands. The PRC does not make special assistance for all vulnerable
APs mandatory in the sense of the ADB Policy, although it provides a somewhat higher
resettlement (rehabilitation) subsidy to rural households in reverse proportion to their access to
land. The PRC does not necessarily adhere to ADB's principle of assisting the vulnerable as
part of the project; it may give this responsibility on a need basis to government offices
independent of the project.

107. In Viet Nam, the decrees still permit the use of frame prices rather than tailored
replacement costs to determine the compensation for land loss. Compensation issues have
become more complicated due to the nontransparent, volatile real estate market in the main
cities, which has left APs dissatisfied with the compensation offered by the government. There
is provision for providing assistance to vulnerable APs, but there are no prescribed objective
criteria for the level of assistance. Also, squatters get compensation for structures only if built in
areas with no land use plans or if they were built after such plans with official permission.

108. In the Philippines, existing laws do not prescribe the payment of relocation and transfer
expenses; assistance for transition and livelihood support; special assistance for vulnerable
people; reestablishment of agricultural and business production; assistance for income
restoration; and restoring social services, social capital, community property, and resources.

109. Pending more thorough investigations of country system commonalities by RSES, a
cautious and preliminary conclusion of OED is that of the four countries, PRC and Viet Nam
seem closer to ADB IR standards overall, but that differences remain concerning both principles
and procedures. The situation for PRC and Viet Nam is somewhat less complex than those of
many other countries, as there are fewer squatters, and land ownership is less inequitable. Due
to the land bureaus and, in many cities, resettlement offices, resettlement capacity is higher.
Existing policy is better enforced, and legislation regarding compensation is improving. The
PRC is currently putting major brakes on local governments acquiring land around towns, due to
the many reported cases of abuse of requisition powers (outside the context of ADB projects,
and in contrast with the much higher level of due diligence for externally financed projects). The
PRC has some social safety net elements that provide limited subsistence allowances to some
disabled, elderly, and otherwise seriously disadvantaged persons that do not have relatives to
support them. In India and Philippines, such a system does not exist.

110. In conclusion, the country systems for IR in all four countries still need serious attention
from ADB, and could not immediately be adopted as long as ADB wishes to apply its current set
of safeguards. Although most countries allow the award of compensation for land at
replacement cost under some circumstances, for instance, they do not prescribe this, leaving it
to the project to negotiate this with the land authorities. ADB then needs to apply pressure for
this to happen. However, progress has been made in strengthening the country systems. With
further progress, these systems could converge with the principles and objectives of ADB's IR
policy.
40


B.     ADB's Technical Assistance on Involuntary Resettlement

111. In addition to project-based resettlement planning, the IR policy requires ADB to take
measures to strengthen DMC frameworks for involuntary resettlement. The policy encourages
support for efforts by governments and other project sponsors to formulate and implement
resettlement policies, strategies, laws, regulations, and specific plans. Provision of TA was
envisioned to strengthen the capacity of agencies responsible for resettlement policy, planning
and implementation.

112. A review of the TAs that ADB approved regarding land acquisition and resettlement
since 1994 (Appendix 17) leads to the conclusion that ADB has spent much time and effort in
advising on improvement of resettlement legislation and policies in its DMCs as well as in
building capacity in EAs. ADB approved four regional technical assistance (RETA) activities on
IR over the period 1994­2005 (one of which was small-scale, to finance a regional workshop),
and at least 23 TAs (although many were small-scale) for resettlement policy, capacity
development, or resettlement preparation in 10 countries: 5 in Sri Lanka; 3 each in Bangladesh,
PRC, and Indonesia; 2 each in Cambodia, Pakistan, and Viet Nam; and 1 each in India, Nepal,
and Philippines. Fourteen of these were undertaken in the last 5 years. All of this work was
done for a modest $7.6 million. The three main RETAs also included policy and capacity
development in various countries through action plans and workshops. The actual volume of TA
that has included resettlement and especially land acquisition issues may in fact be larger, as
some TAs or RETAs have titles that are not self-explanatory. For instance, RETA 6113 on
Making Markets Work Better for the Poor, not included in the list, may have had relevance to
land acquisition and compensation in Mekong countries, as it included study of land markets. In
many cases, when ADB assistance ended, the World Bank provided follow-up support. In other
cases, ADB TA followed earlier involvement by the World Bank. An example of a country-
oriented TA, implemented in the PRC, which added value is given in Supplementary
Appendix H. The Vietnam Land Law and Decree 197/2001, the Sri Lanka National Involuntary
Resettlement Policy, the Cambodian Land Law, Lao Resettlement Decree, Decision No. 28 in
the PRC, and ongoing work with revisions to the PRC's Land Law have all benefited from
exposure to ADB IR policy, practice, and technical support. Currently, Bangladesh, Cambodia,
and Nepal are receiving technical support from ADB to develop national resettlement policies.
Program loans may also contribute to resettlement policy reform. A key focus of the new
Indonesia Infrastructure Reform Program loan under preparation is dialogue with the
government and other multilateral institutions to address the complexities of land acquisition and
resettlement.

113. The three major RETAs on IR approved in 1998, 2000, and 2002 merit some further
description in this study, as well as some of the country TAs, as they demonstrate the
processes ADB has supported in this area. Overall, this SES concludes that, in spite of
continuing divergence between ADB and country policies, the TAs have had high value added,
well beyond individual ADB-supported operations (Appendix 18).

114. Despite the progress that has been made by some DMCs, continued reliance on ADB's
IR policy remains necessary in many countries, since the convergence with domestic law and
policy is compromised by continuing lack of capacity and ingrained bureaucratic attitudes,
including lack of filtering down of new guidelines to government officials at subnational levels.

115. In summary, there are legitimate reasons for continuing to supplement the countries'
own regulations by the ADB IR policy. The SES concludes that ADB should (i) continue to
support the improvement of country systems through policy dialogue and dedicated TA, and
                                                                                                 41


(ii) enter into country- and EA-specific agreements that set appropriate targets for additional
procedures and assistance in the medium term. The goal should be to develop country systems
to the level where they meet the broad objectives and principles of ADB's IR policy. This would
allow ADB, possibly working with the World Bank and other interested donors, to certify that a
country's system has reached the stage that it can be used for ADB projects. Given the
commitments made to harmonization in the Paris Declaration, it would not be sustainable for
ADB to insist on the application of its IR policy if the World Bank certified the use of the
domestic IR systems for the same type of project in the same country or vice versa. Donor
coordination in this area is essential.

C.     ADB's Resettlement         Policy   Measured     Against    Resettlement      Practices   in
       Developed Countries

116. Some ADB staff have raised the question whether ADB's resettlement procedures are
perhaps not more advanced and "generous" than those in developed countries, implying that
the policy perhaps demands too much from DMCs. Are ADB's standards higher, and in fact too
high, for the current development stage of some DMCs, as many EAs and borrower
representatives are claiming? Although it is generally acknowledged that resettlement policies,
practices and history in developed countries have not been sufficiently studied, a few examples
of practices in the United States (US), Netherlands and United Kingdom shed some light on this
question (Appendix 19).

117. Country standards such as currently in place in US and Netherlands for compensation of
land loss and restoration of livelihood of those losing land or access to land or housing do not
appear to be lower than the ADB standards promoted. Compensation would, however, not be
mandatory, for instance, for losses of water vendor businesses as a result of piped water supply
to households. The US had incomplete land records and a widespread practice of illegal
possession of public lands in the 19th century, but gradually legalized and privatized lands taken
by millions of pioneers and squatters through sell-offs of land at low prices. More recently,
adverse possession laws, establishing the principle of creation of rights through unopposed long
use of land, have enforced discipline in the use of lands by their rightful owners. Continuous
right of use of land for those who do not have legal title is defined in law--7 to 12 years in the
US and 12 years in the United Kingdom. These figures are broadly consistent with the 10 years
used in Thailand to determine if squatters are eligible for compensation. No similar time frame is
specified in ADB's IR policy. In practice, a rather arbitrary date, the time of a survey, is used by
ADB to determine which squatters are eligible for compensation. A difference between
resettlement environments in developed countries and the ADB IR policy is that in many
developed countries the social safety nets available lessen the need for the handling of all
income and rehabilitation assistance through a project intervention. Another difference is the
well-developed court systems that can be utilized to redress grievances. When comparing this
with DMCs, the long time taken to put in place such high standards in developed countries
needs to be taken into account, and the question asked, What can reasonably be expected from
DMCs over a short period of time?

          V.      MAIN FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES AND COMPLEX ISSUES

118. This chapter presents findings from 16 project case studies prepared for the SES by
local consultants. The projects are listed in Table 5, with their costs, loan amounts, and number
of APs. The analysis covered (i) procedural and efficiency issues, (ii) impact and ADB's added
value, (iii) incremental costs and transaction costs of the projects studied, and (iv) complexities
related to the application of the policy.
42


                                        Table 5: Project Case Studies
 Loan No.           Year of               Project Title                Cost at        Loan        APs at       APs at
 and Country       Approval                                          Appraisal      Amount       Appraisal   Completion
                                                                     ($ million)   ($ million)
 1405-IND            1995   Power Transmission (Sector)                 527.4          275.0      --           435
 1417-PRC            1995   Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower                721.0          170.0    41,054      39,393
 1473-PHI            1996   Sixth Roada                                 652.8          167.0      --       (36,500)
 1544-PRC            1997   Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply                518.0          100.0    36,888      37,199
 1626-PRC            1998   Guizhou-Shuibai Railway                     381.0          140.0     2,466      29,653
 1636-PRC            1998   Fuzhou Water Supply and                     192.2          102.0       514         521
                            Wastewater Treatment
 1647-IND         1998      Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure             120.0        250.0        4,663   not complete
                            Development
 1668-PHI         1998      Southern Philippines Irrigation            102.0         60.0          770   not complete
                            Sector
 1691-PRC         1999      Southern Yunnan Road                       770.3       250.0         5,376      21,329
                            Development
 1692-PRC         1999      Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation                875.8       300.0        17,552      22,256
 1746-PHI         2000      Pasig River Environmental                  150.0         75.0       55,000   not complete
                            Management and Rehabilitation
 1813-IND         2000      Kolkata Environmental Improvement          360.0       250.0        11,000   not complete
 1835-PRC         2001      Yellow River Flood Management              404.7       150.0         2,896   not complete
                            Sector
 1839-IND         2001      Western Transport Corridor                 378.0       240.0        24,012   not complete
 1851-PRC         2001      Guangxi Roads Development                  455.2       150.0        31,700   not complete
 1870-IND         2001      West Bengal Corridor Development           323.0       210.0        11,304   not complete
                                Total Ongoing                       2,292.9      1,385.0      109,645         NA
                                Total Completed                     4,638.5      1,504.0      135,550      233,307
                                     Grand Total                    6,931.4      2,889.0      245,195         NA
AP = affected person, IND = India, NA = not available, No. = number, PHI= Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of
China.
a
  Loan closed in May 2006; 3,600 Affected Families for land, and 7,300 Affected Families for structures.
 Sources: Regional and Sustainable Development Department Involuntary Resettlement Database; various reports and
          recommendations of the President/resettlement plans; Various project completion reports and loans;
          technical assistance, grants, and equity approvals database.

A.         Procedural and Efficiency Issues

119. The case study projects were selected based on consideration of the following factors:
(i) variety in infrastructure sectors within countries, category A (updated); (ii) variety of types of
resettlement operations; (iii) either ongoing operations, or completed projects with recent PCRs;
and (iv) inclusion of some projects with IP plans or frameworks (see also Section C of Chapter I.
All projects selected were in the public sector.74 This section summarizes the findings in Table 6
in matrix format. The rows in the matrix represent issues assessed; columns A to P represent
individual project cases. The table intends to provide a quick visual impression of the overall
level of efficiency and compliance achieved for the 16 projects studied. Compliance is taken
broadly, and in line with the last OM F2 section. It has to be cautioned, however, that all projects
in the table were approved before the issuance of OM F2, and many projects were also largely




74
     The portfolio of completed projects approved since 1994 included only one category A ADB-supported private
     sector project in the four countries. One other in category A was ongoing, but the RP had been canceled. Other
     projects were categorized "TBD".
                                                                                                                     43


implemented before this time.75 The black squares in the table indicate no efficiency or no
compliance with the point discussed for a particular case study project, the gray squares
indicate that the compliance or efficiency was to some extent achieved or not achieved (and
difficult to assess). The white squares indicate that the case study consultants judged the
resettlement operation evaluated as being either in compliance with the current OM or as
efficient, or both, as the case may be. Appendix 20 provides a more complete analysis of the
16 project case studies, discussing each issue at greater length, but distinguishing four main
types of issues: those regarding (i) due diligence, (ii) land acquisition and resettlement,
(iii) sufficiency of compensation, and (iv) sufficiency of assistance to the vulnerable.

120. The ongoing projects studied were the Kolkata, West Bengal Corridor, and Rajasthan
projects in India; the Yellow River project in PRC; and the Pasig River and the Southern
Philippines Irrigation projects in Philippines. The resettlement operations were well under way,
and partly completed. Some projects had very large resettlement requirements across a
significant distance; some had mainly house or shop relocation requirements on the plot; others
had few relocation requirements and mainly required compensation for crop losses and slices of
land along roads. Given lack of information and, in many cases, the long time that had passed,
little information could be systematically collected about the public consultation process and the
disclosure of RPs in the older cases. Anecdotal information indicates that there were
deficiencies in these areas. It is only since 2002 that ADB made the RPs systematically
available on a dedicated website. This action, of course, does not guarantee that the information
is spread effectively to APs, as the material is typically posted in English. Many APs are on the
wrong side of the information technology divide and are not fluent in English. Only since the
Public Communications Policy of 2005 has ADB specified the requirements for separate
disclosure of documents to APs.




75
     ADB seems to have followed the unwritten rule that all ongoing projects need to be in compliance with the latest
     procedures, even if these were instituted after the loan agreement. Allegedly only for about a year or so, an up-to-
     then usual covenant stating that ADB's IR Policy needs to be applied and subsequent amendments thereupon,
     was dispensed with.
            44


                       Table 6: Procedural Compliance with IR Policy and Efficiency Achieved
                                        in the Projects Studied for the SES
  Country                                                                            IND                PRC               PHI
  Project                                                                      A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P
  Procedural compliance:
  Were alternatives to minimize IR explored at the time of project design?
  Was an analysis of the DMC's legal and policy framework for IR conducted?
  If nonsector project: Was an RP or RF prepared before project approval?                                        --           --
  If sector project: Were RPs for all subprojects prepared in time?            -- --     -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --    -- -- --
                                                                                                           a
  Was the RP approved by EA before RRP (or ADB comments on it)?                          --                                --
  If there were changes after approval, was an update of the RP submitted?            --    --    -- ?                 --     --
  Did EAs state that there were no delays in comments or approvals by ADB?
  Were consultations held with APs at RP preparation stage?
  Were consultations held with APs at RP implementation stage?
  If NGOs were involved, so were they involved in time?                        --     --       -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --     -- --
  Were internal monitoring arrangements made?
  Were external monitoring arrangements made (if this was required)?
  Was a grievance redress mechanism set up?
  Was compensation for land loss provided in time?                                --                                   --
  Was compensation for land paid in accordance with specifications in RP?         --                                   --
  Was replacement value used as basis for compensation of losses                  --                                   --
    If no, was additional assistance paid to make up the difference?              --                          -- -- --     --
  Was compensation for structures provided before land acq./displacement?         -- -- --                             --
  Was compensation for structures paid in accordance with conditions in RP?           -- --                            --
  Was compensation for trees provided in time?                                    --                                   --
  Was compensation for trees paid in accordance with or higher than in RP?        --                          ? ?      --
  Was compensation for crops lost provided in time?                            ? --         --                         --
  Was compensation for crops lost paid according to/higher than in RP?         ? --         --                         --
  Were nonlegalizable nontitleholders compensated for structures?                     -- --                -- -- -- --
    Did vulnerable squatters receive relocation and rehabilitation assistance?    -- -- --     -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
  Was compensation for business losses provided in time?                              -- --       ? ? ? -- -- -- --
  Was compensation for business losses paid in accordance with RP?                ? -- --         ? ? ? -- -- -- --
  Was land acquisition completed before project works started?                                       ?
  Was relocation completed before project works started?                              -- --
  Were APs consulted about the design of the resettlement site (if app.)?             -- --
  Were APs who relocated helped with their relocation?                                -- --
   If so, was this sufficient according to the APs?                                   -- --
  Were nonlegalizable nontitleholders assisted in relocation costs?               -- -- --                 -- -- -- --
  Were nontitleholders assisted with transitional income during relocation?       -- -- --                 -- -- -- --
  Were vulnerable people assisted with transitional income during relocation?         -- --
  Were rehabilitation assistance measures included (training, microcredit)?
    If so, were they sufficient according to the APs?
  Were nonlegalizable nontitleholders (squatters) assisted in rehabilitation?         -- --                -- -- -- --
  Were vulnerable people assisted in rehabilitation?
-- = not applicable, ? = no information found, black square = no, gray square = to some extent, white square = yes, ADB = Asian
Development Bank, AP = affected person, EA = executing agency, IND = India, IR = involuntary resettlement, PHI = Philippines,
PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, PRC = People's Republic of China, RF = resettlement framework, RP = resettlement
plan, RRP = report and recommendation of the President, SES = special evaluation study.
Note: A = Loan 1870-IND: West Bengal Corridor Development Project; B = Loan 1813-IND: Kolkata Environmental Improvement;
         C = Loan 1405-IND: Power Transmission (Sector); D = Loan 1647-IND: Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development; E = Loan
         1839-IND: Western Transport Corridor; F = Loan 1692-PRC: Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation; G = Loan 1636-PRC: Fuzhou Water
         Supply and Wastewater Treatment; H = Loan 1544-PRC: Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply; I = Loan 1417-PRC: Fujian Mianhuatan
         Hydropower; J = Loan 1626-PRC: Guizhou-Shuibai Railway; K = Loan 1691-PRC: Southern Yunnan Road Development; L = Loan
         1835-PRC: Yellow River Flood Management Sector; M = Loan 1851-PRC: Guangxi Roads Development; N = Loan 1746-PHI:
         Pasig River Environmental Management and Rehabilitation; O = Loan 1473-PHI: Sixth Road; P = Loan 1668-PHI: Southern
         Philippines Irrigation Sector.
a
    Although EA had not endorsed the RP before RRP, they worked with PPTA team, and signed Loan agreement.
Source: Consultant reports of project case studies.
                                                                                                45


121.   The main findings in Table 6 and Appendix 20 can be summarized as follows:

       (i)     Procedural compliance and efficiency overall has been variable. Table 6 shows
               that for many procedural aspects, projects were either not in compliance with at
               least the latest procedures, or such compliance was ambiguous or questionable,
               prompting the consultants to respond that the issue was "to some extent" in
               compliance or not in compliance. In some cases, only insufficient information
               could be gathered at the stage of the field assessment, pointing to lack of
               documentation of the resettlement process. Generally, older resettlement
               interventions were less in compliance with current procedures and RPs were of
               lower quality. It is also clear that the overstretched ADB social development and
               resettlement specialists have given variable attention to resettlement operations,
               some receiving a good amount, others practically none.
       (ii)    The study could not assess whether alternatives with less resettlement impact
               had been sufficiently studied, in part because feasibility studies did not discuss
               these systematically and RRPs did not discuss them at all. There are issues of
               principle and methodology that make this procedural requirement difficult to
               impose. The issue is often one of political choice about the type of development
               pursued and long-term advantages versus short-term disadvantages or one of
               financial choice--whether to build something cheaper or more expensive. In the
               PRC, a better job seemed to have been done in examining alternatives to reduce
               the amount of resettlement, particularly when detailed designs for road
               alignments were finalized (i.e., after loan approval).
       (iii)   The policy's second principle of minimizing resettlement if it was unavoidable
               overlaps the first principle of avoiding it, but when applied at the implementation
               stage was often seen to be helped by the fact that land acquisition and
               resettlement are time-consuming and expensive options.
       (iv)    The level of public consultation achieved was often in question. Consultations
               with APs regarding RPs were often held only nominally in the older cases, where
               RPs were written by consultants without demonstrable support from the
               government. For instance, whether sufficient consultations with APs and other
               stakeholders had taken place was often a subjective issue, unless it was
               documented that all relevant APs had explicitly agreed to the nature of the
               consultations and had given their full consent in writing or in fully representative
               surveys.
       (v)     Especially with older projects, RP updates to take account of charges needed
               were inconsistently submitted to ADB, although the procedures were also not
               clear on this at the time.
       (vi)    A problem arising for cases where RPs were issued before the detailed design of
               roads was completed was the creation of uncertainty among APs regarding
               whether, and especially when, they needed to move. This could paralyze
               business and investment decisions, sometimes for years. It may be better to
               notify people at the feasibility stage that some land acquisition and possibly
               resettlement may be required, and announce that a more detailed plan will be
               prepared at the stage of detailed design. Detailed resettlement planning cannot,
               for example, be completed until after the road alignment is finalized. This
               normally occurs a year or two after loan approval, when resettlement specialists
               are typically not involved in project administration.
       (vii)   Compensation for land loss was not always paid out demonstrably at the level of
               full replacement cost. Compensation was usually paid in accordance with local
               laws and valuation procedures, especially in PRC. In India, applying the principle
46


              of replacement cost for land lost by land owners met with many practical
              problems but was sometimes achieved due to pressure from ADB. Sometimes, it
              was paid out only several years later and after an arbitration process. Some
              agencies in Philippines and one in India used special assessors. As mentioned
              earlier, relatively high levels of compensation were achieved in parts of the PRC,
              particularly in the more recent projects in the transport and urban sectors. In the
              Philippines (and one project in India), most APs were informal dwellers/squatters
              and did not receive compensation for access to land and structures lost but were
              offered low-rent social housing and relocation assistance. In another project in
              India, encroachers and squatters along a road received cash compensation but
              preferred to be moved to vendor markets; the project had set up only one. In
              another case, they opposed replacement cost and were more interested in a
              unitary amount. In the PRC, land replacement cost along the policy's principle of
              "replacing what is lost" is impossible to calculate, as farmers cannot acquire new
              land once they lose it. Land-for-land deals are often not possible, although in the
              south, some rural collectives could clear new drylands. The OM leaves the
              possibility open that a project provides additional assistance where the land
              authorities do not grant compensation at the full replacement cost.
     (viii)   Compensation for land and structures was generally paid in time, except in the
              PRC, where it was often paid in staggered installments over a number of years.
              Problems often arose for local governments in charge of the administration of
              compensation when EAs could not deliver the agreed upon funds in time.
     (ix)     Compliance with the ADB guidelines about replacement cost, compensation for
              illegal structures and assistance to squatters in some cases caused resentment
              from some staff of EAs who felt exposed to criticisms by national auditors that
              national laws and policies had been violated.
     (x)      Compliance with ADB covenants for the completion of the land acquisition and
              resettlement operations before the start of works was problematic in the linear
              projects. This, however, seemed to pose few problems in practice. What is
              important is that resettlement and other project implementation activities are well
              coordinated, something that is not well recognized in ADB's IR procedures and
              practices.
     (xi)     Relocation was not always completed before start of works in roads cases, but
              works sometimes started in a different location from where the APs lived, so in
              practice it was less of a problem.
     (xii)    Relocation assistance was mostly provided, and was a significant benefit for the
              APs; however there were also cases where an insufficient amount was provided.
     (xiii)   Grievance redress mechanisms were often established, but mostly within the
              government or project structure, and sometimes committees were not functional.
     (xiv)    Arrangements for external monitoring were inconsistent, often late, and had
              questionable results. NGO involvement in this aspect was not very high, although
              part of the reason was the high number of projects studied in PRC where NGOs
              in the international sense are only beginning to develop. In PRC, regularly a local
              Academy of Social Sciences was involved in monitoring benefits.
     (xv)     Sector projects often encountered special problems due to the need for
              preparation of RPs for many subprojects with low numbers of APs, sometimes
              long after loan approval.
                                                                                                                       47


        B.      Impact and Added Value for Affected Persons

        122. The analysis of the impact of land acquisition and/or resettlement operations was
        confined to assessing a series of effects and perceptions of the effects by APs. Around
        600 affected households were interviewed through surveys in 2006 and questioned about
        improved quality of housing, satisfaction with housing conditions, resettlement location and
        resettlement site, access to communal resources and social services, access to agricultural land
        and other opportunities for livelihood restoration, perception of actual restoration of livelihood,
        and level of dissatisfaction with the resettlement process. The focus was on AP perceptions
        about resettlement operations that had been completed. Due to lack of time, the study did not
        attempt to measure, in a statistically rigorous manner, AP incomes and other indicators of
        livelihood, quality of life, and quality of housing, and compare the findings with other factual data
        to develop a counterfactual, i.e., what would have happened without the project.
        123. The main findings of the case studies are reflected in Table 7 and discussed in detail in
        Appendix 21.

                            Table 7: Impact Issues in the Projects Studied for the SES
 Countries                                                                    IND                       PRC                   PHI
  Case study projects                                                   A B C D E F G H I                J K L M N O P
Was quality of new house better than APs' previous house or houses
                                                                        --    -- -- --
owned by host community?
Were APs satisfied with new house at the time of the survey?            --    -- -- --
Had they expanded the house with their own funds?                       -- -- -- -- --
Was the new housing free of mortgage or rent requirements?              --    -- -- --
Were APs satisfied with resettlement site offered to/built for them?    --    -- --
Were APs satisfied with access to communal resources/social
                                                                        --    -- --
services?
Did APs have similar access to agricultural land as before?             -- -- -- -- --                                    --
Did APs' access to agricultural land improve as a result of the new
                                                                        -- -- -- -- --                                    --
location?
Did APs have similar access to other economic opportunities as
                                                                              -- --
before?
Did APs' access to other economic opportunities improve due to new
                                                                              -- --
location?
Did APs restore their livelihood (as yet)?
  If not: Can APs be held to be on the way to restoring their
                                                                        -- --                           --            --
  livelihood?
Do APs who were relocated feel better off after resettlement?                 -- --
   Do APs who did not need to relocate feel better off?                    --            -- -- -- --                      -- -- --
   Are they complaint-free regarding the resettlement process?                               ?
Was rehabilitation assistance (livelihood support) continuing after the
                                                                                 --
project?
-- = not applicable, ? = no information found, black square = no, gray square = to some extent, white square = yes, ADB = Asian
Development Bank, AP = affected persons, IND = India, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, SES = special evaluation
study.
Note: A = Loan 1870-IND: West Bengal Corridor Development Project; B = Loan 1813-IND: Kolkata Environmental Improvement; C = Loan
         1405-IND: Power Transmission (Sector); D = Loan 1647-IND: Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development; E = Loan 1839-IND:
         Western Transport Corridor; F = Loan 1692-PRC: Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation; G = Loan 1636-PRC: Fuzhou Water Supply and
         Wastewater Treatment; H = Loan 1544-PRC: Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply; I = Loan 1417-PRC: Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower;
         J = Loan 1626-PRC: Guizhou-Shuibai Railway; K = Loan 1691-PRC: Southern Yunnan Road Development; L = Loan 1835-PRC:
         Yellow River Flood Management Sector; M = Loan 1851-PRC: Guangxi Roads Development; N = Loan 1746-PHI: Pasig River
         Environmental Management and Rehabilitation; O = Loan 1473-PHI: Sixth Road; P = Loan 1668-PHI: Southern Philippines Irrigation
         Sector.
Source: Consultant reports of project case studies.
48


124. Broadly, the picture was more positive for the projects reviewed in the PRC and to some
extent also for those in the Philippines. The findings were less positive for some of the projects
reviewed in India, with the exception of the Kolkata project (which was not completed at the time
of the case study). Although the standards of ADB for due diligence, compensation, and levels
of assistance were not always met, APs in PRC and Philippines had a generally positive view of
the various impacts on their livelihood and standards of living, although sometimes trading off
advantages in one area against disadvantages in another. In many cases, APs judged new
housing and access to public facilities as much better than before, but the restoration of
livelihood was not yet fully achieved for all households. There were impoverished people, but
also some relatively wealthier people among ex-APs.

125. This study takes into account that, in a changing environment, the objective of livelihood
restoration may be difficult to achieve at one particular point in time for all APs involved. It is
certainly not easily "inspectable," as poor people slide in and out of poverty with regularity for a
variety of reasons. The policy, procedures, and guidelines do not state the period needed for the
achievement of restoration of livelihood, although it is logical that this period should not be too
long. The sample included projects with resettlement operations at various stages of completion
and postcompletion. Is the policy achieved when at a particular point in time, say 2 years after
the resettlement operation, 80% of APs have restored their livelihood? A group of farmers
displaced by a water reservoir in southern Philippines were relatively generously compensated
for the loss of structures and crops, given replacement land (they were illegally occupying
government timberland) and replacement houses--and yet did not restore their livelihood after 3
years because they used the compensation to plant fruit trees. In a reservoir dam project in the
PRC, certain categories of APs (the ones that moved uphill and not out of the head pond area
altogether) were dissatisfied with the resettlement operation. However, these APs, as they
acknowledged themselves, were given a choice of either remaining in the area or moving to a
relatively distant location. If the APs are, in such circumstances, given a choice and select an
option that they later regret with the benefit of hindsight, there seem to be some limits on the
future obligations of the government to restore their livelihoods. In some other cases, APs opted
to use cash compensation for housing or consumption-related expenditure, rather than for
productive investment.

126. There was awareness among many APs that without ADB's involvement in the process,
the deal offered and the conditions achieved up to the time of interview would have been worse.
This was the case even in India, where some of the surveys registered much dissatisfaction. It
was also the case in the more recent projects in the PRC, where ADB's influence led to more
attention to resettlement follow-up than the authorities normally provide. For instance, after the
construction of the Zhezjiang Shanxi Water Supply Dam, a 10-year post- RP was approved. In
the Guanxi Road Development Project, much attention was devoted to restoration of lands
temporarily used by road contractors and to restoration of disrupted irrigation and drainage
systems. As acknowledged by many APs met during the study team's visits, nationally funded
and managed projects generally provided a less advantageous compensation package and no
rehabilitation package.

127. Wider Positive Impacts of the IR Policy. It is the view of this SES, acknowledged by
government stakeholders met during the country visits, that there have been wider impacts of
ADB's IR policy and those of other international financing institutions, particularly the World
Bank, and the advocacy of NGOs. The policy, as implemented by ADB and other institutions,
has raised public attention to government-funded projects that involve expropriation and
displacement of APs, and has set standards for resettlement and treatment of APs that have
influenced government and public opinion. Many projects have had a demonstration effect, such
                                                                                                               49


as in Kolkata, where railway squatters were able to negotiate a deal regarding their eviction and
resettlement, based on the resettlement deal provided to canal bank squatters under the ADB
financed Kolkata Environmental Improvement Project. Public awareness of the rights of APs to
decent treatment has risen as a result. Even in exclusively nationally funded resettlement
operations, more articulate demands for assistance to the vulnerable are being voiced. The
problems created for governments have indirectly led to greater acceptance of standards such
as set by the IR policy. The EA survey results also show that there is more understanding of
ADB's position. Other wider impacts have been capacity development in the EAs that do not
rely only on consultants and contractual staff, and policy and law development impacts. An
interesting sign of the impact of the performance standards of institutions such as ADB was
demonstrated by the adoption of the Equator Principles76 regarding environmental and social
safeguards by 36 multinational companies.

C.      Incremental Costs and Transaction Costs

128. Although many wider impacts may be positive from the perspective of benefits for people
directly affected by ADB-supported projects, they should be weighed against the costs of
resettlement planning and implementation, as borne by governments, including local
governments, and ultimately by the people they serve. As with all investments, and even though
some review the policy as protecting essential rights of APs, there is an opportunity cost
associated with such expenses. The costs of the application of the policy can be subdivided into
two: incremental costs associated with additional requirements, and transaction costs
associated with negative effects on organizations or business. Although it was beyond the
scope of this study to quantify these costs, their nature can be elaborated.

129. Incremental Costs for ADB. Incremental costs incurred by ADB when preparing
resettlement plans under the policy arise from (i) initial poverty and social assessments and
socioeconomic surveys to determine vulnerable people who will later be assisted, (ii) more
consultations with APs than the government would have conducted to obtain their suggestions
and consent for the compensation and assistance packages, and (iii) estimation of the
replacement cost of assets if this is considered different from the value determined by the
country's usual valuation process.77 During loan administration, ADB needs to monitor the
resettlement operation from the perspective of the policy, making sure that the additional
conditions imposed by the policy are met. It could be argued that, since ADB is a not-for-profit
organization, ultimately all incremental costs are borne by client countries, either directly or
indirectly.

130. Incremental costs for ADB can be higher than the costs mentioned with dam and other
controversial projects. One example demonstrates some of these costs. During the preparation
of the Nam Theun 2 Project,78 which was cofinanced with the World Bank Group and
commercial banks, ADB spent $1.7 million to review the studies undertaken by the proponents
to ensure that the project was aligned with ADB policies; about 60% of this was to review
safeguard conditions. About 14 staff years were spent for processing; 88 weeks of staff time



76
   Available: http://www.equator-principles.com/
77
   Some countries use market or replacement cost, and in many countries, ADB does not require such calculations in
   practice.
78
   ADB. 2005. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the Lao
   People's Democratic Republic for the Greater Mekong Subregion: Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project. Manila.
50


was spent for missions and compliance reviews; six missions were mounted to Japan, Thailand,
US, and Europe to meet with NGOs and other interested parties; and there were over
30 meetings and briefings with ADB Management and the Board and site visits by Management
and the Board. During project processing, ADB interacted with dozens of NGOs. ADB
responded to hundreds of questions raised by ADB executive directors and by advocacy NGOs
that challenged staff and member governments through an internationally coordinated
campaign.

131. Incremental Costs for Borrowers and EAs. For borrowers and EAs, the incremental
costs beyond the country system result from (i) preparation of RPs if these are not prescribed or
have a different format from those required under national systems; (ii) the extra costs of
compensation against replacement value of assets lost by APs; (iii) the additional assistance
provided for vulnerable APs if this is not already prescribed by the country's law or policy; and
(iv) the time and human costs needed for additional due diligence, grievance redress,
monitoring, and reporting to ADB.

132. Application of the ADB policy often means that, as more vulnerable people are affected,
and especially as more squatters are involved, significant costs are incurred that national
governments would not have been obliged to incur based on their own laws. From a borrower's
perspective, the policy sometimes has the unfortunate effect of adding to the cost of ADB-
financed projects that operate in areas where funded projects would be cheaper. These
incremental costs also create perverse incentives for both DMCs and individual ADB staff to
avoid involvement in projects that have significant resettlement elements. Arguably, these are
precisely the projects for which ADB has the potential to add the greatest value for APs. If
governments choose to follow domestic procedures and not to provide such additional
assistance, this could lead to (i) risks of impoverishment of segments of their population that
would have to be addressed later; (ii) risks connected with civil unrest; (iii) the shifting of
problems to other locations, as vulnerable people do not have sufficient purchasing power to
buy a home and would have to squat elsewhere; and (iv) missed opportunities for development
when poor people already identified and targeted by an intervention are not subsequently
helped. In other words, not addressing resettlement properly externalizes such costs, but they
do not go away. On the other hand, when ADB's policy is applied flexibly, and good agreements
with EAs are made before loan approval, there may be more speedy project implementation, as
landowners and other APs will be better consulted, better compensated, better assisted, and
less inclined to pose obstacles. The EA survey also bore this out. If the EA cannot get
possession of the land, the project cannot be implemented.

133. Transaction Costs for ADB. A recent Board information paper (footnote 68) estimated
that, in 1995, lead time for infrastructure operations was 54 staff weeks for loan processing. In
2004, it was 75 staff weeks, "primarily because of safeguard assessments." The costs
associated with preparation of resettlement operations themselves are not transaction costs--
they are incremental costs--but the disincentives to borrow from ADB that they result in
certainly are, although these are difficult to quantify.

134. The transaction costs resulting from ADB's transition period in which experience was
built up and the new policy and procedures were sometimes imposed on already ongoing
projects may have been high. In some cases, ADB seems to have pushed too hard. One EA in
the road sector in the Philippines indicated to the study team that it is no longer willing to borrow
from ADB for a next project because of the bad experience with the IR policy and its
enforcement. Due to controversy over the nature of RPs for a number of subcomponents, the
entire loan was suspended for 15 months. In India, a loan was canceled when a state
                                                                                                                  51


government decided to turn a two-lane highway improvement project into a dual carriageway.
ADB was not requested to provide funding for the new project, partly because of the EA's
extensive experience with the resettlement planning required as part of ADB's appraisal
processes, which the government thought did not fit their schedule. The indications are that the
Indonesia power sector and the Viet Nam hydro power generation sector do not wish to borrow
from ADB any longer, in large part on account of ADB's IR policy and its enforcement. If clients
disengage with ADB because of the IR policy or its enforcement, it may mean that they will
return to the use of lower national standards and can no longer be influenced to move gradually
in a better direction through continuous engagement with ADB.

135. Transaction Costs for Borrowers and EAs. There are various types, and some can
also be viewed as benefits when a longer time frame is taken. One is the effect on the nature of
the project itself, and the organization implementing it. ADB's view that resettlement should, as
far as possible, be handled and budgeted by the same project that causes it79 may add to the
complexity of projects. Resettlement and livelihood restoration require much more coordination
among various agencies than usual. The approach combining these activities often requires
single-sector projects handled by a single or a few agencies to become multisector projects
involving multiple implementing agencies. The approach complicates project design and
implementation and sometimes requires EAs to build up expertise outside of their core business
areas. This is viewed as a transaction cost by many EAs, which need to invest in capacity
building for the sole purpose of the project. However, in the absence of country-wide social
safety nets, ADB sees no alternative to this, and regards capacity building for resettlement
operations in infrastructure agencies as an added benefit of the resettlement process. This was
confirmed by some EAs as well. Many informed the study team that, although ADB's IR policy
added transaction costs, it also increased their understanding of the need for fair treatment of
APs, better due diligence, and the benefits of more humane resettlement processes.

136. One other possible transaction cost was occasionally brought forward by borrowers and
EAs during the study's country missions. When the ADB policy asks governments to sidestep
their own laws and government policies in order to favor certain categories of people, then this
may help perpetuate the "soft state,"80 no matter how valid the sidestepping might be in certain
cases. Applying different standards within a country may diminish respect for law and
government policy, and thereby make them less effective. Government policies may ultimately
be undermined by precedents. Special treatment of land acquisition and resettlement is not the
only area in which international agencies have been sidestepping government systems. For
example, donors have sometimes required the establishment of project implementation units
outside of the normal government system, although this practice is now discouraged in the Paris
Declaration.

D.       Complex Issues Encountered

137. Complex issues raised by this study can be divided into three groups: (i) ADB-wide
issues impacting on resettlement issues, (ii) procedural and technical issues related to the way
the policy fits into ADB's processes, and (iii) policy issues.



79
   Basic principle (iv) of ADB's IR policy: "Any involuntary resettlement should, as far as possible, be conceived and
   executed as a part of a development project or program."
80
   A concept introduced by Gunnar Myrdal referring to a state that finds it hard to enforce policies and in which
   government decisions can be challenged or sidestepped with relative ease. Myrdal, Gunnar. 1968. Asian Drama:
   An Enquiry into the Poverty of Nations. Pantheon. New York.
52


       1.      ADB-Wide Issues

138. Availability of Alternative Project Finance. Because interest rates are currently low,
and OCR countries have access to other sources of finance, they are less willing to put up with
what they see as onerous ADB conditionalities, including those related to safeguards. Some
other financial institutions such as the World Bank also face this situation, but have more staff to
assist and provide added value. Other donor agencies may have less staff available but also
have less stringent conditionalities. This view comes at a time when ADB is in the process of
systematizing and strengthening its application of the safeguards.

139. Alignment with Country Systems. There is a major issue of whether ADB's safeguard
policies should be better aligned with those of the DMCs. If so, a certification process would be
required to ensure that the principles of the domestic resettlement laws and procedures are
converging with those in ADB's IR policy. A country by country approach would be needed,
preferably in partnership with other donors. Special attention would need to be paid to the
enforcement of domestic laws and policies, as poor enforcement is often a problem. Better
enforcement should in principle increase respect for the law rather than decrease it, such as
may be the case when financing institutions like ADB superimpose their separate standards on
top of those of the countries. Alignment, however, may in practice mean the relaxing of
standards in some areas, as time will be required in many countries to strengthen their
resettlement policies and practices. The use of some of ADB's scarce resettlement expertise
would need to shift from project-by-project processing and implementation to strengthening
country systems. If successful, efforts to strengthen country systems would have a much
greater strategic impact than implementing good resettlement programs in ADB-financed
projects. In practice, such assessments would show that the IR systems are more advanced in
some countries than in others. While it may be possible for some countries to reach
international standards in a relatively short period, for many other countries many years would
be required.

140. Harmonization with Other Donors. Countries and EAs worry about the transaction
costs related to diminished respect for government policy, including the law, when different
resettlement assistance packages are imposed by different multilateral and bilateral institutions.
Staff of the National Highway Authority in India mentioned the case of a highway being
constructed with funds from ADB, World Bank and Japan Bank for International Cooperation.
Vulnerable groups on different stretches of road received widely diverging assistance packages,
depending on the aid agency. Given the commitment made by all funding agencies in the Paris
Declaration to harmonize, greater progress in this area is needed. This will become all the more
important as the World Bank progresses with its commitment to test making greater use of
country systems in the area of safeguards. Harmonization will require the safeguard policy
update process to look carefully into such issues as the possible adoption of the 10 safeguard
policies of World Bank and the 10 performance standards of IFC.

       2.      Technical Issues

141. RPs Prepared Too Early. ADB's IR policy and overall focus on procedural compliance
during project processing have had the effect of emphasizing the preparation of the RP before
loan approval. Particularly in cases where the exact location of the future works is not yet clear
at an early stage, as with linear investments such as roads, railways, transmission lines, and
water supply, this may not always be in the best interest of the ultimate resettlement operation.
In such cases, the RP preparation may be better coordinated with the detailed design of the
works. At the feasibility study stage, the number and location of APs is often not known,
                                                                                                                    53


because the alignment is not known. This means that the RP needs significant updating at the
detailed design stage and occasionally at the project implementation stage. The preparation of
detailed RPs before actual resettlement operations begin in these sectors has brought ADB
much criticism, even from APs who stood to benefit, as the early and sometimes wrong
announcements created in their view an unnecessary scare or raised expectations that were not
met. Perhaps equally bad was the effect of premature public disclosure on the behavior of some
APs. Existing APs might wish to expand their structures quickly and cheaply in order to claim
more compensation. New squatters might also be attracted to the project area because of better
than normal possible assistance provided at a later stage.81 However, early resettlement
planning has also had advantages in the case of linear projects: (i) the establishment, at an
early stage, of a budget for resettlement operations; (ii) more secure budget for resettlement
planning, as it can be made part of the project preparatory TA; (iii) affected communities are
informed much earlier and at a time when key project decisions are made; (iv) the surveys may
help to assess project alternatives and reduce costs when resettlement is a key factor; and
(v) early disclosure of the draft RP enables stakeholder feedback prior to Board approval of the
loan. The safeguard policy update will have to consider the efficiency considerations carefully.

142. Duplication with Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs). There is some
duplication of effort in resettlement planning, as ADB's guidelines for EIAs also require attention
for IR. This may be a historical relic in the sense that the EIA guidelines were developed long
before ADB adopted the IR Policy. ADB should consider whether joint consideration of social
and environmental impacts can serve a useful purpose, or whether it is better to consider social
and environmental impacts separately.

         3.       Policy Issues

143. Rewarding Wealthier Illegal Dwellers. Concerns were expressed, notably in the West
Bengal Corridor Project, about the fairness of ADB's policy in case of offering replacement value
for structures built illegally on government land or right of way. Illegal dwellers themselves have
submitted hundreds of grievances about the perceived unfairness in "rewarding" illegals with
more financial clout who have usurped bigger areas and built bigger structures (houses, shops,
workshops), with higher compensation. In their view, all were equally illegal, and richer
squatters who had taken more advantage should not receive more assistance.

144. Assistance to Deal with Losses Not Directly Related to Land. During the study,
concerns were expressed about the extent of assistance to be offered in case of business
losses as a result of temporary and permanent disturbances. The Kolkata project was planning
to provide assistance to 625 trash sorters at a dump site. Their livelihood would be affected by
its conversion into a controlled landfill. In a recently prepared water supply project for the Jaffna
area in Sri Lanka, assistance will be provided to water vendors who will be affected by the
expansion in household connections under the project, as it will adversely affect their
livelihoods. In both cases, monitoring arrangements through consultants or NGOs were included
in the project design.82 The safeguard policy update process should consider whether such
cases fit into an RP, or a social development action plan.



81
   Even though cut-off dates are established and ID operations are conducted, some APs may not be in the area on
   the day of the survey. These genuine APs need to be distinguished from bogus claimants who move into the area,
   sometimes with the connivance of criminal syndicates, in search of resettlement benefits.
82
   In the Jaffna project, the monitoring arrangements were also serving to check the treatment of kiosks and stalls that
   needed to be moved to the other side of the road during earthworks for reticulation systems.
54


145. Extent of Public Consultation. ADB promotes extensive consultation processes. This
is desirable, but there is a need to appropriately distinguish among (i) the authority of the
government regarding investment decisions, (ii) ADB's own responsibility to decide on financing
or not, and (iii) the need for public consultation to make sure that adverse impacts are identified
and mitigated, and improvements are made that enhance the impact for vulnerable groups. ADB
needs to have greater clarity concerning the definition of broad community support among APs
for project interventions.

146. Due Diligence on Resettlement Issues Caused by Prior Public Investments.
A complex issue is the extent to which ADB should be held responsible for resettlement
conducted by governments prior to the approval of ADB financing to support a project. Clients
do not always understand why ADB regards due diligence checks as necessary for prior
resettlement operations in which ADB was not involved. The current approach is that ADB
checks whether outstanding grievances and claims with prior operations are legitimate and can
affect the implementation of the project. This should be straightforward. However, ADB may
also need to consider reputational risks arising out of involvement in projects that include
components completed before ADB involvement. RSDD's review of the policy should explore
how to consider these risks, whether due diligence checks should become mandatory, whether
an element of proportionality can be applied, whether time limits for such retroactive compliance
can be given, and whether other rules can be formulated that can guide staff.

147. Limits of ADB's Involvement in the Project. Current ADB IR policy, like that of the
World Bank, applies to the whole project, for which ADB may contribute only a portion of the
funding. ADB sometimes funds only some components while others are fully funded by the
government or other financiers. The need for compliance with ADB's IR policy for the whole
project is often perceived as inappropriate by DMCs, and can lead to problems if other funding
agencies have different IR procedures. Special problems may occur if ADB attempts to apply
the policy to program loans with investment components. OED would recommend exploring the
possibility of developing procedures for applying the principle of proportionality in the
assessment of ADB's responsibility.

148. The IR Policy Applied to Private Sector Projects and Credit Line Projects. The
policy does not clearly define the boundaries with respect to resettlement needed within the
context of private sector projects and credit line projects. The Private Sector Operations
Department in ADB does not have any social safeguards specialist. In some cases, the
government, rather than the private sector sponsor, is responsible for resettlement.

                                  VI.       ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS

149. In this final chapter, OED assesses the relevance of the IR policy to ADB operations, the
efficiency of inputs and systems, the effectiveness of outcomes for APs and DMC capacity, and
the sustainability of the IR approach. OED uses a scale of four possible ratings for each criterion
--for example highly relevant, relevant, partly relevant, and irrelevant.83 The assessments of
relevance, efficiency, and sustainability are based on the analysis undertaken for this
evaluation, complemented by the results of interviews and questionnaire surveys. The




83
     Likewise, the ratings can be (i) highly efficient, efficient, less efficient, and inefficient; (ii) highly effective, effective,
     less effective, and ineffective; and (iii) most likely sustainable, sustainable, less likely sustainable, and
     unsustainable.
                                                                                                 55


assessment of effectiveness is mainly based on analysis of the 16 case studies selected from a
portfolio of a few hundred completed and ongoing projects approved since 1994, complemented
by information from 62 PCRs and relevant OED evaluation reports. It could be argued that a
definitive statement of the effectiveness of ADB IR practices should rely on large surveys of a
statistically significant number of APs associated with completed projects and control groups to
assess the impact on APs. This evaluation was not designed to be a rigorous impact evaluation.
The SES rather raises a number of questions as to possible clarifications and changes to IR
principles and procedures based on the analysis and case studies undertaken. The chapter
concludes with recommendations related to the planned update of the IR policy and its
implementation.

A.     Assessment of the Involuntary Resettlement Policy

150. The change in goalposts of the IR policy make it difficult to rate the overall success of
resettlement operations since 1995. There was an extensive transition period during which ADB
staff and EAs tried to come to grips with the 1995 Policy, the 1998 Handbook, and the 2003 OM
F2 section. With growing experience and more international concern for resettlement
operations, OESD and later RSES enforced the principles and procedures ever more
systematically and strictly. Overall, this study found that the older resettlement operations in the
sample of projects studied offered poorer deals to APs and were accompanied by less due
diligence. Some projects, particularly in the PRC, benefited from rapid economic growth and job
creation that absorbed the labor resources of the APs, thus helping to improve their livelihoods.

       1.      Relevance of the Policy and its Procedures

151. The IR Policy was issued prior to ADB's 1999 decision to adopt poverty reduction as its
overarching objective through the Poverty Reduction Strategy. The increasing emphasis on
resettlement and livelihood restoration after 2000 may have been linked to this focus on poverty
reduction, as most APs are poor. Although ADB's infrastructure projects have many positive
impacts, the mitigation of adverse impact on APs can be taken as a key marker to assess
ADB's seriousness in fighting poverty. The relevance of the policy to ADB's poverty reduction
agenda is in principle high, as is the relevance to ADB's more recent reaffirmation of
infrastructure development as a major area of operations in the MTS II. Other relevant aspects
are the use of the Policy in making sure that the due diligence aspects of ADB-supported
projects are receiving attention during loan processing, land is acquired more speedily, and
social unrest is prevented.

152. This study questions whether the current version of the policy, as embodied in OM
F2/BP as well as the OP section, has expanded the scope beyond what the Board intended
when the 1995 IR Policy was approved. An RP now needs to be prepared for any project in
which a possible adverse impact of greater than 10% of the livelihood of one or more APs can
be identified. For example, water vendors may be required to be assisted, given that they may
lose business opportunities from the provision of piped water supply to households; the
businesses of shop owners may be affected by highways that bypass an older road;
moneylenders may lose from projects introduce microcredit; charcoal producers lose income
from electrification projects; and fish farmers in waters around wastewater treatment plants may
see their yields decline. These categories of APs may refer to the OM, demand compliance with
the requirements set out (although the OM states it is "for ADB staff and not necessarily a
complete treatment of the subject," it is on the ADB website and "subject to compliance review"),
and demand to be included in an RP. Adverse social impacts need to be assessed and may
need to be mitigated. However, OED questions whether the most appropriate means is through
56


an IR policy. Given that there is a wide range of such impacts, it may be more appropriate for
them to be addressed through a social development action plan or ad hoc project-specific plan.

153. The label "IR policy" has become a misnomer. Although the emphasis of the 1995 Policy
was clearly on significant physical dislocation and resettlement, later developments have
focused on mitigating all potentially negative social effects from projects, including nonland
effects and livelihood restoration. While the latter must be seen as positive in terms of
contributing to ADB's overarching objective, the label of "IR" on the policy seems at odds with
this broader objective and places mitigation activities in the wrong framework of RPs. This has
caused, and continues to cause, confusion among borrowers and EAs.

154. The procedures do not differentiate sufficiently between the responsibilities of ADB and
those of EAs. It is acknowledged that ADB's role is different from that of EAs. ADB cannot be
held responsible for all of the EAs' choices, nor can ADB penalize EAs for all violations when
some of them are due to inexperience or to force majeure. ADB can promote the provision of
training, microcredit, etc. to APs, sufficient to provide the opportunity to restore their livelihood
and improve their quality of life. The goal of rehabilitating the livelihoods of 100% of APs is one
to be aspired to, and on the same order as, for example, ADB's projects planning to lift
beneficiary populations out of poverty. A principle of "no one will be worse off" which the policy
enshrines, while highly desirable, will be exceedingly difficult to meet in every circumstance
when thousands of APs are involved. Not achieving this goal or principle should not by itself be
a compliance issue, unless the agreed upon inputs, activities, or outputs, which were largely
under the control of ADB, were not realized. All parties--APs, NGOs, EAs, and ADB--would
agree that the lives of APs should not be adversely affected because of an ADB financed
project. However, ADB has failed to distinguish adequately between goals (hope-to-meet) and
obligations (must-meet) in the IR policy and related business practices.

155. In view of these considerations, this study assesses the IR policy and procedures as
relevant to ADB's operations, but on the borderline of partly relevant. If a number of the "design"
issues of the policy had been addressed earlier, this study would have assessed the IR policy
as highly relevant.

       2.      Effectiveness of Outcomes for APs and for DMC/EA Capacity

156. By the letter of ADB's IR procedures and by the current standards enforced, the projects
in the sample regularly did not comply with all requirements. Many of these were approved
before the latest procedures were made official, so perhaps this should not be a surprise. But in
several cases studied in the PRC, India, and the Philippines, the original Policy's principle of
fully restoring livelihoods, especially those of the vulnerable ones, was unlikely to be achieved
for all of the displaced persons within a reasonable time period. This was confirmed by feedback
from NGOs on projects in other countries, which identified some projects in which adverse
impacts on APs, were not successfully mitigated. Nevertheless, the PCR data and the case
studies undertaken also indicated that most APs were not dissatisfied and resentful. The
housing situation and related quality of life standards had often improved significantly. Many
believed that the deal they got was relatively good in comparison with the average treatment
APs received in their countries in similar operations. Especially for projects in India, and to some
extent in the Philippines, there was dissatisfaction with some aspects of the deal or the process,
due to different perceptions of what was fair. More recent resettlement operations were better
prepared than earlier ones, with more explicit agreements between EAs and ADB. EA project
directors and ADB staff confirmed these observations in questionnaire surveys. Where
acquisition of privately owned land was involved, the policy's principle of providing
                                                                                                   57


compensation at replacement cost could sometimes be seen as promoting faster resolution of
land-related delays and thereby project progress. The study findings suggest that currently
planned and ongoing resettlement operations may achieve a higher and more consistent level
of effectiveness. For these reasons, the study tentatively assesses the current IR policy as
effective in terms of outcomes for APs, though for the completed projects reviewed was rated as
effective but on the borderline of being partly effective due to a number of cases observed
where there were shortcomings. Further country studies, project studies, and wider
consultations with other stakeholders should be undertaken during RSDD's review of the IR
policy to test the robustness of this conclusion.

157. The impression of effectiveness of more recent practices on balance is enhanced by the
experience of ADB's IR TAs. Such TAs have often had high value in terms of policy
development and capacity building. Due in part to ADB operations, the efforts of other financiers
and domestic agencies, and ADB's TA, some DMCs have either approved new policies and
adapted relevant legislation, or at least paid more attention to IR than they would have in the
absence of the activities of ADB, other funding agencies and NGOs. Half of the EA project
directors felt that the increase in experience with resettlement safeguards within their
organization was one of the main benefits of ADB involvement in the project.

       3.      Efficiency of Inputs, Processes, and Systems

158. Much progress has been made since 2000 with systems instituted, the categorization of
resettlement impacts, and the comprehensiveness and usability of entitlement matrixes.
Experience has grown, and the number of resettlement experts has increased, which has made
many aspects of the preparation and handling of resettlement operations more efficient.
However, given the many requirements of the currently more strictly applied policy, two
additional findings of the evaluation regarding the efficiency of inputs are (i) a continuing lack of
specialized staff for IR in some departments and divisions; and (ii) the mismatch between staff
resources used for IR during loan preparation and during project implementation and,
sometimes, in the post-construction phase. Similar findings were also reported by an OED
resettlement study in 2000. These two problems have not been effectively addressed during the
past 5 years. OED assesses that they are not likely to be redressed by any changes to the IR
policy, as the mismatch is large. Even if a more limited scope of the IR policy were endorsed,
nonland and secondary impacts of projects would still need to be addressed in some way
through poverty and social assessment, and possibly social development action plans.

159. OED assesses the efficiency of the OM of 2003 as an instrument guiding operations as
less than optimal, as it is not fully in line with the 1995 Policy. In addition, although it clarifies
many issues, it sets the bar higher, and yet does not resolve all the issues that ADB staff and
EAs face, while also creating new issues due to its greater inclusiveness. In combination with
the lack of staff, the fear of rejection of draft RPs by RSES, and the fear of exposure to the
compliance review mechanism if too liberal interpretations are made, the confusion that staff
have about the OM has sometimes led to tense interactions with clients. In a number of cases,
earlier agreements have had to be revisited due to the more inclusive concept of IR held by
ADB. This was not always welcome by EAs. The second main goal of the policy, to foster
learning and to create IR capacity in DMCs, has been limited by a policing mentality among
some ADB staff to prevent "violations" of the many procedures. Infrequent and irregular
missions have contributed to this as well. This is alienating some DMC clients. Civil society and
NGOs have identified instances in which APs have been adversely affected because mitigation
measures were not effectively implemented or adequately designed. Lack of ADB loan
administration efforts has sometimes resulted in ADB being slow to take action to try to resolve
58


problems. In this sense the implementation of the policy has been inefficient and difficult.
Furthermore, the emphasis on front-end compliance has led to the project preparation stage
taking up far more time than before. Given finite resources, some ADB staff and many EAs see
this as being to the detriment of other important aspects of project design.

160. In ADB's zeal to cover all potential adverse effects of a project and to ensure that
mitigation actions are agreed upon before loan approval, detailed resettlement planning is often
carried out at too early a stage for some types of projects (particularly road projects). This adds
to duplication of effort and perverse effects later. For example, it may invite more squatters to
move into the project area in hopes of being compensated. In other projects, such planning is
appropriate at the time of loan preparation, but the planning exercise is regarded by some EAs
as done mainly to satisfy ADB's internal requirements.

161. The social development/IR specialists in many, though not all, divisions have become
more efficient over the years. One positive result has been that more RPs are now endorsed
and owned by EAs. This is a change from past practice, in which many RPs were produced by
consultants with minimal EA or even AP input, leading to little ownership later. Given the current
policy mandates, more ADB specialists are needed, unless a pool of semipermanent staff
consultants can be built up that is given the authority to take over part of the supervision of RP
preparation and implementation tasks. EAs in India used the World Bank, with its substantial
numbers of contracted specialist staff in their country office, as a good example for ADB to
consider. Sufficient numbers of ADB staff located in RMs, well versed in resettlement
implementation and able to proactively solve problems, can address daily problems
encountered in implementing the IR policy. Possibilities for outsourcing part of the capacity
development tasks now conducted by ADB specialists could also be investigated, but authority
problems would have to be overcome. The mismatch between processing and implementation
resources within ADB is not confined to resettlement.

162. RSES and the SPCM have helped raise the profile of resettlement in ADB's operations.
However, RSES lacks the capacity to be fully efficient in its role of quality assurance. In
addition, some of the mechanisms used are not credible in the present situation. The last
signature on the SPCM is provided by the CCO, whose staff rely on information submitted by
the ODs. RSES does not have enough staff or time to independently verify the quality of the
information. In a zero ADB staff growth environment, the Accountability Mechanism has, in
effect, provided strong incentives to transfer staff resources from prevention and problem
solving to procedural compliance review during project processing. In view of these
considerations, this study assesses the inputs, processes, and systems to implement the IR
policy as less efficient.

       4.      Sustainability of the Policy's Approach

163. ADB's emerging inclusive approach towards adverse effects of projects through the IR
policy has created incremental costs and transaction costs that diminish the positive impacts
and that raise questions about its sustainability. Incremental costs include high consultant cost,
cost of socioeconomic surveys to determine levels of vulnerability and need for rehabilitation,
additional costs borne by some governments due to award of replacement value for land and
structures when it is not the legal standard, compensation for structures and assets lost of non-
titleholders (if this was not mandatory in the DMC), and assistance to the poor and vulnerable
when the law of the land does not provide a treatment as generous. Transaction costs are
apparent in longer preparation times for projects, which EAs resent, delays in implementation
due to special arrangements different from the usual country system arrangements, extra costs
                                                                                                59


due to contract extensions when this happens, and higher commitment charges for OCR loans.
Ultimately, these translate into lower economic and financial returns of projects, although the
social returns may be higher.

164. Part of the transaction costs may have been a transitional problem, as the policy's
approach was being experimented with. However, the application of the current procedures in
sector projects and in cases of indirect impacts is a disincentive for some clients. On occasion,
ADB and the EA have agreed that ADB should not be involved in contentious cases, and even
sometimes in cases that are not contentious but involve significant resettlement and/or
livelihood restoration. The SES, for instance, found that covenants are currently added in some
sector loan agreements that discourage the inclusion of subprojects that would be categorized
as A (significant), since these are likely to need too much time to prepare to fit the
implementation schedule. In other cases, DMC clients no longer ask ADB to support projects
with significant resettlement impacts, as ADB involvement is perceived to add too many costs
and delays. Safeguards add significantly to the loan preparation time, and many clients feel it
has become too long. The consequence of raising the bar much higher than the country
standard is that there are incentives for both EAs and ADB staff to avoid ADB involvement in
projects with significant resettlement. This is most prevalent in countries in which alternative
sources of financing are available. Two other consequences flow from this perverse
development: (i) ADB is having less aggregate influence on DMC IR processes, and (ii) APs are
likely to be less well off than they would have been if ADB were involved in the project. A policy
that will not be adopted for projects financed by clients without support from ADB cannot be
called sustainable or at least replicable. Ways need to be identified to reduce such transaction
costs. Although receiving considerable feedback during the evaluation on the increased
transaction costs associated with the IR policy, OED recognizes that there would also be costs
associated with the absence of such a policy. Examples of such costs would include long delays
in acquiring the land required for the projects, potential social unrest, adverse impacts on APs,
and reputational risks for ADB. A larger process to which ADB contributes mainly through policy
dialogue, policy TA, capacity-building TA, and to some extent through "model" resettlement
operations, may in the longer term have some effect on increasing the acceptability and thereby
the replicability of ADB's policy approach in contexts other than ADB supported projects. OED
assesses the policy as less likely to be sustainable.

B.     Recommendations for the Update of the Safeguard Policies

165. The team in RSDD working on the policy update should consider the recommendations
made below and expand the evidence base as needed, in order to arrive at a strengthened
assessment of past experience, and a well-justified proposal for policy update.

166. Management and the Board need to reconcile the differences between the 1995
Policy and the currently applied policy, as laid down in the OM F2 section. The current OM
F2/BP and even F2/OP incorporate new policy elements. In OED's view, the three key
principles of the policy remain valid, but ADB needs to decide whether to endorse the greater
inclusiveness of the IR policy and procedures, or return the current OM and IR practice back to
greater focus on displacement of APs. In either case, the policy requires an update. It may be
unrealistic to expect that the IR policy be brought back to a significantly more limited scope than
currently applied in practice, so the scope of the original Policy could be somewhat extended.
The new policy could then be renamed as the Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement
Policy, also covering, for instance, impacts of partial loss of access to land. More secondary
adverse impacts of projects could then be addressed through a more specific social
60


development strategy or social protection strategy. If a significantly more inclusive concept is
endorsed, the new policy could perhaps be labeled the Social Safeguard Policy.

167. Whatever the nature of the policy adopted, it should have a results based
framework--distinguishing desired impact, outcomes, outputs, activities, and inputs
both at macro (country) and micro (project) level. At the macro level, the policy should aim
for a country system in place that ensures involuntary resettlement of people is avoided or
minimized, and that people affected by public and private sector infrastructure development
have been treated fairly and equitably, and can fully restore their livelihoods. The country
system should set itself such standards and obligations that the imposition of separate
safeguards by ADB would be superfluous. The outcome of ADB's IR policy should be
convergence between country system and ADB policy and procedures, as visible in country
policy frameworks and growing country and agency capacity. The outputs of the ADB IR policy
would then be APs properly treated and given the means and opportunities necessary to restore
their livelihoods. At the micro level of an individual project, application of the IR policy should
have the desired impact of avoidance of adverse effects from projects, minimization of
disruption to livelihood of those unavoidably affected, restoration of their livelihoods, and
improvement in their standards of living. The outcome of the policy would be opportunities
seized by APs, necessary for realizing the desired impact. The outputs of the policy would be
compensation and assistance provided by the project. Activities would have to be specified for
ADB and EAs and other agencies involved. Among the activities to be conducted by the EA
would be the achievement of broad agreement among borrowers, EAs, and APs regarding
procedures and assistance packages through a well-documented process. For APs living below
the national poverty line, the desired impact should be to lift them above the poverty line. As in
ADB's design and monitoring frameworks for projects, ADB and EA can only contribute to the
desired impacts and outcomes. EAs are fully responsible for outputs, and ADB and EAs for an
agreed set of activities and inputs.

168. The updated policy should highlight a set of performance standards. It should set
standards for ADB and EA in terms of vulnerability assessment, public consultation, disclosure
of information, reporting, monitoring, and grievance redress.

169. The updated policy should elaborate on the objective of greater reliance on
country EA systems for land acquisition and resettlement safeguards. The common
objective should be for ADB's operations to rely more on country systems for IR. This would
need to be accompanied by certifications, preferably by ADB working jointly with other aid
agencies, of sufficient convergence with the IR policy and effective implementation capacity.
Partial use of country systems could be piloted. Rules to define the vulnerable among the APs
may need to be established by country, to reduce the costly socioeconomic surveys that in
many cases generate unreliable data. While the greater use of country systems is desirable, this
would require much greater support by ADB during implementation than is currently the case in
order to avoid negative impacts on APs. Movement toward the use of country systems would
have to recognize that the IR policy, the legal and regulatory framework, and the implementation
capacity vary significantly from country to country and within sectors in the same country. Thus,
progress in adopting systems would be faster in some countries than in others. Indeed, for
some, it may remain a distant goal.

170. The updated policy should have clearer guidelines and procedures regarding the
identification of resettlement operations needed, such as those on project alternatives,
retroactive compliance with the policy, different types of operations and lending modalities, the
                                                                                                         61


minimum number of APs, and resettlement frameworks. The issues and recommendations
regarding the triggering of resettlement planning are listed in Box 3.

            Box 3: Guidelines and Procedures Related to Resettlement Planning

 Project alternatives. The RRP needs to be more explicit about the project alternatives it considered
 to avoid or minimize resettlement and their costs and benefits.

 Retroactive compliance with the policy. More guidance should be given on cases where the
 government clears the land before ADB is requested to participate in the project, and compensates,
 assists, and/or resettles people using its own procedures prior to ADB involvement in the project.

 Different types of operations. Guidelines and possibly procedures for some important sectors could
 be specified (e.g., dams, large urban renewal, slum eradication), along the lines of the subsector
 checklists in ADB's 1994 Handbook for Incorporation of Social Dimensions. ADB may need to
 prioritize the use of its modest resettlement expertise on projects with anticipated large effects, during
 both project formulation and implementation.

 Different lending modalities. The implications of new lending modalities, particularly MFF, in the OM
 for improved resettlement planning should also be worked out, as should those of existing modalities
 such as sector and sector like loans, private sector loans, and credit line operations involving
 resettlement.

 Involuntary resettlement of communities beyond a certain scale. Operations to resettle
 communities may need to be cast as separate projects, beyond a certain financial threshold. This
 would also allow a more focused assessment of associated costs and benefits of resettlement
 operations. Such resettlement projects should be 100% reimbursable through loans.

 Minimum number of 200 APs requiring preparation of a full RP. More appropriate criteria should
 be defined that consider the characteristics of the country, sector, and project and the past track
 record of IR implementation. The 200 figure is not appropriate for all situations.

 The application of RFs. Greater reliance on RFs can work only if (i) significantly more ADB
 resources are devoted to project administration as opposed to preparation; (ii) the project
 implementation period can be extended with fewer financial consequences for the DMC; and
 (iii) supplementary loans can be approved quickly and flexibly if needed, should resettlement costs
 turn out to be significantly higher than expected.


171. The updated policy should also be clearer on guidelines and procedures
regarding compensation and assistance within resettlement operations. The issues and
recommendations are summarized in Box 4.
62


           Box 4: Guidelines and Procedures for Compensation and Assistance

 Procedures for ADB-financed acquisition of land. Procedures need to be developed for the proper
 valuation of land and compensation of APs in case of compulsory acquisition of land financed by ADB.
 ADB's current procurement guidelines generally rely on competitive bidding, something that is not
 generally appropriate for land acquisition. ADB needs to work out ways to apply the principles of
 economy and efficiency in the use of loan proceeds for land acquisition.

 Use of the replacement cost method for the determination of compensation and assistance.
 The new handbook under preparation should indicate by major region or country how the principle of
 replacement cost is to be applied in various situations, particularly in those where agricultural land is
 not a freely marketable good, and where assets of illegal dwellers are involved.

 ADB approaches in situations involving squatters. The inconsistency in the treatment of squatters
 between the 1995 IR Policy and OM F2 needs to be addressed. Although the OM F2 sections provide
 some guidance, it does not help a systematic response in all instances involving squatters. For
 instance, what should be ADB's response in cases where squatters settle in an area after the cut-off
 date and are forcibly evicted by a government. There is a need to clarify whether the policy allows the
 offering of replacement rental housing for squatters, and how long a squatter needs to live in an area
 to be eligible for compensation.

 Definition of the period after which economic rehabilitation should be achieved. This needs to
 be indicated so that an evaluation can be based on an agreed upon benchmark.

 Public consultation and disclosure requirements. Beyond those points already addressed by the
 new Public Communications Policy, the principle of consultation with APs should be elaborated into a
 principle that emphasizes broad and documented community support for resettlement in case of
 community type dislocations, and establishment of majority support for assistance packages that the
 project provides. Hearings have proved to be valuable instruments for gaining broad community
 support in cases where resettlement operations deal with communities rather than scattered
 populations. The relation among censuses, surveys, focus group discussions, interviews with
 representatives, and hearings should be discussed in the policy, from the perspective of what
 constitutes adequate consultation and broad community support.

 External monitoring. The procedures should elaborate under what conditions the project should
 employ external monitors. The procedures should refer to the need for country agreements regarding
 such conditions, the need for third party monitoring, and the role that can be played by NGOs in this
 area. The current frequent use of external monitoring, even in cases involving a few APs or minor
 effects, cannot be a substitute for more (resettlement-focused) field visits by ADB staff.


C.     Recommendations for Involuntary Resettlement Implementation

172. ADB is facing a dilemma. The IR bar has been continuously raised. Staff dedicated to IR
have increased, but not sufficiently. The policy is equivalent to that of the World Bank, but staff
resources available for its enforcement are not. The SES shows that ADB is giving insufficient
attention to supervising the administration of RPs and monitoring their implementation. Most
specialists in ADB would agree that ADB needs more staff, particularly in the RMs, to ensure
that the current policy is applied in a more hands-on, constructive way, and in a manner that the
policy mandates. More direct collaboration with relevant units in EAs is required during and after
implementation to ensure that RPs are appropriately updated and implemented, and that EAs
follow through on commitments to assist vulnerable people. More direct collaboration is needed,
for the increasing number of sector projects, to ensure that RPs for new subprojects are well
prepared and implemented within the time frames dictated by loan schedules. Without training
and continuous hands-on ADB involvement, capacity cannot be built. Irregular contact between
                                                                                                63


ADB and the EAs during implementation fosters defensive attitudes. Without close collaboration
between ADB and EAs, especially through the RMs, confrontations over resettlement will
continue. However, ADB shareholders have also made it clear that ADB staff numbers should
not grow significantly. Management must find ways to balance the staff resources and the IR
policy. Options include some combination of the following: (i) allocating more resettlement
specialists either through reallocation of existing positions or creating more positions;
(ii) identifying ways to focus ADB's scarce resettlement expertise in areas of greatest value
added; and/or (iii) changing the policy in ways that will be less staff intensive for ADB. This may
involve making greater use of country systems, as was recommended in the previous section.
The current mismatch between the policy and staffing is likely to lead to continued confrontation
with some DMCs, EAs, NGOs, and APs; some loss of business; reputational risks for ADB;
more compliance reviews; and unmitigated adverse impacts on APs. It is also likely that
opportunities will be lost for providing ADB's added value that comes with its emphasis on due
diligence and added components for relocation, income, and rehabilitation assistance.

173.   The following three recommendations are given:

       (i)     Formulate a time-sequenced implementation plan to complement the IR
               safeguard policy update. This should fully identify the required resource
               requirements, staffing and organizational implications, perhaps based on
               benchmarking staffing against that of the World Bank for the implementation of
               its policy. Specialist expertise needs to be created in RMs located in countries
               with significant IR operations to improve day-to-day interaction with project
               authorities. This should be achievable through the recruitment of additional
               national officers in the RMs or training existing ones. In ADB headquarters,
               national officers or long-term local consultants, could be recruited/retained to do
               certain tasks or to take over tasks currently carried out by short-term consultants.
               The safeguard policy update should consider the organization of safeguard
               delivery and compliance as well. Consideration should be given to RSES
               becoming a quality assurance unit advising on safeguard compliance issues
               through comments on, and spot checks of the preparation and implementation of
               RPs. Under this option, the authority to approve RPs and sign safeguard
               compliance memoranda would be turned over to the ODs. Intermediate solutions
               may also be considered, such as delegating the approval of RPs for category B
               projects to ODs with senior resettlement specialists.
       (ii)    Improve IR monitoring. Loan covenants regarding IR need to be more
               consistent across loan agreements. ADB monitoring of resettlement
               implementation, including post-resettlement rehabilitation, needs to improve,
               particularly during review missions, and reporting needs to be updated more
               regularly and made more detailed in project performance reports. Partnerships
               with NGOs and civil society organizations should be strengthened with a greater
               involvement in project monitoring arrangements. The relevant project
               administration instruction on the preparation of PCRs and the PPER guidelines
               should be amended to specify more clearly the reporting required on IR
               implementation and impact. ADB should develop a better system to follow up on
               actions recommended in PCRs.
       (iii)   Get more involved in building country systems and capacity. ADB should
               accord higher priority to training programs for EA staff, as the payoff may be high
               in terms of improved resettlement operations. Perhaps such a program could be
               outsourced. The training program should be country specific and deal with both
               country systems and ADB systems, and address convergence and divergence
64


     issues. A country review on safeguards should be undertaken as part of country
     planning, to assess which aspects of the procedures should be instituted over
     and above the country's own safeguard systems. ADB TA on country systems
     led by RSES could feed into this. Assessments of country systems should be
     undertaken jointly with the World Bank and possibly other aid agencies and cover
     the legal/regulatory framework, institutional capacity and implementation track
     record. The principles of the IR policy should remain--the move to country or EA
     systems should not be taken to mean a lowering of the desired impact of the IR
     policy. As ADB moves to country systems, it should do so in concert with other
     aid agencies as part of the harmonization agenda. A road map for use of country
     systems should be prepared for interested countries that would identify time
     bound, monitorable indicators of progress. Under the IR policy, ADB is required
     to build capacity for resettlement but only modest resources have been directed
     towards this area. A greater effort can be justified. Management needs to
     address this issue in terms of the competing uses for the scarce TA resources
     and in light of the policy of capping the number of new TA proposals in a year
     because of inadequate TA supervision.
                                                                                          Appendix 1      65


      SUMMARY OF FINDINGS OF EARLIER OPERATIONS EVALUATION DEPARTMENT
                          SOCIAL SAFEGUARD STUDIES

1.      The Operations Evaluation Department carried out two evaluations: one on safeguards
for hydropower projects in 1999,1 and one on the impact of the policy in 2000.2

2.       The Special Evaluation Study (SES) on Social and Environmental Impacts of
Hydropower Projects (footnote 1) concluded that the study projects had not resulted in
disastrous environmental and social impacts. However, several shortcomings occurred, most of
which could have been avoided or compensated for with more diligence on the part of the
project proponents, developing member countries' (DMC) agencies, and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB). Identification and mitigation of project impacts improved in later study projects. The
Hunan Lingjintan Project3 performed better than other study projects in terms of resettlement
efforts due to institutional capabilities of the local agencies and the adoption of the development
resettlement concept, wherein resettlement arrangements were imbedded in an integrated
regional development program. The SES also concluded that (i) the consultation process was
not very effective in most of the study projects; (ii) the preparation of study projects in terms of
environmental and social concerns was weak due to the quality of baseline data and
incompleteness of coverage; (iii) monitoring impacts was better during construction than in the
operations phase due to the use of review missions, progress reports, and panels of experts;
(iv) the institutional capabilities of DMC agencies responsible for enforcing environmental and
social concerns varied substantially across countries; (v) ADB staff members' involvement in
preparing project environmental and social documents and recommending their inadequacy to
the Board created an awkward dual function; (vi) the project units responsible for implementing
environmental and social mitigation measures, in some cases, were inappropriately staffed,
inadequately funded, and established too late with insufficient authority; and (vii) at the time of
the study, ADB policies and guidelines for incorporating social dimensions into ADB operations
were still maturing, with ADB staff displaying a limited understanding of ADB's involuntary
resettlement (IR) policy principles.

3.      To address the weaknesses identified above, the SES recommended the need for
(i) ADB to continue its technical assistance (TA) to help develop the consultation process in
countries that need it; (ii) impact assessments to be prepared in local languages (where this
was not yet being done); (iii) project preparatory work to include the collection of adequate
baseline data; (iv) surveys of project-affected persons and public consultation meetings for all
category A projects;4 (v) environmental and social scientists as an integral part of the design
team for sensitive projects (which could be supplemented by a panel of experts); (vi) ADB's
continued support, where needed, for the development of relevant enforcement agencies
through TAs for long-term monitoring programs; (vii) multiskilled supervision teams
(supplemented by external consultants or panels of experts where needed), at least during
midterm review of category A projects, to evaluate the progress of environmental and social
mitigation measures; (viii) a clearinghouse for all monitoring efforts, especially when several
agencies carry out such monitoring (since environmental and social impacts are interrelated);
(ix) the role of project environmental and social specialists and that of peer reviewers who
ensure a project's adherence to ADB's guidelines to be separated (and ADB staff with such

1
    ADB. 1999. Special Evaluation Study on Social and Environmental Impacts of Hydropower Projects. Manila.
2
    ADB. 2000. Special Evaluation Study on the Policy Impact of Involuntary Resettlement. Manila. Available:
    http://www.adb.org/Evaluation/reports.asp?s=1&wp=2&ps=25&type=4
3
    ADB. 1994. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
    People's Republic of China for the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project. Manila.
4
    Projects that were expected to have significant adverse environmental impacts.
66        Appendix 1



expertise augmented); and (x) local agencies, if adequate institutional capacity is prepared, to
officially take over the responsibility of monitoring operational mitigation measures over a long
period (if not, external audits were recommended).

4.      The SES on the Policy Impact of Involuntary Resettlement (footnote 2) concluded
that by 2000 there had been significant improvements to the preparation and implementation of
resettlement operations after the approval of the IR policy in September 1995. This had led to
enhanced payment of compensation for lost assets, providing improved housing and
infrastructure, and restoring livelihoods for many resettled families. The study found new
awareness in dealing with vulnerable groups, particularly the poor and informal dwellers.
However, there were still many problems on the road to satisfactory resettlement results: (i) lack
of appropriate and compatible national resettlement policies in most DMCs; (ii) inadequate
social investigations at the project preparatory level; (iii) improperly identified impoverishment
risks, resulting in inadequate restoration of income and livelihood and serious implications for
the sustainability of resettlement programs;5 (iv) weak executing agency (EA) institutional
capabilities and inadequate funding for resettlement activities; (v) weak supervision and
monitoring of resettlement implementation; (vi) lack of consistency in capacity building and in
the role of nongovernment organizations (NGOs) in project implementation and sustainability;
and (vii) inadequate aid coordination among funding agencies. Nevertheless, the study
concluded that the IR policy was adequate and relevant and that a revision was not necessary.
The study suggested refinements to clarify specific policy elements, such as compensations,
people directly affected by projects, and those of the vulnerable groups. Implementation
practices were to be improved with a focus on income restoration in the post resettlement
period. OED asked ADB to be more proactive in its cooperation with other agencies and NGOs,
so that quicker progress could be made in improving and harmonizing resettlement standards.

5.      Specific recommendations included the need to (i) streamline the Policy on Involuntary
Resettlement implementation; (ii) adopt appropriate and improved national resettlement policies
in individual DMCs; (iii) provide adequate funding for resettlement activities to prevent
impoverishment of the affected people; (iv) strengthen supervision and monitor project
resettlement activities by both ADB and EAs (v) strengthen and improve initial social
assessment through comprehensive surveys of those affected, and improve disclosure and
public consultation; (vi) strengthen ADB capacity for project resettlement activities by providing
additional staff and consulting resources; (vii) strengthen the institutional capacity of the DMCs
by providing technical assistance; and (viii) improve cooperation among multilateral and bilateral
agencies within each DMC.




5
    In field-based case studies from Bangladesh, Philippines, and Indonesia, the income of about one third of those
    affected by ADB projects was not restored after resettlement at the time of the survey.
                                                                                                        Appendix 2        67


           SHIFTS IN OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK'S
                         INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT POLICY

1.       There have been shifts in the guidance given to the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
staff related to the application of the 1995 Involuntary Resettlement (IR) Policy. In the view of
this study, the emphasis of the 1995 Policy document and the 7 January 1997 Operations
Manual (OM) was on significant displacement and resettlement,1 while the focus of the last
approved OM Sections F2/BP and F2/ OP, issued on 29 October 2003, was on recognizing and
addressing all kinds of losses that people affected by projects can sustain, including those that
do not engender involuntary displacement and require actual resettlement. This is clear mainly
from the weight given in the 1995 Policy to population displacement and significant involuntary
resettlement as the key triggers for starting ADB action. Various key statements across the
document attest to this, and are reflected in Box 1.2 The impression that the Policy is mainly
about significant displacement is reinforced by its discussion in paragraph 21 of the well-known
review of World Bank projects, which is quoted to demonstrate that, of the 1,900 ongoing
projects in 1993, 146 (or less than 8%) involved IR, and displaced nearly two million people. In
present day terms, this percentage is not very high, indicating the World Bank's focus on
significant displacement at that time. ADB's proportion of projects supported that include
resettlement planning is now almost 50%.

2.      The 1995 Policy is somewhat vague about the nature and severity of the anticipated
adverse impacts that projects need to address. For instance, the third principle mentioned in
paragraph 34 has been argued as requiring projects to address all adverse impacts on people's
livelihoods. This study, however, sees this is as necessary when combined with the previous
passage. Paragraph 34 (iii) reads: "If individuals or a community must lose their land, means of
livelihood, social support systems, or way of life in order that a project might proceed, they
should be compensated and assisted so that their economic and social future will generally be
at least as favorable with the project as without it." The previous passage, however, reads as
follows: "For any project that requires relocating people, resettlement should be an integral part
of project design and should be dealt with from the earliest stages of the project cycle, taking
into account the following basic principles...." Even in isolation, the idea of paragraph 34 (iii) is
more likely intended in this context to elaborate the consequences of displacement itself, as
displacement indeed brings with it losing land, means of livelihood, social support systems, or
way of life--and losing only part of the land would not normally mean loss of social support
systems. The argument that the Policy is intended for all projects requiring one or more persons
to relocate, and therefore requiring a resettlement plan, seems to rest on the wording "for any
project that requires relocating people" as well, but has to be weighed against many other
statements, in the 1995 Policy which require "significant displacement" or "significant
resettlement" of "population".

3.     A second reason for judging the 1995 Policy as somewhat vague also stems from
paragraph 34, which subsequently formed the basis for Operations Manual (OM) Section 50/BP,
issued on 7 January 1997. Different from the other statements in the 1995 Policy, it discusses

1
    OM Section 50/BP (3 pages) mainly repeats paragraph 34 of the 1995 Policy. Only one principle was removed,
    basic principle (viii). This specified that the costs of resettlement and compensation, including the costs of social
    preparation and livelihood programs, should be included in the preparation of the project costs and benefits. This
    was apparently recognized as a procedural issue and transferred to OM Section 50/OP.
2
    Other sentences focusing resettlement and significant displacement of people are in paragraphs 35 ("significant
    involuntary resettlement"), 36 ("displacement of people," "significant involuntary resettlement"), 38 ("where
    population displacement is unavoidable"), 42 ("if the project is likely to involve significant involuntary resettlement"),
    and 43 ("the project profile for each project involving significant involuntary resettlement").
68      Appendix 2



(i) "displaced people," (ii) "adversely affected population," (iii) "resettlers," (iv) "affected people,"
(v) "affected groups," and (vi) "affected persons," perhaps implying differences between these
categories. Whereas all are in the IR Policy's purview, without defining a clear definition in the
Policy, the reader remains with the impression that the different terms used are mainly there to
avoid repetition of the same words over and over again. In this view, the focus is clearly on
resettlement.

4.      Lastly, different from the rest of the 1995 Policy, paragraph 34 distinguishes among
resettlement, compensation, and rehabilitation in points (v), (vii), and (viii) in a way that could be
construed as indicating that the Policy would have to deal with any of the three in isolation of the
other two; or if any of the other two does not apply. Nevertheless, the study argues that this
usage seems to be a reflection of loose terminology rather than a deliberate intent to distinguish
among the three concepts. The interpretation of the clauses is dependent on the prior
qualification that reads, "For any project that requires relocating people."

      Box 1: Quotes of the 1995 Involuntary Resettlement Policy Regarding its Focus

 Italics added for clarity

 Para. 2. This paper deals with proposed approaches to address involuntary resettlement,
 compensation, and rehabilitation of people displaced by development projects (...)

 Para. 8. Many development projects that require involuntary displacement of people generally have
 adverse economic, social, and environmental impacts on the displaced people." "The absence of
 appropriate development measures for compensation, resettlement, and rehabilitation of the displaced
 people may (i) cause severe long-term hardship, impoverishment, and even decimation of the affected
 communities; (ii) adversely affect the host populations; and (iii) lead to severe environmental damage.

 Para. 28. Until recently, development-induced displacement of population was considered a "sacrifice"
 some people have to make for the larger good. Resettlement programs in general were limited to
 statutory monetary compensation for land acquired for the project, and occasionally development of a
 resettlement site.

 Para. 29: However, perceptions are changing because of delays in project implementation and
 benefits foregone; growing awareness about the potential adverse economic, social, and
 environmental consequences of population displacement; and increasing concern about people's
 welfare. Resettlement is viewed increasingly as a development issue.

 Para. 33: Bank Policy. The objectives of the Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement should be to
 (i) avoid involuntary resettlement where feasible; and (ii) minimize resettlement where population
 displacement is unavoidable, and ensure that displaced people receive assistance, preferably under
 the project, so that they would be at least as well-off as they would have been in the absence of the
 project, as contemplated in the following paragraphs.

 Para. 34. Involuntary resettlement should be an important consideration in project identification. The
 three important elements of involuntary resettlement are (i) compensation for lost assets and loss of
 livelihood and income, (ii) assistance for relocation including provision of relocation sites with
 appropriate facilities and services, and (iii) assistance for rehabilitation to achieve at least the same
 level of well-being with the project as without it. Some or all of these elements may be present in
 projects involving involuntary resettlement. For any project that requires relocating people,
 resettlement should be an integral part of project design and should be dealt with from the earliest
 stages of the project cycle. (...)
                                                                                         Appendix 2         69


5.      In summary, as is also intuitively self-evident from the title of the IR Policy, the original
1995 Policy was about displacement and resettlement (with emphasis on significant
resettlement), and the associated compensation and assistance for relocation, rehabilitation,
and vulnerable people involved. When all of this is compared with the beginning statements of
OM F2/BP (Box 2), then it is clear that OM F2/BP expanded the original meaning of the Policy is
stretched considerably: The 1995 objective of the Policy talked about displaced people receiving
assistance, not "affected people." The new OM also talks about "people dispossessed or
displaced." The definition of involuntary resettlement has become convoluted, and no longer
says what it is but rather what it "addresses."

      Box 2: Quotes in the OM/BP F2 of December 2003 on the Nature of the IR Policy

 A.       Introduction

 1.      The involuntary resettlement policy provides an effective opportunity for people who
 dispossessed or displaced to achieve development benefits. The policy that addresses losses of
 land, resources, and means of livelihood or social support systems, which people suffer as a result
 of an ADB projects and project components in its developing member countries (DMCs). The
 involuntary resettlement policy applies to all ADB's operations in DMCs. The involuntary
 resettlement policy is a key ADB safeguard consonant with the Poverty Reduction Strategy and the
 Long-Term Strategic Framework. [footnotes deleted]

 B.       Definitions

 2.       "Involuntary resettlement" addresses social and economic impacts that are permanent or
 temporary and are (i) caused by acquisition of land and other fixed assets, (ii) by change in the use
 of land, or (iii) restrictions imposed on land as a result of an ADB operation. An "affected person" is
 one who experiences such impacts. [footnote quoted in text]

 C.       The Policy

 3.      The involuntary resettlement policy objectives are (i) to avoid involuntary resettlement
 wherever feasible; (ii) to minimize resettlement where population displacement is unavoidable by
 choosing alternative viable project options; and (iii) where involuntary resettlement is unavoidable, to
 ensure that affected people receive assistance, preferably under the project, so that they will be at
 least as well off as they would have been in the absence of the project. Where involuntary
 resettlement is unavoidable, the policy is designed to include any resulting losses in project budgets.
 The policy treats involuntary resettlement as a development opportunity and allows planners to
 manage impoverishment risks and turn the people dispossessed or displaced into project
 beneficiaries, particularly the poor and vulnerable, who may be disproportionately affected by
 resettlement losses.


6.      Affected persons in the OM F2 Section are defined as those who experience social and
economic impacts that are permanent or temporary and are caused by (i) acquisition of land
and other fixed assets, (ii) change in the use of land, or (iii) restrictions imposed on land as a
result of an ADB operation. A footnote, however, goes further by avoiding any reference to land
or even asset impacts [italics added]: "The term affected person includes any people,
households, firms, or private institutions who, on account of changes that result from the project
will have their (i) standard of living adversely affected; (ii) right, title, or interest in any house,
land (including residential, commercial, agricultural, forest, and/or grazing land), water
resources, or any other moveable or fixed assets acquired, possessed, restricted, or otherwise
adversely affected, in full or in part, permanently or temporarily; and/or (iii) business,
70       Appendix 2



occupation, place of work or residence, or habitat adversely affected, with or without
displacement." OM F2/OP reinforces this, especially in paragraph 13, which says, "All eligible
affected people, including tenants and employees of affected businesses who stand to lose their
jobs, incomes, or livelihoods because of project impacts, are entitled to receive one-time
financial assistance to cover losses of the move, as well as economic and social rehabilitation."

7.      There are other significant changes since the issuance of the 1995 Policy. The original
Policy specified that a resettlement plan (RP) was needed "where population displacement is
unavoidable," but did not elaborate on the threshold for the numbers of displaced people,
neither on the need for an RP in cases wherein affected people would lose a proportion of their
land or livelihood, but did not need to resettle. This was to be clarified later through a
Resettlement Handbook. The 1998 Resettlement Handbook specified that a full RP was needed
when more than 200 people needed to be resettled (or 100 IPs or 50 very vulnerable affected
persons [APs]). A rationale was not provided, other than that the thresholds were the same as
those of the World Bank. A short RP would do in cases of lower numbers of APs. OM Section
F2/OP2 of 2003 reflected these changes but specified that there was a need to categorize the
resettlement impact of each project into three categories: A (full RP required), B (short RP
required), and C (no RP required). This was reflected in an earlier decision taken by
Management in 2002. It then went on to indicate that full or short RPs needed to be prepared in
all cases where either people are displaced, or where people lose more than 10% of their
livelihoods. A lower AP threshold (above 1 but below 200) for short RPs was not indicated, and
an RP needs to be prepared wherever one person or more is affected beyond an equivalent of a
loss of 10% of his/her livelihood. This has led to the production of RPs and enforcement
mechanisms for cases where there are only one or a handful of APs.

8.      F2/OP states, "In each DMC [developing member country], entitlements will generally be
established in consultation with the affected people in accordance with applicable policies and
laws, and ADB's IR Policy standards." The statement about the applicable policy and country
laws suggests complementarity with ADB's policy requirements, but in practice, ADB's policy is
comprehensive and overlapping, and mostly uses higher standards than those of the DMCs.
What is more, ADB's current compliance focus requires that the standards be enforced strictly.
Again, the ambiguity may cause considerable uncertainty in ADB staff as to what can be
demanded of executing agencies and DMCs, although in the larger countries with more
resettlement operations, precedents have usually been set, and practical experience has given
staff more confidence in putting the demands forward.

9.      Box 3 shows that the bar was set higher as a result of the 2005 Public Communications
Policy.3 As shown in Box 3, ADB has adopted higher standards that mandate consultation and
public disclosure of RPs. The 1995 Public Communication Policy guidelines covered
resettlement operations. The OP section in OM 50 of 1997 counted three pages and specified
that the RP should be submitted by the government or the private project sponsors to ADB,
"preferably together with the feasibility study for the project, but in any case, before project
appraisal, as the costs and implementation of resettlement are likely to critically affect the
overall costs and implementation schedule of the investment project." It was not specified who
would approve the plan, and the assumption was perhaps that a definitive plan could be
submitted at that stage. Neither was it specified that a draft RP would have to be issued publicly
and to APs. Figure A2.1 shows the current process for preparation and implementation of IR in
ADB.

3
    ADB. 2005. The Public Communications Policy of the Asian Development Bank: Disclosure and Exchange of
    Information. Manila.
                                                                                Appendix 2    71


10.     The purpose of the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) raising the issue of
differences in the 1995 IR Policy and OM F2/OP is not to dispute the desirability for raising the
bar. A plausible case can be made for doing so. Rather, in OED's view, the issue relates to
governance in ADB. The question is whether Management and staff, or the Board, should have
made such decisions. While issuing OMs is clearly the prerogative of Management, OMs should
not be a way to make new policies. Given the contentious nature of the issues and the wide
variety of views among various stakeholders, it is OED's view that these decisions to raise the
bar should have been taken by the Board and not by Management.
72     Appendix 2



               Box 3: Relevant Quotes in the Public Communications Policy 2005

 Information for Affected People

 74.      To facilitate dialogue with affected people and other individuals and organizations, information
 about a public or private sector project or program under preparation (including social and environmental
 issues) shall be made available to affected people. ADB shall work closely with the borrower or project
 sponsor to ensure information is provided and feedback on the proposed project design is sought, and
 that a focal point is designated for regular contact with affected people. This should start early in project
 preparation, so that the views of affected people can be adequately considered in project design, and
 continue at each stage of project or program preparation, processing, and implementation. ADB shall
 ensure that the project's or program's design allows for stakeholder feedback during implementation. ADB
 shall ensure that relevant information about any major changes to project scope is also shared with
 affected people.

 75.     To support the requirements in paragraph 74, developing member country governments and ADB
 may jointly develop communications plans for certain projects and programs, particularly those likely to
 generate a high level of public interest. Such plans could, for example, recommend how to engage in
 dialogue with affected people, broaden public access to information on economic and legal reforms, help
 governments and project sponsors involve affected people in the design and implementation of ADB-
 assisted activities, and increase involvement of grassroots and civil society organizations in the
 development process.16

 76.      Private sector entities and implementing institutions are a diverse group, with varying capabilities,
 and ADB is generally flexible in dealing with them. The substance of ADB's environmental and social
 safeguard requirements for private sector investments is generally the same as for the public sector.
 ADB's safeguard policies require private sector sponsors to assess, manage, monitor, and disclose the
 social and environmental impacts of their projects. They include requirements for early engagement by the
 private sector sponsor with affected people, and the timely dissemination of relevant project information to
 such communities in an understandable and accessible form. Toward this end, the project sponsor shall
 inform ADB, before appraisal, how it intends to engage with affected people.

 Resettlement Planning Documents

 80.     The borrower or private sector sponsor shall make available to affected people under Operations
 Manual section F2/BP on involuntary resettlement: (i) before appraisal-a draft resettlement plan; (ii) after
 completion of the final resettlement plan-such resettlement plan, and (iii) following revisions to the
 resettlement plan as a result of detailed technical design or change in scope in the program or project -the
 revised resettlement plan.

 81.      The information from the documents specified in paragraph 80 can be made available as
 brochures, leaflets, or booklets in local languages. For non-literate people, other communication methods
 will be appropriate.

 82.       ADB shall make publicly available: (i) before appraisal-a draft resettlement plan or framework (or
 both); (ii) upon receipt of the final resettlement plan-the final resettlement plan; and (iii) upon receipt of a
 revised resettlement plan-the revised resettlement plan.
                                                                                                                 Appendix 2       73
                                                           Figure A2.1:
                                                    Safeguard Policy Compliance
                                                  INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT
               REQUIREMENTS                                                                                 OUTPUTS
                 Identify IR impacts.                           Project                 · Project brief/concept paper reflecting potential IR
                                                             Identification               impacts
                                                                 (ID)                   · IR categorization form prepared & submitted to CCO
                                                                                          (optional)

· Identify IR impacts of project and propose IR                 Project                · IR impact categorization form approved by CCO
  category.                                                    Predesign                 (required)
· Conduct IPSA; assess resource requirements for                                       · IR impacts and required resettlement planning
  resettlement planning during project design.                                           document reflected in IPSA
                                                                                       · PPTA including resettlement specialist TOR and budget
                                                                                         in PPTA report

Feasibility Study: Explore options to avoid and/or               Project               · Draft RP/RF prepared, disclosed to APs, endorsed by
minimize IR impacts in project design, prepare RP/RF.            Design                  EA prior to MRM
                                                                                       · SPRSS prepared reflecting IR impacts and plan/s
                                                                                         prepared

 · Submit draft RP/RF to RSES.                           Loan Processing                 · EA endorsed draft RP/RF submitted.
 · Reflect IR impacts and plans prepared in 1
                                             st
                                                          1st MRM/CCM                    · Summary RP/RF is a core appendix to the RRP; full
   draft RRP.                                                                              version listed as supplementary.
 · Prepare assurances covering IR                    Management confirms project         · RRP main text, assurances, and SPRSS cover IR
   implementation.                                   compliance with safeguard             issues.
                                                     policy based on CCO's advice.       · CCO/RSES issues SPCM stating if RP/RF is
                                                                                           satisfactory for appraisal.
Before appraisal: Satisfactory RP/RF required:
Meet SPCM conditions, if any. Disclose draft RP to
                                                                                          Before appraisal: Draft RP disclosure to APs confirmed.
affected people. Disclose draft RP/RF on ADB
                                                                                          Draft RP/RF disclosed on ADB website.
website.

· Revise RP/RF during appraisal, if required. If            Loan Appraisal                · Loan covenants prepared; outstanding issues listed
  revised, disclose final RP to APs right after                                             as conditions.
  completion.                                           Project team discusses final      · Supervision consultants' TOR includes RP/RF
· Draft loan covenants; list outstanding issues as      safeguard measures with             implementation.
                                                        EA, including budget and
  conditions.                                                                             · PAM reflects RP/RF.
                                                        institutional management.
· Initiate PAM preparation.
· Draft TOR of supervision consultants.

 · Circulate 2nd RRP and loan/project covenants.              Staff Review                 · Final RP disclosed to APs after completion and on
 · Address RSES IR comments in SRC issues                      Committee                     ADB website upon receipt from EAa
   matrix.                                                    Meeting/2nd
                                                              MRM/CCM                      · Outstanding
                                                                                                · RRP/RP/RF1st MRM   issues addressed
                                                                                                                finalized
                                                                                           · Revised RP/RF sent to RSES
                                                                                           · 2nd draft RRP, draft loan/project covenants
                                                                                              circulated; issues matrix address IR

                                                            Management                     · Loan covenants covering IR finalized during loan
                                                        Authorization of Loan                negotiations
                                                                                           · Confirm IR compliance requirements during
                                                                                             processing were met.

Include summary RP in the final RRP for Board               Loan Approval                   · Final RP disclosed on ADB website.a
circulation.                                                                                · Summary RP/RF is a core appendix to the RRP;
                                                                                              full version listed as supplementary.


                                                               Project
                                                           Implementation
                                                         (continued on p. 74)
          74       Appendix 2




· Cat A: OD RS to join inception mission; review RP      Project Implementation        · RP/RF implementation arrangements
  preparation; visit sites; review reports; join OD       (continued from p. 73)         reflected in PAM
  review missions.                                                                     · Progress reports, external monitor's report
· Regular reporting on RP implementation                                                 reviewed by OD RS and submitted to
· Large scale IR: review semiannually                                                    RSES
· Revise RP after detailed design or change in                                         · BTORs reflect RP progress
  project scope. Disclose revised RP to APs and on                                     · For sector/hybrid/FI/emergency loans:
  ADB website.                                                                           Revised RP and noncore subproject RPs
· For sector/hybrid/FI/emergency loans prepare                                           disclosed to APs after completion. Noncore
  noncore subproject RP. Disclose noncore                                                subproject RP/s submitted to ADB and
  subproject RP to APs. Submit to ADB for approval                                       disclosed on ADB website.
  and disclosure on ADB website.


· Include history of IR activities, assessment and         Project Completion           PCR submitted to RSES for review include
  evaluation of RP implementation in PCR.                  and Postevaluation           the following:
· Prepare resettlement completion report (as                                            · Concise history of IR activities
  necessary).                                                                           · RP implementation evaluation
                                                                                        · EA's performance assessment
                                                                                        · Summary: external M&E reports
                                                                                        · Lessons learned, measures to address,
                                                                                          outstanding issues



a
  Disclosure of final RP should be done no later than upon Board approval.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, AP = affected person, BP = Bank Policy, BTOR = back-to-office report, CCO = chief compliance
officer, EA = executing agency, FI = financial institution, IPSA = initial poverty and social analysis, IR = involuntary resettlement,
M&E = monitoring and evaluation, MRM = Management review meeting, OD = operations department, PAM = project administration
memorandum, PCR = project completion report, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, RF = resettlement framework,
RP = resettlement plan, RRP = report and recommendation of the President, RS = resettlement specialist, RSDD = Regional and
Sustainable Development Department, SPCM = Safeguard Policy Compliance Memorandum, SPRSS = summary poverty reduction
and social strategy, TA = technical assistance, TOR = terms of reference.
                                                                                              Appendix 3       75


                      INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT BY THE WORLD BANK

1.     The Asian Development Bank's (ADB) Involuntary Resettlement (IR) Policy is based in
large part on World Bank experience and the World Bank's earlier IR Policy. Like ADB, the
World Bank has changed its Operations Manual (OM) several times. OP 4.12 replaced OM 4.30
in December 2001 and was revised again in April 2004 to meet with the requirements of OP/BP
6.00 on Bank Financing.

2.      The World Bank has 10 safeguard policies;1 next to the IR it also has an Indigenous
Peoples (IP) Policy, and has additional, related, policies for cultural properties and safety of
dams. The World Bank's social safeguard policies on IR and IP are highly similar in their
objectives, thresholds (200 affected persons [APs], 10%), and procedures. The differences are
gradual: the World Bank states that resettlement activities should be conceived and executed as
sustainable development programs, providing sufficient investment resources to enable the
persons displaced by the project to share in project benefits. The World Bank seems to have
more rules that apply in cases of projects that would restrict access to natural resources in
legally designated parks and protected areas.

3.      Overall, the procedures are specified in somewhat less detail than those of ADB, they
leave more open for negotiations and discrete agreements. The World Bank is said not to
approve projects before the point that they have been sufficiently designed in detail to cover at
least one year of work. This also means that they will need to have prepared resettlement plans
(RPs) that are fully final for those works, and do not need later updating, such as is generally
the case with ADB RPs.

4.      The World Bank has embarked on a pilot study on the use of "borrower" systems for its
10 policies. OP 4.00 to this effect was issued in March 2005.2 If systems are deemed equivalent
to World Bank standard, then executing agency (EA) documentation can be utilized, and there
is no need for separate World Bank documents. Twelve projects are being selected worldwide,
preceded by a thorough equivalence check in the host countries. Progress with this has been
slow; no projects have been selected so far in Asia in as far as social safeguard equivalence is
concerned.

5.      In the Operations Evaluation Department's (OED) view, it is worth cooperating with the
World Bank on expanded use of country systems, although this may yield results only in the
medium term. ADB's South Asia Regional Department (SARD), for example, has been
interacting with World Bank teams on resettlement issues. In Bhutan, the World Bank's
preliminary assessment showed that the equivalence of the Bhutan system with the World
Bank's IR policy was not high. The World Bank expressed general agreement with a
resettlement framework prepared for an ADB-supported project. In Bangladesh, ADB was given
the opportunity to comment on a resettlement framework prepared by the World Bank for an EA
with which ADB also worked. This framework was prepared in response to the finding that the
country's policy was deemed not equivalent to the World Bank's.




1
    Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Pest Management, Indigenous People, Involuntary Resettlement,
    Forests, Safety of Dams, Projects on International Waterways, Projects in Disputed Areas, and Management of
    Cultural Property in Bank-Financed Projects.
2
    World Bank. 2005. Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in
    Bank-Supported Projects. OP 4.00. Available on the World Bank website.
76      Appendix 4



           ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK STATISTICS ON RESETTLEMENT PLANS
                              AND FRAMEWORKS

Table A4.1: Number of Public and Private Sector Projects with Involuntary Resettlement
                              Requirement, 1994­2005
Item                                                Public Sector    Private Sector    Total   % Total
                                                   Total      %      Total      %
                                                            Public           Private
A. Projects with Significant IR Requirement,       204       25       4         4      208       23
Full Resettlement Plan
     1. Agriculture and Natural Resources           26        3        0       0         26       3
     2. Education                                    0        0        1       1          1       0
     3. Energy                                      34        4        1       1         35       4
     4. Health, Nutrition, and Social Protection     1        0        0       0          1       0
     5. Industry and Trade                           3        0        0       0          3       0
     6. Multisector                                 32        4        0       0         32       3
     7. Transport and Communications                88       11        0       0         88      10
     8. Water Supply and Sanitation                 20        2        1       1         21       2
     9. Others (not categorized)                     0        0        1       1          1       0
B. Projects with Insignificant IR                   37        5       1        1        38        4
Requirement, Short Resettlement Plan
     1. Agriculture and Natural Resources            7        1        0       0          7       1
     2. Education                                    1        0        0       0          1       0
     3. Energy                                       5        1        1       1          6       1
     4. Health, Nutrition, and Social Protection     2        0        0       0          2       0
     5. Industry and Trade                           1        0        0       0          1       0
     6. Multisector                                 10        1        0       0         10       1
     7. Transport and Communications                 5        1        0       0          5       1
     8. Water Supply and Sanitation                  6        1        0       0          6       1
C. Projects with Resettlement Framework             15        2       8        8        23        2
Only
     1. Agriculture and Natural Resources            4        0        0       0          4       0
     2. Education                                    0        0        0       0          0       0
     3. Energy                                       1        0        1       1          2       0
     4. Finance                                      0        0        6       6          6       1
     5. Health, Nutrition, and Social Protection     1        0        0       0          1       0
     6. Industry and Trade                           0        0        0       0          0       0
     7. Law, Economic Management, and Public
     Policy                                          0        0        0       0          0       0
     8. Multisector                                  4        0        0       0          4       0
     9. Transport and Communications                 3        0        0       0          3       0
     10. Water Supply and Sanitation                 2        0        1       1          3       0
D. Projects with No IR Impact                      563       69      91       89       654       71
     1. Agriculture and Natural Resources           99       12       1        1        100      11
     2. Education                                   76        9       0        0         76       8
     3. Energy                                      48        6       9        9         57       6
     4. Finance                                     69        8      20       20         89      10
     5. Health, Nutrition, and Social Protection    35        4       2        2         37       4
     6. Industry and Trade                          23        3       7        7         30       3
                                                                                                 Appendix 4       77


 Item                                                       Public Sector       Private Sector          Total       %
                                                            Total     %         Total      %                       Total
                                                                    Public              Private
     7. Law, Economic Management, and Public Policy          49       6           0         0             49         5
     8. Multisector                                          77       9           0         0             77         8
     9. Transport and Communications                         56       7           5         5             61         7
     10. Water Supply and Sanitation                         31       4           1         1             32         3
     11. Others (not categorized)                             0       0          46       45              46         5
         Total                                             819      100         104      100             923       100
IR = involuntary resettlement.
Note: (i) 2005 loans with IR categorization from Regional and Sustainable Development Department database; (ii) 2002­
       2004 approved public and private sector projects (IR categorization A, B, C, and TBD); (iii) 1994­2001 public sector
       projects (with IR impact = A; no IR impact = C); (iv) 1995­2001 private sector projects (with IR impact = A; no IR
       impact = C; no sector classification and investment numbers); (v) Full resettlement plan category for public sector
       includes 21 projects categorized as "A/B"
Sources: Asian Development Bank Loan, Technical Assistance, Private Sector Approvals database, Regional and
          Sustainable Development Department database, Project Coordination and Procurement Division list of loans, and
          reports and recommendations to the President.

 Table A4.2: Number and Percentage of Projects with Full/Short Resettlement Plans and
                 Resettlement Framework, Approved from 1994­2005
                   Full RP            Short RP          Only RF               Subtotal             No RP         Total
            No.      No.      %      No.      %       No.        %        No.         %        No.      %
            (A)     (A/B)                                                         A+B+RF
 Private Sector
 1994        0        0        0      0       0        0         0         0          0          0       0          0
 1995        0        0        0      0       0        0         0         0          0        14     100          14
 1996        0        0        0      0       0        0         0         0          0        13     100          13
 1997        0        0        0      0       0        0         0         0          0          7    100           7
 1998        0        0        0      0       0        0         0         0          0          8    100           8
 1999        1        0      25       0       0        0         0         1         25          3     75           4
 2000        1        0        9      0       0        0         0         1          9         10     91          11
 2001        1        0      17       0       0        0         0         1         17          5     83           6
 2002        0        0        0      0       0        1        13         1         13          7     88           8
 2003        1        0      14       0       0        1        14         2         29          5     71           7
 2004        0        0        0      1       7        1         7         2         14         12     86          14
 2005        0        0        0      0       0        5        42         5         42          7     58          12
  Total      4        0               1                8                  13                   91                104
 Public Sector
 1994       10        1       22      0       0        0         0        11         22         39      78         50
 1995       14        2       23      0       0        0         0        16         23         53      77         69
 1996       19        4       27      0       0        0         0        23         27         61      73         84
 1997         5       1         7     0       0        0         0          6          7        83      93         89
 1998       15        2       28      0       0        0         0        17         28         43      72         60
 1999       17        0       29      0       0        0         0        17         29         41      71         58
 2000       15        2       20      0       0        0         0        17         20         68      80         85
 2001       19        5       34      0       0        0         0        24         34         47      66         71
 2002       18        0       26      6       9        5         7        29         41         41      59         70
 2003       17        0       27     10      16        7        11        34         55         28      45         62
 2004       16        0       27     10      17        1         2        27         46         32      54         59
 2005       18        4       35     11      18        2         3        35         56         27      44         62
  Total 183          21              37                15                256                  563                819
IR = involuntary resettlement, RF = resettlement framework, RP = resettlement plan.
Sources: (i) 2002­2004 approved public and private sector projects (IR categorization A, B, C, and TBD); (ii) 1994­
    2001 public sector projects (IR categorization "with full RP" = A, "with short RP" = B); (iii) 1995­2001 private
    sector projects (with IR impact = A; no IR impact = C; no sector classification and investment number);
    (iv) Masterlist 2005 Projects­IR categorization only from Regional and Sustainable Development Department;
    and (v) Project Coordination and Procurement Division list of loans for other projects previously not included.
                                                                                                                                                   78
                   Table A4.3: Projects Approved from 1994­2005 by Country, by Five Main Infrastructure-Related Sectors
                                            1994­2001                                                 2002­2005
                                             a
                      Infrastructure Sectors        Infrastructure Sectors      Infrastructure Sectorsa        Infrastructure Sectors
                                                         without ANRb                                               without ANRb




                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 4
                                          % with                          % with                          % with                          % with
 Country           Projectsc   with RPd    RP      Projectsc   with RPd    RP      Projectsc   With RPd    RP      Projectsc   with RPd    RP
China, People's
Republic of           58         45        78         53         43        81         28         28        100       26          26        100
India                 20         10        50         20         10        50         17         17        100       16          16        100
Sri Lanka             20          4        20         10          2        20         11         11        100        9           9        100
Bangladesh            24         12        50         17         11        65         12         11         92       10           9         90
Pakistan              19          3        16         13         3         23         11          9         82       10           9         90
Lao People's
Democratic
Republic              14          5        36         12          5        42          7          7        100        5           5        100
Viet Nam              19         12        63         15          9        60          9          8         89        6           5         83
Indonesia             32          8        25         17          4        24         10          8         80        7           5         71
Afghanistan            0          0         0          0          0          0        7           5         71        6           4         67
Cambodia              11          7        64         11          7         64        6           6        100        3           3        100
Nepal                 15          7        47         10          7         70        4           4        100        2           2        100
Philippines           26          8        31         21          7         33        2           2        100        2           2        100
Fiji Islands           1          0         0          1          0         0         3           3        100        2           2        100
Regional               0          0         0          0          0         0         2           2        100        2           2        100
Uzbekistan             5          0         0          4          0         0         3           2         67        2           2        100
Federated States
of Micronesia          1          0         0         1           0         0         1           1        100        1           1        100
Papua New
Guinea                 6          0         0         4           0         0         2           2        100        1           1        100
Republic of
Marshall Islands       2          0         0         2           0         0         1           1        100        1           1        100
Samoa                  1          0         0         1           0         0         1           1        100        1           1        100
Thailand               8          1        13         8           1        13         1           1        100        1           1        100
Azerbaijan             0          0         0         0           0         0         3           1         33        2           1         50
Bhutan                 4          0         0         4           0         0         2           1         50        2           1         50
Kyrgyz Republic        8          0         0         7           0         0         1           1        100        2           1         50
Maldives               4          0         0         4           0         0         2           1         50        2           1         50
Mongolia               9          0         0         8           0         0         2           1         50        2           1         50
Tajikistan             5          1        20         5           1        20         5           4         80        2           1         50
Cook Islands           3          0         0         2           0         0         1           0          0        1           0          0
                                                 1994­2001                                                                        2002­2005
                            Infrastructure Sectorsa      Infrastructure Sectors                               Infrastructure Sectorsa      Infrastructure Sectors
                                                              without ANRb                                                                      without ANRb
                                                                                               with                                                   with                     with
                       Projectsc      with RPd     Projectsc     with RPd      Projectsc       RPd        Projectsc      With RPd      Projectsc      RPd       Projectsc      RPd
  Kazakhstan                   4             0            0              3            0           0              0              0              0            1           0          0
  Kiribati                     1             0            0              1            0           0              0              0              0            0           0          0
  Malaysia                     2             1           50              0            0           0              7              0              0            0           0          0
  Solomon Islands              1             0            0              1            0           0              0              0              0            0           0          0
  Tonga                        3             0            0              3            0           0              0              0              0            0           0          0
  Vanuatu                      2             0            0              2            0           0              0              0              0            0           0          0
     Total                   328           124           38           260           110          42          156              138             88         127         112          88
ANR = agriculture and natural resources, RP = resettlement plan, RRP = report and recommendation of the President, TA = technical assistance.
Note: Source list excludes all non-infrastructure sectors (law, economic management, and public policy, health, nutrition, and social protection, industry and trade, education, finance,
        etc.), program loans, TA loans, credit lines, and (for 2000­2005) other projects appearing to have little or no civil works. The listing of countries is based on the number of RPs
        from 2002­2005 for infrastructure sectors excluding ANR.
a
   Infrastructure sectors refer to ANR, energy, multisector, transport and communications, and water supply and sanitation sectors.
b
   Total of major infrastructure sectors without ANR sector.
c
  Total of major infrastructure sector projects, excluding credit lines, TA loans, and programs.
d
   Projects with RPs/resettlement frameworks/land acquisition and RP, as per project's RRP.
Sources: Regional and Sustainable Development Department, Project Coordination and Procurement Division list of loans, and RRPs.




                                                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 4
                                                                                                                                                                                      79
80      Appendix 4



      Figure A4.1: Growth of Resettlement Plan (RP) Inclusion in Infrastructure Sector
                                    Projects, 1994­2005

                Energy, Transport,
                Multi-sector, Water
                                                                                        88
              Supply, and Agriculture
              and Natural Resources                           42
                      Sectors


               Energy, Transport,                                                       88
              Multi-sector, and Water
                  Supply Sectors                            38


                                        0     20         40       60      80                 100
                                                           Percent
                                            1994-2001              2002-2005

         Sources: Environment and Social Safeguards Division, Project Coordination and Procurement
                  Division list of loans, and reports and recommendations of the President.



      Table A4.4: Infrastructure Projects without Resettlement Planning (Category C),
                    1994­2005, for Indonesia, Pakistan, and Philippines
No.    Year                                Project Name                         Country      Loan No.   Sector
 6     1994     Capacity Building in the Water Resources Sector                  INO           1339      ANR
 7     1994     Second Integrated Irrigation Sector                              INO           1296      ANR
11     1994     Sumatra Power Transmission                                        INO          1320       EN
23     1994     West Lampung Emergency Reconstruction                            INO           1321       TC
24     1994     Eastern Islands Roads (Sector)                                    INO          1335       TC
28     1995     Sulawesi Rainfed Agriculture Development                         INO           1351      ANR
31     1995     Farmer Managed Irrigation Systems                                INO           1378      ANR
37     1995     Gas Transmission and Distribution                                INO           1357       EN
46     1995     Sumatra Urban Development                                        INO           1383      MS
47     1995     West Java Urban Development                                       INO          1384      MS
58     1995     Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project                 INO           1352      WS
63     1996     P.T. Banjarmasin Agrojaya Mandiri                                 INO          7129      ANR
67     1996     Bapedal Regional Network                                          INO          1449      ANR
71     1996     Integrated Pest Management for Smallholder Estate Crops          INO           1469      ANR
99     1997     Participatory Development of Agricultural Technology              INO          1526      ANR
103    1997     Coastal Community Development and Fisheries Resources            INO           1570      ANR
                Management
105    1997     Northern Sumatra Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Sector         INO         1579      ANR
120    1997     Belawan, Balikpapan and Banjarmasin Ports                         INO         1559       TC
121    1997     Eastern Islands Air Transport Development                         INO         1586       TC
130    1997     Capacity Building of Water Supply Enterprises for Water Loss      INO         1527      WS
                Reduction Sector
134    1998     Central Sulawesi Integrated Area Development and Conservation     INO         1605      ANR
182    2000     Community Empowerment for Rural Development                       INO         1765      MS
186    2000     Community Empowerment for Rural Development                       INO         1766      MS
193    2000     Road Rehabilitation (Sector)                                      INO         1798       TC
220    2005     Rural Infrastructure Support Project                              INO         2221      MS
                                                                                                  Appendix 4       81


 No. Year                                   Project Name                                  Country   Loan No.        Sector
 221 2005 Road Rehabilitation-2 Project                                                     INO       2184            TC
  10     1994 KESC Sixth Power (Sector Loan) Project                                       PAK     1314/1315          EN
  15     1994 Social Action Program                                                        PAK        1301            MS
  26     1995 National Drainage Sector                                                     PAK        1413           ANR
  35     1995 Forestry Sector                                                              PAK        1403           ANR
  59     1995 Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation                                     PAK        1349            WS
  70     1996 Bahawalpur Rural Development                                                 PAK        1467           ANR
  77     1996 Fauji Kabirwala Private Sector Power Project                                 PAK        7126            EN
  86     1996 Social Action Program (Sector) II                                            PAK        1493            MS
 104 1997 Second Flood Protection Sector                                                   PAK        1578           ANR
 116 1997 Dera Ghazi Khan Rural Development                                                PAK        1531            MS
 131 1997 Korangi Wastewater Management                                                    PAK        1539            WS
 153 1999 Punjab Farmer Managed Irrigation Project                                         PAK        1679           ANR
 158 1999 Malakand Rural Development                                                       PAK        1672            MS
 184 2000 North-West Frontier Province Barani Area Development Phase II                    PAK        1787            MS
 199 2001 North-West Frontier Province Urban Development Sector                            PAK        1854            MS
 211 2004 Sustainable Livelihood in Barani Areas Project                                   PAK        2134           ANR
 218 2005 New Bong Escape Hydropower Project                                               PAK     2198/7222/         EN
  16     1994 Rural Infrastructure Development                                              PHI       1332            MS
  27     1995 Second Irrigation Systems Improvement                                         PHI    1365/1366         ANR
  61     1995 Umiray-Angat Transbasin                                                       PHI       1379            WS
  65     1996 Cordillera Highland Agricultural Resource Management                          PHI       1421           ANR
  85     1996 Bukidnon Integrated Area Development                                          PHI       1453            MS
  93     1996 Small Towns Water Supply Sector Project                                       PHI       1472            WS
  94     1996 Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector                                      PHI    1440/1441          WS
 102 1997 Fisheries Resource Management                                                     PHI       1562           ANR
 115 1997 Subic Bay Area Municipalities Infrastructure Improvement                          PHI       1599            MS
 123 1997 Third Airports Development (Southern Philippines)                                 PHI       1536            TC
 142 1998 Clark Area Municipal Development                                                  PHI       1658            MS
 145 1998 Metro Manila Air Quality Improvement (Investment Loan)                            PHI       1665            MS
 164 1999 Philippine International Air Terminals Co., Inc. (PIATCO)                         PHI       7155            TC
 168 1999 Maynilad Water Services Incorporated (MAYNILAD)                                   PHI       7154            WS
 169 2000 Grains Sector Development Program (Project)                                       PHI       1740           ANR
 181 2000 Infrastructure for Rural Productivity Enhancement Sector Project                  PHI       1772            MS
 188 2000 North Luzon Expressway Rehabilitation and Expansion                               PHI       7162            TC
ANR = agriculture and natural resources, EN = energy, MS = multisector, RRP = report and recommendation of the
President, TC = transport and communications, WS = water supply and sanitation.
Note: List excludes all non-infrastructure sectors (education, finance, law, economic management and public policy, health,
       nutrition and social protection, and industry and trade), program loans, technical assistance loans, credit lines, and
       (for 2000­2005) other projects appearing to have little or no civil works as per their RRP.
Sources: Regional and Sustainable Development Department database, Project Coordination and Procurement Division list
           of loans, and RRPs.
82    Appendix 5



     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK STATISTICS ON NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF
      AFFECTED PERSONS IN PROJECTS WITH INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT

  Table A5.1: Number and Percentage of Affected Persons in Projects with Involuntary
      Resettlement for the Period 1994­2005, Estimated at Time of Project Approval
Item                              Number of        % of       Number of        % of
                                   Projectsa     Projects         APs          APs
             By Year
1994                                  10               5        305,613         17
1995                                  13               7          53,900         3
1996                                  18               9          78,235         4
1997                                   5               3          69,065         4
1998                                  14               7        342,994         19
1999                                  17               9          79,384         4
2000                                  14               7        256,445         14
2001                                  18               9        110,123          6
2002                                  20             10          94,614          5
2003                                  24             13         151,091          8
2004                                  21             11         120,108          7
2005                                  18               9        117,178          7
   Total                             192           100        1,778,750        100
            By Sector
Agriculture and Natural
Resources                             25            13          109,054          6
Energy                                32            17          124,567          7
Health, Nutrition, and Social          2              1              225         0
Protection
Industry and Trade                     4              2           1,815          0
Multisector (mainly urban             26            14           48,652          3
development)
Transport and Communications          80            42       1,360,495          76
Water Supply and Sanitation            2            12          133,942          8
    Total                            192           100       1,778,750         100
           By Country
People's Republic of Chinab           71            37         1,088,158        61
Bangladesh                            19            10           153,043          9
Viet Nam                              19            10           156,242          9
India                                 14              7            99,676         6
Philippines                            8             4            74,664          4
Nepal                                  6              3            64,341         4
Indonesia                             10             5            45,281          3
Cambodia                              11              6            42,419         2
Pakistan                              11             6            23,623          1
Sri Lanka                              5              3            15,946         1
Lao People's Democratic
Republic                              10             5            14,576         1
Afghanistan                            1              1               196         0
Tajikistan                             3              2               173         0
Uzbekistan                             1             1                275         0
Federated States of Micronesia         1             1                 60         0
                                                                                                           Appendix 5           83


                                                   Number of              % of              Number of              % of
                                                   Projectsa            Projects               APs                 APs
     Fiji Islands                                      1                    1                      40                0
     Samoa                                             1                    1                      37                0
        Total                                        192                  100               1,778,750              100
     AP = affected person, PCR = project completion report, RP = resettlement plan, RRP = report and
     recommendation of the President,
     a
       Projects whose RPs (from RRPs) indicated the number of APs as a result of involuntary resettlement.
     b
       If ADB's more strict categorization of severely affected peoples, those affected beyond 10% of their livelihood,
        is used, then the actual numbers for road and railway projects (37% of the total number of projects in PRC,
        with 922,640 APs counted by their RPs) could possibly be still many times higher for that country. This is
        because of the nature of land ownership in rural areas, which is collective ownership by registered village
        collectives with use rights arranged for named families and individuals. Especially until 2004, land takings from
        rural collectives for railways and roads used to be meticulously recorded, but not numbers of APs. Chinese
        authorities have left it at the discretion of village collectives to decide whether to "redistribute" land taken from
        individual farm lands within collectives in the right of way, among all members of the collective (each losing a
        small part of their land, rather than some farmers losing all), or to compensate individual members for actual
        land loss. Most of the AP figures in RRPs and even PCRs for new road and railway projects in the PRC seem
        to be based on numbers derived from aggregate land takings divided by the average area per farmer in a
        collective. The true picture that prevailed in the past is then very different from the APs reported in the RRPs
        and even PCRs, and many more people got affected, although most in minor ways.

        Table A5.2: Resettled and Not-Resettled Affected Persons, Estimates and Actuals, in
                     Infrastructure Projects Approved in the Period 1994­2005,
                                and with Project Completion Reports
  Number of Completed Projects                                   PRC           IND         PHI         VIE       Others          Total
                                                                  33            2           4           4          8              51
 APs as estimated in RRP/RP
 Number of APs                                                  212,891           800      5,833       6,905      42,032        268,461
 - Number of APs to be resettled                                145,257           800      5,833       6,356       5,362        163,608
 - Number of APs with no need for resettlement                   67,634             0          0         549      36,670        104,853
 Actual APs as estimated by PCR/PPER
 Number of APs                                                  292,308           435      8,171      86,064      56,287        443,265
 - Number of APs resettled                                      164,729             0      8,171       5,336       1,256        179,492
 - Number of APs with no need for resettlement                  127,579           435          0      80,728      55,031        263,773
 % Change - APs (Actual vs. Estimate)
 Number of APs (%)                                                     37        (46)          40      1,146           34             65
 Number of APs resettled (%)                                           13       (100)          40        (16)        (77)             10
 Number of APs with no need for resettlement (%)                       89           0           0     14,605           50            152
AP = affected person, IND = India, IR = involuntary resettlement, PCR = project completion report, PHI = Philippines,
PPER = project performance evaluation report, PRC = People's Republic of China, RP = resettlement plan, RRP = report and
recommendation of the President, RSDD = Regional and Sustainable Development Department, TA= technical assistance,
VIE = Viet Nam.
Notes: (i) IR categories are based on RSDD; (ii) Actual IR categories are based on the actual number of APs and retrofitted in
       the IR category definitions in the Operations Manual (Section F2/OP); (iii) not included in the listing were Loan 1553-
       PRC: Shenmu-Yanan Railway, (approved 29 September 1997) which was closed on 30 June 2003 but did not have a
       PCR; Loan 1305-PRC: Jing Jiu Technical Enhancement, as the 212,000 APs were not directly due to the loan's
       equipment provision for the railroad (Beijing­Hong Kong) built by the government; and Loan 1638-PRC: Chengdu-
       Nanchong Expressway Project, where 188,000 secondary APs identified in the RRP were not included in the
       calculations, as the PCR did not discuss these. Infrastructure projects in sectors of (i) transport, (ii) energy, (iii) water,
       (iv) multisector, and (v) agriculture and natural resources.
Sources: Fifty-one PCRs issued for infrastructure projects approved from 1994 onwards. The PCR for the equipment financing
           loan for the Jing-Jiu Railway Technical Enhancement was excluded (Loan 1305-PRC, for $200 million, approved
           14 July 1994); RSDD IR database; various RRPs/RPs; various PCRs; loans, TA, grants, and equity approvals
           database.
    84      Appendix 5



                Table A5.3: Ongoing Infrastructure Projects with IR Impacts Approved
                               Between 1994­2005, in Four Countries
  Item                                                      PRC            IND          PHI         VIE         Total
 Number of Ongoing Projects                                   31             19           7           11          68
 % of total                                                   45.6           27.9        10.3         16.2       100.0
 APs (based on RRP/RP)
 Number of APs                                          422,942.0      102,691.0      76,169.0    135,013.0   736,815.0
 % of total                                                  57.4           13.9          10.3         18.3      100.0
     Number of APs to be resettled                      159,173.0       14,943.0      45,176.0     17,354.0   236,646.0
     % of total                                              67.3            6.3          19.1          7.3      100.0
     Number of APs with no need for resettlement        263,769.0       87,748.0      30,993.0    117,659.0   500,169.0
     % of total                                              52.7           17.5           6.2         23.5      100.0
AP = affected person, IND = India, IR = involuntary resettlement, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China,
RP = resettlement plan, RRP = report and recommendation of the President, VIE = Viet Nam.
Sources: Regional and Sustainable Development Department database involuntary resettlement database; various
          RRPs/RPs; loans, technical assistance grants, and equity approvals database.

          Table A5.4: Resettled and Not Resettled Affected Persons by Country and Sector,
               Estimates and Actuals, for Infrastructure Projects Approved Since 1994
                        with Project Completion Reports Issued Before 2006
      Timing/Sector                                PRC         IND           PHI         VIE        Others      Total
                                                   APs         APs           APs         APs         APs
     At Appraisal
      Agriculture and Natural Resources                 0              0         0         3400           0      3,400
      Energy                                       57,875              0       300            0       1,025     59,200
      Water Supply, Sanitation and Waste                               0         0           45         113     56,947
                                                   56,789
     Management
      Transport and Communications                 93,491              0      3,800       3,460      40,719    141,470
      Multisector                                   4,736            800      5,833       6,905      43,032    268,461
         Total                                    212,891            800      9,933      10,410      84,889    318,923
     At Completion
      Agriculture and Natural Resources                90              0          0       4,248           0      4,338
      Energy                                       55,754            435      2,217           0         375     58,781
      Water Supply, Sanitation and Waste           61,374              0          0         200         960     62,534
     Management
      Transport and Communications                170,743              0      5,277      81,616      54,952    312,588
      Multisector                                   4,347              0        677           0           0      5,024
         Total                                    292,308            435      8,171      86,064      56,287    443,265
    AP = affected person, IND = India, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, VIE = Viet Nam.
    Source: All project completion reports which allowed for comparisons of estimated and actual APs (51).
                                                                                                  Appendix 5      85


               Table A5.5: Resettled and Not-Resettled Affected Persons by Sector,
               Estimates and Actuals, for Infrastructure Projects Approved Since 1994
                        with Project Completion Reports Issued Before 2006
                           ANR                  EN            MS           TC               WS          Total
                            APs                 APs           APs          APs              APs         APs
APs (Appraised based on RRP/RP)
APs                           3,400               59,200         7,444      141,470         56,947          268,461
 To be resettled              2,860               41,131         7,444       65,438         46,735          163,608
 No need for resettlement       540               18,069             0       76,032         10,212          104,853
APs (Actual based on PCR/PPER)
APs                           4,338               58,781         5,024      312,588         62,534          443,265
 Resettled                    4,338               44,315         5,024       67,719         58,096          179,492
 Not resettled                    0               14,466             0      244,869          4,438          263,773
ANR = agriculture and natural resources, AP = affected person, EN = energy, MS = multisector, PCR = project
completion report, PPER = project performance evaluation report, RP = resettlement plan, RRP = report and
recommendation of the President, TC = transport and communications, WSS = water supply, sanitation and waste
management.
Sources: Regional and Sustainable Development Department database; loans, technical assistance, grants, and
          equity approvals database; RRP and PCRs of 51 projects.

    Table A5.6: List of Infrastructure Projects Approved Since 1994 with Project Completion
                  Reports Issued Before 2006, with Estimated and Actual APs
    Year    Loan No.                              Project Name                                   AP                AP
                                                                                              (Appraisal)        (Actual)
    People's Republic of China
    1994       1304       Yunnan-Simao Forestation and Sustainable Wood Utilization                     0             90
    1994       1313       DalianWater Supply Project                                                1,800          1,036
    1994       1318       Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower                                               3,412          6,100
    1994       1324       Heilongjiang Expressway                                                   1,100            786
    1994       1325       Yunnan Expressway                                                         2,300          1,780
    1994       1336       Beijing Environmental Improvement                                         2,393          3,374
    1995       1386       Fujian Soil Conservation and Rural Development                              308            480
    1995       1387       Hebei Expressway                                                          3,662          3,910
    1995       1388       Liaoning Expressway (Tieling -Siping)                                     2,993            855
    1995       1411       Second Yantai Port                                                            0            300
    1995       1417       Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower                                             41,054         39,393
    1995       1419       Ping Hu Oil and Gas Development                                              40             40
    1996       1427       Fangcheng Port                                                              188            188
    1996       1436       Second Industrial Energy Efficiency and Environment Improvement             200              0
    1996       1439       Daxian-Wanxian Railway                                                   11,290         17,570
    1996       1470       Chongqing Expressway                                                     11,200          9,381
    1996       1483       Shenyang-Jinzhou Expressway                                                 465          1,320
    1996       1484       Jiangxi Expressway                                                        1,494          2,069
    1996       1490       Anhui Environment Improvement Project­Water                                  35            362
    1997       1543       Xi'an-Xianyang-Tongchuan Environment Improvement                          2,200             11
    1998       1644       Yunnan Dachaoshan Power Transmission                                        869            492
    1997       1553       Shenmu-Yanan Railway                                                     12,518              0
    1997       1582       Northeast Power Transmission                                             10,100          9,718
    1998       1617       Hebei Roads Development                                                  12,814         37,932
    1998       1626       Guizhou-Shuibai Railway                                                   2,466         29,653
    1998       1636       Fuzhou Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment                                514            521
    1998       1641       Changchun-Harbin Expressway:Hashuang Expressway                           2,250          4,006
    1998       1638       Chengdu-Nanchong Expressway (direct APs)                                 17,517         34,196
    1998       1642       Changchun-Harbin Expressway:Changyu Expressway                            5,858          5,468
    1997       1544       Zhejang-Shanxi Water Conservancy                                         36,888         37,199
86       Appendix 5



 Year     Loan No.                             Project Name                                  AP              AP
                                                                                          (Appraisal)      (Actual)
 1999          1685   Northeast Flood Damage Rehabilitation                                   2,035            493
 1999          1691   Southern Yunnan Road Development                                        5,376         21,329
 1999          1692   Suzhou Creek Rehabilitation                                            17,552         22,256
 Vietnam
 1994          1344   Red River Delta Water Resources Sector                                    540            652
 1995          1361   Provincial Towns Water Supply and Sanitation                               45            200
 1995          1404   Fisheries Infrastructure Improvement                                    2,860          3,596
 1996          1487   Second Road Improvement (Phase I)                                       3,460         81,616
 Philippines
               1042   Sixteenth Power (Masinloc Thermal Power)                                    0           1,089
 1994          1333   Airport Development                                                     3,800           5,277
 1995          1367   Regional Municipal Development                                          1,733              677
  1995         1398   Northern Luzon Transmission and Generation (19th Power)                   300           1,128
 India
  1995         1405   Power Transmission (Sector)                                                  0             435
 1995     1415/1416   Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development (Government of India           800                0
                      and HDFCL)
 Other Countries
 1995     1369-LAO Champassak Road Improvement                                                        259          260
 1996     1424-PAK Ghazi Barotha Hydropower                                                           650             0
 1996     1428-INO       North Java Road Improvement                                               40,000       53,375
 1996    1452-NEP Kali Gandaki-A Hydroelectric                                                        375          375
 1996 1468-CAM Phnom Penh Water Supply and Drainage                                                     80         930
 1996    1478-BAN Jamuna Bridge Access Roads                                                          460        1,317
 1998    1666-BAN Flood Damage Rehabilitation                                                         175             0
 2001     1852-TAJ       Emergency Restoration of Yavan Water Conveyance System                         33           30
AP = affected person, BAN = Bangladesh, CAM = Cambodia, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic,
NEP = Nepal, No. = number, PAK = Pakistan, PCR = project completion report, TAJ = Tajikistan.
Note: For the Chengdu-Nanchong Expressway Project, only the direct APs were counted, as the PCR did not record the
      numbers of indirectly affected people that were anticipated by the Report and Recommendation of the President.
Source: All fifty-one project completion reports which allowed for comparisons of estimated and actual APs.

         Table A5.7: Summary of Estimated and Actual Numbers of Affected Persons
            by Country and Sector, Infrastructure Projects Approved Since 1994,
                     and with Project Completion Reports, All Countries
       Item                                            Total Affected Persons
                                            At Appraisal      At Closing    % Difference
      By Country
      People's Republic of China               212,891          292,308           37
      Viet Nam                                   6,905           86,064       1,146
      Philippines                                5,833            8,171           40
      India                                        800              435         (46)
      Other Countries                           42,032           56,287           34
      By Sector
      Agriculture and Natural Resources          3,400            4,338           28
      Energy                                    59,200           58,781          (1)
      Multisector and Industry                   7,444            5,024         (33)
      Transport and Communications             141,470          312,588         121
      Water Supply and Sanitation               56,947           62,534           10
         Total Affected Persons                268,461          443,265           65
     Source: All 51 project completion reports issued until end 2005 for projects in transport, energy, water,
             urban/multisector, and agriculture and natural resources.
                                                                                                   Appendix 6         87


 THIRTY PROJECTS APPROVED BETWEEN 1994 AND 2005 WITH HIGHEST NUMBER OF
         AFFECTED PERSONS, AS ANTICIPATED BY RESETTLEMENT PLANS
        Loan       Year                        Project Name                            DMC     Sector        No. of
         No.                                                                                                  APs
  1     1305       1994     Jing-Jiu Railway Technical Enhancement                    PRC         TC        210,000
  2     1638       1998     Chengdu-Nanchong Expresswaya                              PRC         TC        205,500
  3     1298       1994     Jamuna Multipurpose Bridge                                BAN         TC         77,200
  4     1748       2000     Hefei-Xi'an Railway                                       PRC         TC         76,500
  5     1653       1998     Third Road Improvement                                     VIE        TC         71,400
  6     1745       2000     Pasig River Environmental Management and                   PHI       ANR         55,000
                            Rehabilitation Sector Development Program
   7     1417      1995 Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower                                  PRC         EN         41,000
   8     1820      2000 Melamchi Water Supply                                         NEP         WS         40,913
   9     2182      2005 Zhengzhou-Xi'an Railway                                       PRC         TC         37,000
  10     2089      2004 Hunan Roads Development II                                    PRC         TC         36,978
  11     1544      1997 Zhejang-Shanxi Water Conservancy                              PRC         WS         36,888
  12     1784      2000 Chongqing-Guizhou Roads Development: Guizhou                  PRC         TC         31,800
                            Component (Chongzun Expressway)
  13     1851      2001 Guangxi Roads Development                                     PRC         TC         31,700
  14     1428      1996 North Java Road Improvement                                    INO        TC         31,300
  15     2024      2003 Xi'an Urban Transport Project                                 PRC         TC         29,044
  16     1660      1998 GMS: Phnom Penh-HCMC Road Improvement                          VIE        TC         27,925
  17     2051      2003 Yichang-Wanzhou Railway                                       PRC         TC         25,175
  18     1839      2001 Western Transport Corridor                                     IND        TC         24,012
  19     2181      2005 Central Sichuan Roads Development                             PRC         TC         22,871
  20     1850      2001 Ganzhou-Longyan Railway                                       PRC         TC         19,340
  21     2029      2003 National Highways Sector I                                     IND        TC         17,088
  22     1945      2002 GMS: Cambodia Road Improvement                                CAM         TC         16,665
  23     1732      1999 Rural Electrification, Distribution and Transmission          NEP         EN         16,000
  24     2094      2004 Guangxi Roads Development II                                  PRC         TC         15,519
  25     2004      2003 Ningxia Roads Development                                     PRC         TC         14,800
  26     2125      2004 Gansu Roads Development                                       PRC         TC         14,750
  27     1701      1999 Shanxi Roads Development                                      PRC         TC         13,900
  28     2103/     2004 NWFP Road Development Sector and Subregional                  PAK         TC         13,590
         2104               Connectivity
  29     2219      2005 Hunan Roads Development III                                   PRC         TC         13,078
  30     1944      2002 East West Corridor                                             IND        TC         13,064
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ANR = agriculture and natural resources, AP = affected person,
BAN = Bangladesh, CAM = Cambodia, DMC = developing member country, EN = energy, IND = India,
INO = Indonesia, MS = multisector, NEP = Nepal, No. = number, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's
Republic of China, TC = transport and communications, VIE = Viet Nam, WS = water supply and sanitation.
a
   This project anticipated 17,517 direct APs and made an estimate of 188,000 APs with "secondary" resettlement
   impact. The document explained this as follows: "The primary resettlement impacts include permanent loss of
   farmland, housing, other assets, tree crops, and other crops. A further 188,000 people live in the villages along the
   road alignment, and will experience secondary resettlement impacts as each village adjusts agricultural land
   contracts to accomodate land losses and to replace housing." As Table A5.6 demonstrates, the project completion
   report determined the final number of APs as 34,196.
Note: Loan 1305-PRC: Jing-Jiu Railway Technical Enhancement, approved in 1994, was exclusively for equipment
       purchase. The number of resettled people prior to loan approval because of construction unrelated to the ADB
       loan has not been added to the totals for the tables regarding estimated and actual number of APs.
Sources: (i) 1994­2005 data from the Environment and Social Safeguards Division of the Regional and Sustainable
          Development Department of ADB; (ii) 2002­2005 number of APs data from resettlement plans posted in
          the ADB Involuntary Resettlement website, and reports and recommendations of the President.
88      Appendix 7



              DAMS IN ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK-SUPPORTED PROJECTS

              Table A7.1: ADB Loans with Dam Component to Overall Portfolio
                           No. of Loans                   Amount ($ million)
                With Dams All Loans        %     With Dams      All Loans                              %
 1970­1979             36              422          8.5             771.43           5,707.70         13.5
 1980­1989             27              538          5.0            1,347.48         18,226.35          7.4
 1990­1999             19              665          2.9            1,937.53         43,571.14          4.4
 2000­2005              7              413          1.7             583.30          26,827.78          2.2
   Total               89            2,038          4.4            4,639.74         94,332.98          4.9
 ADB = Asian Development Bank, No. = number.
 Source: ADB portal and ADB website on water resources. Available: http://www.adb.org/water/topics/dams/pdf/
         Dams-Database.pdf

                Table A7.2: Completed ADB-Financed Large Dams Since 1994
 Loan     DMC                                 Project                           Amount            Year
  No.                                                                          ($ million)      Approved
  1318    PRC         Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower                                116.0            1994
  1329    LAO         Theun-Hinboun Hydropower                                     60.0           1994
  1386    PRC         Fujian Soil Conservation and Rural Development               65.0           1995
  1417    PRC         Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower                               170.0            1995
  1424    PAK         Ghazi Barotha Hydropower                                   300.0            1996
  1452    NEP         Kali Gandaki "A" Hydroelectric Power                       160.0            1996
  1456    LAO         Nam Leuk Hydropower                                         52.0            1996
  1462     SRI        North Central Province Rural Development                    20.0            1996
  1544    PRC         Zhejiang-Shanxi Water Supply Project (Phase I)             100.0            1997
  1668     PHI        Southern Philippines Irrigation Sector                       60.0           1998
 Ongoing:
  1757     SRI        Water Resource Management                                    30.0            2000
  1814    PRC         West Henan Agricultural Development Project                  64.3            2000
  1922    PRC         Hebei Zhanghewan Pumped Storage Project                     144.0            2002
  1995    PRC         Harbin Water Supply                                         100.0            2003
  2025     VIE        Phuoc Hoa Multipurpose Water Resources                       90.0            2003
  2032    PRC         Gansu Clean Energy Development                               35.0            2003
  2162    LAO         GMS Nam-Theun II Hydropower Development                     120.0            2005
ADB = Asian Development Bank, DMC = developing member country, NEP = Nepal, No. = number, PAK = Pakistan,
PDR = People's Democratic Republic, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China, SRI = Sri Lanka,
VIE = Viet Nam.
Sources: ADB portal and ADB website on water resources. Available: http://www.adb.org/water/topics/
          dams/pdf/Dams-Database.pdf

                            Table A7.3: Large Dams in the Loan Pipeline
 DMC                                  Title                                 Amount           Year to be
                                                                           ($ million)       Approved
 IND     Uttaranchai Power Sector Development                                 300              2006
 PRC     Rural Electrification Development Project (formerly
                                                                              100              2006
         Renewable Energy in Rural Areas)
 PRC     Guiyang Integrated Water Resources Management                        150              2006
 SAM     Savaii Renewable Energy                                               10              2006
 NEP     Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy                            40              2006
 AFG     Hydropower and Transmission Project                                  100              2007
                                                                                          Appendix 7        89


 DMC                                  Title                                 Amount        Year to be
                                                                           ($ million)    Approved
 IND     Kerala Power Sector Development Project                              200           2007
 VIE     Song Bung 4 Hydropower Project                                       180           2007
 PHI     Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System - New
         Water Source Developmenta
AFG = Afghanistan, DMC = developing member country, IND = India, NEP = Nepal, PHI = Philippines,
PRC = People's Republic of China, SAM = Samoa, VIE = Viet Nam.
Note: Pipeline list based on the Project Performance Information System as of 26 August 2005; Dam details
      based on report and recommendation of the President and/or project completion report.
a
  Tentative depending on outcome of feasibility study.
Source: Asian Development Bank website on water resources. Available: http://www.adb.org/water/
          topics/dams/pdf/Dams-Database.pdf
90   Appendix 8



             LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT ISSUES DISCUSSED IN
                         PROJECT COMPLETION REPORTS

A.   Loan 1318-PRC: Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project

     (i)      Slow disbursement and shortfall in the release of the resettlement budget to the
              affected people;
     (ii)     Diversion of CNY19 million from the Taoyuan County finance department's
              resettlement budget to pay alleged shortfalls in the cultivated land tax;
     (iii)    Slow progress of evaluation and acceptance of resettlement completion;
     (iv)     Landslide along the bank reservoir, which may require further household
              relocations;
     (v)      Occasional flooding of the reservoir area, which makes restoration of livelihood
              and income difficult for certain households (flooding threatens about 700 persons
              near the reservoir shore). Also, no funding has been made available from the
              project profits (the reservoir development fund). Thus, further measures are
              urgently needed to ensure that the incomes of affected persons do not continue
              to be reduced.

B.   Loan 1417-PRC: Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower

     (i)      In April 2000, one of the senior officials supervising relocation was accused of
              receiving bribes, and received a court sentence. The Asian Development Bank
              (ADB) promptly requested the government to carefully review the implementation
              of the resettlement plan (RP) and ensure that all funds are used for the purpose
              intended;
     (ii)     In April 2002, the external monitor reported that many of the affected people had
              still not been restored to their preproject income levels. The Fujian Provincial
              Government and Longyan Municipal Resettlement Office disputed the findings of
              the external monitor. The Shanghang and Yongding County Statistics Bureaus
              conducted a survey in early 2003 that revealed that incomes were much higher
              on average, but still an estimated 25% of households had not restored their
              preproject income levels.

C.   Loan 1439-PRC: Daxian-Wanxian Railway

     (i)      Two main problems were observed regarding housing. The first was the small
              average size of affected persons' (APs) new houses as a result of low
              compensation standards. Small house size makes it difficult for APs to lease their
              houses to earn extra income. The second problem was that some APs were
              relocated to remote areas with few business opportunities. However, when APs'
              concerns are given full attention by village leaders and local government, the
              resettlement problems can be resolved in a fair and timely manner.
     (ii)     Relocation of affected persons in Wanzhou was tougher than in other areas,
              because a previous resettlement program related to the Three Gorges Water
              Resources Project was already making it difficult for the people of Wanzhou to
              find jobs. Therefore, APs relocated from areas around the Wanzhou railway
              station were less satisfied than others surveyed.
                                                                             Appendix 8    91


D.   Loan 1484-PRC: Jiangxi Expressway

     (i)   While the land prices and resettlement compensation rates paid to affected
           persons were in line with the Land Administration Law of the PRC, the
           government has revised rates upwards on a number of occasions since the
           resettlement plan was completed. Many of the relocated households had either
           used up their lifetime savings or borrowed from relatives and friends in order to
           construct better and bigger housing. This created dissatisfaction among 24% of
           the relocated persons, who said that cash compensation for housing should be
           sufficient to build bigger and better housing. More frequent dialogue with affected
           persons and clearer explanations on compensation entitlement would have
           minimized their dissatisfaction.

E.   Loan 1544-PRC: Zhejang-Shanxi Water Conservancy

     (i)   About 11% of affected households have not been able to restore their 1996
           income level. The worst-off households in this group resettled in villages around
           the reservoir or in self-selected relocation sites.

F.   Loan 1626-PRC: Guizhou-Shuibai Railway

     (i)   Appraisal figures were very low compared with actual figures, due to many
           design changes to the railway after ADB's approval of the loan.

G.   Loan 1641-PRC: Changchun-Harbin Expressway:Hashuang Expressway

     (i)   ADB was not kept regularly informed of the resettlement activities. Also, no
           external monitor was engaged as required by the loan agreement.

H.   Loan 1642-PRC: Changchun-Harbin Expressway:Changyu Expressway

     (i)   The provincial audit office identified some resettlement issues, such as delays in
           the compensation payments during implementation, though the necessary
           mitigation measures were adopted on a timely basis.

I.   Loan 1644-PRC: Yunnan Dachaoshan Power Transmission

     (i)   One factor in the slow improvement of farmers' incomes was that there were few
           local enterprises in the rural mountain areas. In addition, most of the affected
           households lived in mountain areas with tenuous road access to agricultural
           markets in large towns or cities.

J.   Loan 1691-PRC: Southern Yunnan Road Development

     (i)   The main concern in relation to resettlement implementation was the lack of
           funding, which resulted in serious delays in land compensation payments.
           Compensation was paid in a timely manner for house reconstruction, but
           payments for land losses were delayed for 1 to 2 years.
92   Appendix 8



K.   Loan 1333-PHI: Airport Development

     (i)    Land acquisition and resettlement (LAR) activities were among the major issues
            during project implementation and the main reason for the delay experienced by
            the project. The Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC)
            entered into three Memoranda of Agreement (MOAs) with the City of Davao for
            LAR. The land acquisition and resettlement plan could have been completed
            sooner if DOTC and the project implementation unit (PIU) had maintained full
            control over the resettlement process rather than delegated it to the City of
            Davao, which had different priorities from those of DOTC/PIU. The LAR process
            could also have been speeded up if DOTC/PIU had followed a clearer and more
            systematic project planning and implementation process. The implementation of
            MOA 3 encountered complications involving mortgaged properties of APs. To
            solve the issue, an ADB review mission fielded in February 2002 requested
            DOTC to (i) prepare a full RP based on ADB's resettlement policy for LAR
            activities still to be carried out under MOA 3; (ii) provide an assessment of past
            LAR compensation; and if necessary; (iii) provide additional compensation for
            past land acquisition to ensure replacement value as provided for by ADB policy.
            DOTC agreed to the first request, but rejected all retroactive action on technical
            grounds (a retroactive assessment of market value was unfeasible because of
            ongoing, rapid changes in the real estate market) and legal grounds (the ADB
            policy was not included in the loan covenants).

L.   Loan 1367-PHI: Regional Municipal Development

     (i)    "Over time, the settlers established their livelihoods, though for many this meant
            coping with high transportation costs for commuting to and from Illigan. However,
            20% of the original families have moved on, or even moved back to the city
            center, because they could not cope with the isolation and the 12 km travel from
            this hillside resettlement colony to the city. Transport costs, lack of income
            opportunities, and shortage of water supply and electricity were the major
            problems. This experience suggests that this resettlement project faced
            sustainability problems."

M.   Loan 1398-PHI: Northern Luzon Transmission and Generation (19th Power)
     Project

     (i)    [Stage 2 of Masinloc Project] Project implementation delay was encountered due
            to delay in acquisition of land.

N.   Loan 1042-PHI: Sixteenth Power (Masinloc Thermal Power) Project (Stage 1 of
     Loan 1398)

     (i)    IR, land acquisition, right of way payment, and payment of compensation have
            delayed implementation of the project. The government and the National Power
            Corporation should have a more effective strategy for dealing with such issues.

O.   Loan 1344-VIE: Red River Delta Water Resources Sector

     (i)    Families whose houses were damaged due to nearby piling operations for
            structures complained that they faced difficulties in receiving compensation
                                                                             Appendix 8    93


            payments, as the resettlement and compensation plan did not foresee such
            damage. These families did receive compensation, but with a delay.
     (ii)   One adverse impact observed by the PCR Mission has been the reduction and
            loss of income of families engaged in fishing activities in one of the subprojects
            due to the reduction of saline water intrusion as a result of the project.

P.   Loan 1404-VIE: Fisheries Infrastructure Improvement

     (i)    APs at the Ca Mau Port submitted the following issues to the provincial
            authorities: (i) the compensation rate was lower than the local authority promised
            at the beginning; (ii) some people got higher compensation for the same item;
            and (iii) the land at new resettlement zone was sold to only some people, not to
            everyone as committed by the local authority. The resettlement for Ca Mau Port
            was completed in 2002, when provincial authorities had resolved all resettlement
            issues.

Q.   Loan 1487-VIE: Second Road Improvement (Phase I)

     (i)    Resettlement in connection with upgrading of the 16 kilometers of connecting
            roads was carried out according to national standards, rather than the standards
            agreed to under the project. The national resettlement standard is less
            advantageous to those being resettled than ADB's, but the differences are minor.
            The nongovernment organization appointed to monitor resettlement--the
            Research Center for Gender, Family, and Environment in Development
            (CGFED)--informed the Project Completion Report Mission that they had not
            noted the deviation but found that all affected people had been fully
            compensated. The mission believes the deviation was accidental.
94        Appendix 9



                                       DAMS AND RESETTLEMENT

1.       Because of their scale, scope, and impacts, dams are often at the center of controversy
between governments, multilateral development banks, affected persons (APs) and
nongovernment organizations (NGOs). Resettlement issues associated with large dams are of
particular concern to NGOs.1 The report of the World Commission on Dams2 identified several
reasons for this: (i) worldwide, resettlement associated with large dams accounts for a
significant part of total resettlement associated with all public infrastructure development;
(ii) once constructed, dams are irreversible; (iii) large dams are generally justified by national
economic benefits, while their adverse impacts on APs are local within the confines of the river
valleys--the mismatch between benefits and costs contributes to confrontation; (iv) resettlement
for large dams is more complex than that associated with roads, railways, canals, thermal and
water plants--usually more people are involved, whole communities are moved and APs lose
both their homes, livelihoods, and cultural assets; (v) the more APs, the more difficult are
resettlement issues; (vi) dams can affect both the upstream and downstream populations;
(vii) the APs are often poor and indigenous peoples, and gender issues are not properly
considered; (viii) alternatives are not investigated to minimize resettlement and adverse social
impacts; (ix) the entitlements of APs to improve their livelihoods and quality of life are often not
recognized, and negotiations with APs do not result in mutually agreed upon and legally
enforceable mitigation and development provisions; and (x) agreed upon mitigation measures
are not implemented or are not adequate to offset the actual adverse impacts on people--
payment of cash compensation is often delayed, mitigation efforts are often insufficient to
replace lost livelihoods, and resettlement budgets are frequently underestimated.

2.       The report concluded, "Pervasive and systematic failure to assess the range of potential
negative impacts and implement adequate mitigation, resettlement and development programs
for the displaced, and the failure to account for the consequences of large dams for downstream
livelihoods have led to the impoverishment and suffering of millions, giving rise to growing
opposition to dams by affected communities worldwide." Some of the key resettlement issues as
identified by World Commission on Dams are summarized in Box 1.




1
    NGOs are also concerned about environmental and many other issues associated with large dams, but this report
    focuses on resettlement issues.
2
    World Commission on Dams. 2000. The Report of the World Commission on Dams. Dams and Development: A
    New Framework for Decision-making. Earthscan Publications Ltd, London and Sterling, VA.
                                                                                               Appendix 9       95


            Box 1: Summary of World Commission on Dams Findings on Resettlement

        ·     40­80 million people have been physically displaced by dams worldwide.
        ·     Millions of people living downstream from dams--particularly those reliant on natural
              floodplain function and fisheries--have suffered serious harm to their livelihoods and have
              had the future productivity of their resources put at risk.
        ·     Many of the displaced were not recognized (or enumerated) as such, and therefore were not
              resettled or compensated.
        ·     Where compensation was provided it was often inadequate, and where the physically
              displaced were enumerated, many were not included in resettlement programs,
        ·     Resettlers rarely had their livelihoods restored, as resettlement programs have focused on
              physical relocation rather than on the economic and social development of the displaced.
        ·     Even in the 1990s, impacts on downstream livelihoods were not adequately assessed or
              accounted for in the planning and design of large dams.
        ·     There is a clear relationship between the magnitude of displacement and the ability to
              rehabilitate and restore livelihoods adequately--the larger the number of displaced people,
              the less likely it is that livelihoods can be restored.

    Source: World Commission on Dams. 2000. The Report of the World Commission on Dams. Dams and
            Development: A New Framework for Decision-Making. Earthscan Publications Ltd., London and Sterling,
            VA.


3.      An NGO Forum on an Asian Development Bank (ADB) report3 examined ADB's support
for dam projects, particularly those involving large dams, and included case studies for three
projects: (i) Theun-Hinboun Hydropower in the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR),
for which ADB approved a loan on 8 November 1994; (ii) Nam Leuk Dam in the Lao PDR, with a
loan approved 10 September 1996; and (iii) Kali Gandaki "A" Hydroelectric Project4 in Nepal,
with a loan approved 23 July 1996. Major issues related to resettlement included (i) resettlement
programs focused predominantly on physical relocation rather than restoring the livelihoods of
displaced people; (ii) not all affected people were identified and adequately compensated,
particularly communities downstream of the dam, those without land or legal title, and those
affected by project infrastructure other than the reservoir; and (iii) indigenous people were
adversely affected by a loss of their livelihoods and cultural way of life. Some Operations
Evaluation Department (OED) reports have reached similar conclusions:

            (i)     Theun-Hinboun Hydropower Project: The major conclusions of the ADB NGO
                    Forum report about the resettlement aspects of this project were (i) a lack of prior
                    consultation with APs, (ii) insufficient plans for direct compensation for APs, and
                    (iii) adverse livelihood impacts on APs living in the upstream and downstream
                    areas. The results of independent investigations and work of NGOs contributed
                    to the preparation of a Mitigation and Compensation Program Report in 2000,
                    two years after project completion. ADB's evaluation of this project5 rated it as
                    successful. It was well designed, generated substantial foreign exchange
                    earnings, was financially and economically viable, and was physically
                    sustainable. However, the evaluation documented adverse environmental and
                    social impacts and reached broadly similar conclusions as those of the NGO
                    Forum on ADB. The project was approved before ADB had adopted its

3
    Nuera, Auturo. The Asian Development Bank and Dams. NGO Forum on ADB. November 2005. Manila.
4
    OED selects at 25% random sample of projects for independent evaluation. Although the Kali Gandaki "A"
    Hydroelectric Project was in the population of projects considered for evaluation in 2006, it was not selected.
5
    ADB. 2002. Project Performance Audit Report on the Theun-Hinboun Hydropower Project. Manila.
96        Appendix 9



                  Resettlement Policy. Due to the lack of baseline data on environmental and
                  social impacts, issues related to fisheries, riverbank erosion, and sedimentation
                  and the potential number of affected villages were not well understood. A lack of
                  attention to resettlement matters during project formulation resulted in adverse
                  impacts on APs. Independent third party monitoring reported that, while progress
                  was being made after the adoption of the mitigation and compensation program,
                  there remained concerns over the restoration of livelihoods. This experience
                  underscores the difficulties of replacing natural resource and river­based
                  livelihoods with agricultural­based livelihoods. NGOs continue to follow up with
                  ADB and the government on the implementation of mitigation measures.
          (ii)    Nam Leuk Hydropower Project: The report of the NGO Forum on ADB
                  concluded that the Nam Leuk dam had adversely affected APs, both upstream
                  and downstream, through increased health problems, food shortages, flooding,
                  damage to fisheries and livestock, poor water quality and lack of potable water,
                  illegal logging, and corruption associated with the project. The overall conclusion
                  was that APs, including indigenous people, had not been adequately
                  compensated for the losses caused by the project, and that some were poorer
                  after Nam Leuk was built. The OED evaluation of the Nam Leuk project6 rated it
                  as successful for reasons similar to the Theun-Hinboun Hydropower Project. The
                  physical relocation was limited (16 families) and was generally successful. Many
                  of the families were happier with their new lifestyle and with the facilities available
                  at their new location. However, consistent with the findings of the NGO Forum on
                  ADB, the evaluation documented adverse impacts on upstream and downstream
                  APs after plant startup. Mitigation measures relating to reduced water quantity
                  and impact on quality of fisheries were not fully addressed. Baseline data and
                  monitoring of water quality and fisheries were not adequate to ascertain the
                  project impacts, and mitigation measures were not developed. Institutional
                  weaknesses and inadequate funds led to incomplete mitigation measures in
                  some surrounding villages. Mitigation measures were managed effectively during
                  project implementation, but more attention should have been paid to the
                  mitigation measures after plant startup. NGOs remain concerned about the
                  implementation of agreed upon mitigation measures. Their attention has provided
                  incentives for ADB to continue monitoring the Nam Leuk Project.

4.      Because of the concerns about environmental and social impacts of dams, OED
undertook a special evaluation study (SES) of this topic.7 The four case studies8 examined were
designed before the IR policy was adopted in 1995. When this study began in 1998, projects
approved after ADB adopted the IR policy had not reached sufficient progress in implementation
to draw meaningful assessments or recommendations. Although the evaluation concluded that
the projects had not resulted in disastrous social impacts, there were shortcomings observed,
most of which could have been avoided or mitigated with more diligence. Identification, and
mitigation of project impacts improved in the later projects. The SES concluded that (i) the
consultation process was not very effective in most of the study projects; (ii) the preparation of
study projects in terms of social and resettlement concerns was weak due to the quality of
baseline data and incompleteness of coverage; (iii) monitoring impacts was better during

6
    ADB. 2004. Project Performance Audit Report on the Nam Leuk Hydropower Project. Manila.
7
    ADB. 1999. Special Evaluation Study on the Social and Environmental Impacts of Selected Hydropower Projects.
    Manila.
8
    Batang Ai Hydropower Project in Malaysia, approved in 1981; Power XX (Singkarak) Project in Indonesia,
    approved in 1990; Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project in the PRC, approved in 1994; and Theun-Hinboun
    Hydropower Project in Lao PDR, approved in 1994.
                                                                                          Appendix 9       97


construction than in the operations phase; (iv) the institutional capabilities of agencies dealing
with social concerns varied across countries; (v) ADB staff members' involvement in preparing
project social documents and recommending their inadequacy to the Board created an awkward
dual function;9 (vi) some of the project units responsible for implementing environmental and
social mitigation measures were inappropriately staffed, inadequately funded, and established
too late, with insufficient authority; and (vii) at the time of the study, ADB policies and guidelines
for incorporating social dimensions into ADB operations were still maturing, with ADB staff
displaying a limited understanding of ADB's involuntary resettlement policy principles.

5.      More recent evaluation findings, including work undertaken for this study, regarding
resettlement associated with dams in the People's Republic of China (PRC) are summarized
below:

        (i)     Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project:10 The project was technically sound,
                economically viable, and rated as successful. However, there were resettlement
                weaknesses. Approximately 3,587 people were resettled, and there were
                6,100 APs, including those that required livelihood restoration. The evaluation
                found that (i) more than 50% of those who had resettled reported a decline in
                nominal income and attributed this to the shortage of farmland and ineffective
                production rehabilitation; (ii) only 8% of survey respondents were satisfied with
                the outcome of the economic rehabilitation; (iii) relocation was not completed
                because of financing constraints and cumbersome procedures; and (iv) while the
                majority of APs were happy with their new houses, many were dissatisfied with
                livelihood restoration and with compensation polices. There was a lack of follow
                up by ADB and the government on recommendations to address these issues.
                ADB needs to be more proactive in pursuing the recommendations after projects
                are completed.
        (ii)    Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower Project:11 The project was rated as successful
                and appears to be financially viable. Resettlement has been implemented in
                accordance with PRC regulations and the provisions of the ADB-approved
                Resettlement Plan. Actual people affected by the project were 39,393, of whom
                30,640 lost farmland and 36,913 lost housing. Figures are lower than the initial
                estimate of 41,000 affected people. Training programs were arranged by the
                local government to enhance resettlement management; and physical
                resettlement of people was quite successful. However, despite these, the
                restoration of livelihood of affected persons remains an issue. Regulations and
                compensation standards have limited the ability to restore livelihoods. Another
                possible reason was the APs' decision to spend more money on housing rather
                than on means of production. ADB has already intervened to increase the
                provision of resettlement budget, but this may not have been adequate to
                address the needs of all people.
        (iii)   Zhejiang Shanxi Water Supply Project:12 The project was rated as successful,
                and resettlement was carried out successfully in accordance with the ADB-
                approved resettlement plan and local regulations. APs were estimated to be
                37,256 at project appraisal; at completion actual APs slightly decreased to
                37,199. These people were moved to 123 resettlement sites in 10 counties or
9
   This issue was addressed during the 2002 reorganization and changes in ADB's business processes.
10
   ADB. 2005. Project Performance Evaluation Report on the Hunan Lingjintan Hydropower Project in the People's
   Republic of China. Manila.
11
   Loan 1417-PRC: Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower Project, for $170 million, approved 14 December 1995.
12
   Loan 1544-PRC: Zhezjiang-Shanxi Water Supply Project, for $100 million, approved 23 September 1997.
98         Appendix 9



                   districts within Wenzhou city. The implementation of the resettlement plan was
                   highly participatory, which led to its success. The plan's resettlement strategy
                   emphasized relocation of APs to the coastal plain to improve their socioeconomic
                   conditions and reduce poverty. Another resettlement strategy was to allow the
                   host community residents to transfer their registration from farm to nonfarm
                   status and become urban residents. Contracted farmlands were then returned to
                   the village collective to make way for resettlers. A ten-year post resettlement
                   rehabilitation plan is currently under implementation by a very dedicated
                   Resettlement Office in Wenzhou. This policy was a first for the PRC. The
                   resettlement is successful as most APs (89%) have restored and improved their
                   income.

6.      Dam projects that result in complex resettlement and livelihood issues need to be
carefully prepared. Overall, ADB-financed hydropower projects have been rated as successful
and have been technically and economically sound. However, there have been problems
associated with resettlement and livelihood restoration. There is some evidence to suggest that,
after ADB began paying more attention to resettlement issues, more effective plans have been
developed to identify and mitigate resettlement and livelihood restoration risks. However, it is
too early to draw firm conclusions about the results achieved, as most of the dam projects
financed after the policy was adopted have not been evaluated.

7.      Experience in the Lao PDR suggests that some of the recommendations of project
evaluations have resulted in improvements in the design and delivery of more sustainable social
and environmental mitigation programs in hydropower projects, including the development of
baseline data against which to monitor impacts. ADB now includes covenants that provide for
long-term monitoring. The design of the Nam Theun 2 hydropower project,13 which reached
financial closure in May 2005, incorporated recommendations made by OED, including a
comprehensive consultation process with the local population, studies of the environmental and
social effects of the project and mitigation measures. However, NGOs remain concerned that
there will be inadequate implementation of the measures needed to offset potential adverse
environmental and resettlement impacts, particularly on the poor.

8.      ADB's experience with hydropower projects in the Lao PDR illustrates that NGOs can
play a role in identifying impacts and mitigation measures on APs and strengthening the
monitoring of the implementation of the mitigation measures, particularly in the post operation
phase, when ADB's monitoring and follow up activities normally cease. However, the Lao PDR
experience also indicates that the transaction costs to ADB and the executing agency can be
very high when international NGOs strongly oppose large dam projects (see also the Nam
Theun 2 example in Section B of Chapter V in the main text). Ways need to be developed to
reduce such transaction costs. If both ADB and NGOs are working to achieve the same
objective (i.e., to identify and mitigate adverse impacts on APs) it should be possible to find
ways to cooperate in a less antagonistic manner.




13
     Loan 2162-LAO: Greater Mekong Subregion Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project, for $20 million, approved 4 April
     2005.
                                                                                                Appendix 10       99


           ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK INSPECTIONS AND COMPLIANCE REVIEWS

A.        Samut Prakarn Wastewater Management Project

1.      The inspection was the result of a request made on 5 April 2001 to the Board Inspection
Committee (BIC) from complainants represented by the Mayor of Klong Dan and two other
Klong Dan residents. The complaint concerned the relocation of the treatment plant as a result
of the Pollution Control Department's (the Executing Agency [EA]) decision to allow bids for a
single plant site instead of the two planned originally. Due to various circumstances, the project
cost had increased, which led to supplementary financing from the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) in December 1998, but without the project being subjected to reappraisal.

2.       The complainants raised several issues, among which were environmental issues and
ADB's noncompliance with its policies on Involuntary Resettlement (IR), Incorporation of Social
Dimensions in Bank Operations, and Supplementary Financing of Cost Overruns. There were
alleged to be also irregularities in land acquisition. The complainants argued that ADB violated
its Policy on Supplementary Financing of Cost Overruns by not reappraising the project, and
alleged that ADB violated its IR Policy, not having prepared a social impact analysis or a
Resettlement Plan (RP). Neither had there been any consultation or discussion with the
community. Management's response was initially that there was indeed no RP for the Project
but (i) the relevant policy was issued after loan approval, and the reappraisal for the
supplementary loan focused on the cost overrun; (ii) the treatment plant site acquired did not
involve any resettlement, and was located well away from any community; and (iii) it was
necessary to complete detailed design work to determine the exact size and location of the
economic exclusion zone around the marine outfall before the affected persons (APs) could be
identified. Management also responded that the detailed design work was not completed until
2000 and that the final boundaries were determined only in 2001. By that time, due to contractor
problems, a draft compensation plan1 (also referred to as the RP), had not been submitted to
ADB for review. ADB approved an inspection, and the inspection panel confirmed that there
were indeed breaches of the policies on IR, incorporation of social dimensions, and
supplementary cost financing, which essentially followed from the incorrect decision not to
reappraise the project at the time of the request for supplementary financing.

3.      The Inspection Panel confirmed that, although there was no need for resettlement under
the project, the new site had adverse effects on the livelihood of some of the people in the
surroundings. As a result of the establishment of an exclusion zone, certain mussel farmers--it
was never established how many--would be excluded from their usual fishing grounds. The
Inspection Panel also found no evidence that the community had been involved in a meaningful
negotiation process over compensation, although it had been informed that compensation had
been given to some of these farmers. The potential impacts of the plants on the fish farmers in
the vicinity were identified as changes in salinity, or contamination with pathogens or heavy
metals. The community near the treatment plant was also judged to be affected by the odor
from industrial activities, sludge management, and adverse effect on property values.

4.     The complainants alleged that the process of compensation for land had been infected
by corruption. The purchase price had been inflated and the fact that the actual purchase price
was equal to the maximum allowed under the contract was deemed an indication of collusion
1
    Based on the Fourth Semiannual Report on Implementation of the Recommendations of the BIC, "following the
    decision to declare the turnkey contract null and void, and the subsequent cessation of all project activities, no
    further action or progress has occurred on the compensation plan, monitoring activities, community involvement
    initiatives, or odor and effluent management".
100    Appendix 10



between the buyer and the seller. The Thai National Counter Corruption Commission and the
Thai Senate Environment Committee independently investigated the irregularities related to land
acquisition. Based on an investigation of the project's single turnkey contract by a committee
constituted by the Minister for Natural Resources and Environment in the Government of
Thailand, the presence of irregularities was confirmed, resulting in the EA declaring the contract
null and void. With respect to the fraud charges the EA laid against several individuals
associated with the acquisition of the land for the wastewater treatment plant, a few key
personnel in EA have been cleared, while others are still under investigation. The project has
been suspended in a state of 95% completion and has not been operational up to the date of
this study. No further action is likely to be taken until the contractual dispute between the EA
and the turnkey contractor is resolved.

B.     Chashma Right Bank Irrigation Project Stage III

5.       Alleged violation of the IR and Indigenous Peoples policies was also part of the
justification of this inspection. In November 2002, BIC received a request for this on account of
material harm to APs, including, involuntary resettlement; inadequate compensation for the loss
of land, other assets, and livelihood; and adverse impacts on traditional hill torrent farmers. The
complaint was mainly a result of the change in the final realignment/location and detailed design
of the main canal and distributaries, which implied a shift in the alignment of the main canal of
up to two kilometers, and new designs for a number of cross drainage structures. Again, ADB
had approved a supplementary loan without a full reappraisal of the project.

6.       Complaints related to IR concerned the identification of the need for resettlement and
resettlement planning. According to the request for inspection, at least 22 villages were subject
to the risk of flooding, a situation overlooked at the time of appraisal. The Social Survey and
Action Plan proposed in 1997 had not been delivered until 2001. APs had not been properly
informed and consulted. Meanwhile, the indigenous hill torrent irrigation systems were
negatively affected by diversions and disturbances to the flow of water. The Panel concluded
that ADB had breached its policies on IR and incorporation of social dimensions. In addition, the
feasibility study and appraisal document that were the bases for approving the loan did not
address the issues of "rights of tribal/ethnic minorities, cultural integrity and traditional land use
control," as specified in the 1986 Staff Instructions on Socio-cultural Impacts of Bank Projects.

7.       The recommendations, approved by the Board, included some that were addressed
exclusively to ADB and went beyond the Chashma project itself, raising the bar for safeguard
compliance within ADB, and essentially demanding from ADB Management the reallocation of
staff to resettlement and anticorruption supervision of canal irrigation projects:

       (i)     "with respect to ongoing and future large-scale canal irrigation projects of ADB,
               ADB [must] ensure that appropriate, reliable, transparent and participatory
               mechanisms are in place, so that the requirements under ADB's Policy on
               Involuntary Resettlement and Anticorruption Policy, specifically with regard to the
               following, can be carried out:
               (a)     adequate compensation for land acquisition on a land-for-land basis or,
                       when not possible, on a cash compensation basis at levels that enable
                       the affected households to buy land of equivalent value;
               (b)     any issues relating to corruption; and
               (c)     the borrowing country's carrying out of any resettlement in accordance
                       with requirements under ADB's Policy on Involuntary Resettlement; and
                                                                                 Appendix 10    101


       (ii)    ADB [must] ensure that (a) sufficient ADB human resources are available to
               ensure a satisfactory level of support for, and monitoring of, the implementation
               of any resettlement plans, environmental management plans or other measures
               required under ADB's safeguard policies; and (b) ADB staff are aware of their
               duties and obligations in the formulation, processing and implementation of ADB-
               assisted projects pursuant to ADB's operational policies and procedures."

C.     Southern Transport Development Project

8.        The compliance review for this project was essentially about violation of the IR Policy.
The Joint Organization of the Affected Communities of the Colombo-Matara Highway (JO) had
filed a request for such a review with ADB's Compliance Review Panel (CRP) on 14 November
2004. The complaint mainly concerned the change in the trace or alignment of the highway from
the combined trace to the final trace (FT). The required studies and consultations for the FT
were allegedly not done in accordance with ADB policies. JO claimed that APs were suffering or
were to suffer, among others, in the form of (i) loss of homes, (ii) loss of livelihood,
(iii) dispersion of integrated communities, (iv) damage to five temples, and (v) negative effects of
resettlement. The CRP, which determined that the request was eligible, received authorization
from the Board on 11 January 2005 to conduct a compliance review, selected findings of which
were as follows:

       (i)     Operations Manual (OM) Section 47: Incorporation of Social Dimensions in
               Bank Operations. The breach of compliance with this OM section results from
               shifting of the trace, in the absence of a serious analysis of the Galle access
               road. The weak management information system (MIS), which did not identify
               vulnerable people, and the rudimentary income restoration program were seen
               as serious breaches of compliance.
       (ii)    OM Section 50: Involuntary Resettlement. The CRP concluded that there had
               been no public participation in the decision making regarding the significant shifts
               of the trace. The CRP was also concerned about Management's lack of attention
               to independent monitoring and the need for supporting performance in the areas
               of compensation and resettlement.

9.     The following resettlement-related recommendations were accepted by the Board:

       (i)     require that all APs be fully compensated by actual payment before they are
               moved;
       (ii)    assist in the income restoration program and the establishment of household
               benchmarks through the MIS for the APs as called for in the Resettlement
               Implementation Plan (RIP);
       (iii)   ensure that full project information, especially the essential elements of the RIP,
               be provided in an appropriate language to each affected household, rather than
               simply making it available at the district offices;
       (iv)    help establish well-staffed monitoring of resettlement activities by an independent
               institution, forwarding concerns to the Road Development Authority for urgent
               action from the APs;
       (v)     require immediate provision of utilities and infrastructure to resettlement sites;
               and
       (vi)    require a special emphasis in the RIP and the income restoration program for
               women, if necessary by the allocation of additional staff to track their recovery as
               APs.
                                                                                                                                                          102
  PROJECTS WITH RESETTLEMENT/LAND ACQUISITION CONCERNS FROM NONGOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS/
                              COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONSa
Project Title                                              Concern/s                                          Reaction of ADB/Other Agencies




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 11
A. Central and West Asia Regional Department
1. Chashma Right Bank Irrigation   (i)       No comprehensive resettlement plan for                    (i)     ADB Board mandated the CRP to
Project                                       compensated APs;                                                 monitor implementation progress of
(Stage III) (Pakistan)             (ii)      Process for determining compensation neither                      recommendations made by the
                                              transparent nor conclusive, characterized by                     Inspection Panel.
                                              corruption;
                                   (iii)     Inadequate compensation; livelihood disruption

2. Ghazi Barotha Hydropower         (i)        Functioning of resettlement sites;                      (i)     Infrastructure in resettlement villages
Project (Pakistan)                  (ii)       land acquisition and compensation for                           completed; girls school functional;
                                               transmission line component and payment of              (ii)    No land acquisition with regard to
                                               compensation to Tarbela Dam APs                                 transmission line component
B. South Asia Regional Department
3. Kolkata Environmental          (i)          Understated number of APs; delay in relocation of       (i)      Kolkata Municipal Corporation was
Improvement Project (India)                    APs                                                              advised to devise and implement a
                                                                                                                communications and education
                                                                                                                strategy for new encroachments, and
                                                                                                                APs not recorded in the census.

4. Melamchi Water Supply Project    (i)        Project's impact on traditional livelihood of           (i)      ADB explained the process followed in
(Nepal)                                        residents;                                                       preparing RAP.
                                    (ii)       Residents not consulted when RAP was prepared           (ii)     An NGO was to be engaged to carry
                                    (iii)      Negative impacts due to relocation of homes or                   out external monitoring of the RAP.
                                               acquisition of land

5. Kali Gandaki "A" Hydroelectric   (i)        Objective of rehabilitating the livelihood of APs not   (i)      ESSD was to carry out a reassessment
Project (Nepal)                                achieved;                                                        of the livelihoods of APs and develop a
                                    (ii)       Impaired fishermen's livelihood                                  program of sustainable livelihoods
                                                                                                                based on provision of a microcredit
                                                                                                                facility.

6. Southern Transport Development   (i)        Change in alignment;                                    (i)      The ADB Management prepared a
Project                             (ii)       Land acquisition and resettlement impacts                        course of action to implement the
(Sri Lanka)                                                                                                     CRP's recommendations, which the
                                                                                                                latter is monitoring.
Project Title                                                        Concern                                         Reaction of ADB/Other Agencies
C. Southeast Asia Regional Department
7. Chong Kneas Environmental      (i)                 Impact on traditional livelihood of APs;               (i)        Broad endorsement was given to the
Improvement Project (Cambodia)    (ii)                Equitable treatment of APs                                        proposed approach of resettling APs,
                                                                                                                        including those of Vietnamese origin.

8. East-West Transport Corridor          (i)          Dislocation and involuntary resettlement of APs        (i)        RIPs were prepared.
(GMS)                                                                                                        (ii)       An international consulting firm was
                                                                                                                        engaged to monitor implementation of
                                                                                                                        resettlement.
                                                                                                             (iii)      Beneficiary participation in the process
                                                                                                                        of land acquisition and resettlement
                                                                                                                        encouraged.

9. Metro Medan Urban Development         (i)          Coercive land acquisition practices (complaint         (i)        A special administration review mission
(Indonesia)                                           received in early 2003)                                           was fielded. No evidence or coercive
                                                                                                                        practices found.
10. Tangguh LNG Project                  (i)          Resettlement concerns (no details given)               (i)        The Project committed to implement
(Indonesia)                                                                                                             the IR plan in accordance with local
                                                                                                                        regulations and ADB guidelines.

11. Nam Theun 2 Hydropower (Lao          (i)          Risks associated with livelihood programs for          (i)        Availability of livelihood options
People's Democratic Republic)                         resettled communities on the Nakai Plateau             (ii)       Livelihood programs designed with
                                                                                                                        participatory inputs from community
12. Pasig River Environmental and        (i)          Rejection of the 10-meter environmental                (i)        Alternatives to off-site relocation
Rehabilitation Management Program                     preservation area zone; need for near-site                        identified and evaluated
(Philippines)                                         relocation options; lack of physical progress on       (ii)       Develop and fund URA strategies that
                                                      URAs                                                              take into account needs of poor
                                                                                                                        communities

13. MWSS New Water Source                (i)          Resettlement of indigenous people                      (i)        Dialogue with complainants held
Development Project (Philippines)
14. Sixth Road (Philippines)             (i)          Outstanding issues related to land acquisition and     (i)        ADB is closely monitoring the LAR
                                                      resettlement                                                      activities of DPWH for a successful
                                                                                                                        completion of compensation of APs.




                                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 11
ADB = Asian Development Bank, AP = affected person, CBO = community-based organization, CRP = Compliance Review Panel, DPWH = Department of Public Works and
Highways, ESSD = Environmental and Social Studies Division, GMS = Greater Mekong Subregion, LAR = land acquisition and resettlement, LNG = liquefied natural gas,
NGO = nongovernment organization, RAP = resettlement action plan, RIP = resettlement implementation plan, URA = urban renewal area.
a
  As published in the NGO Concerns Briefing Paper, 2004 and 2005 only.




                                                                                                                                                                    103
104       Appendix 12



                          NOTES ON CORRUPTION AND RESETTLEMENT

1.      Corruption in resettlement operations can be a serious phenomenon as in any other
project operations. Such operations have the potential to provide officials with multiple
opportunities to shift cash funds around and coerce affected persons (APs) into paying
kickbacks for the timely award of cash compensation. With proper public disclosure of
compensation rates and assistance packages and monitoring by civil society, the risk of
corruption can, to some extent, be mitigated. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) Involuntary
Resettlement (IR) Policy of 1995 and later Operations Manual sections emphasized public
disclosure. The rules were sharpened with the promulgation in 2005 of ADB's Policy on Public
Communication.

2.      The project case studies conducted for this special evaluation study did not focus on
corruption. If information was volunteered by APs or others, then this would be recorded, but
this was seldom the case in the 16 case studies conducted. There was one exception--in the
Fujian Mianhuatan Hydropower Project, a senior project officer was dismissed by the
government and convicted of embezzlement of project funds for resettlement operations. The
People's Republic of China (PRC) Government systems uncovered this corruption, which did
not involve the use of ADB funds. In the study of grievance letters conducted as part of some of
the case studies, corruption allegations did not surface.

3.      A review of general sources available on the Internet found statements and allegations
regarding resettlement-related corruption, particularly for high-profile projects such as the
Sardar Sarovar Dam Project in the Narmada Valley in India, and the Three Gorges Project in
the PRC. The World Commission on Dams1 had studied the phenomenon and concluded that
corruption sometimes affected some resettlement programs. Some of its findings are included in
Box 1. As resettlement operations including land acquisition are seldom financed by ADB loans,
the Integrity Division of the Office of the Auditor General (OAGI) has not opened investigations
into corruption in resettlement so far. However, as the financing of land acquisition is now
permissible, this should become an issue of increasing concern for ADB.

4.      Chris de Wet has given an interesting explanation for the occurrence of corruption in
resettlement operations:2

          "Resettlement and rehabilitation policies are coordinated and implemented at the level of
          government departments and district administration. There are weaknesses in the chains
          of communication and decision making due to work pressures, insufficient capacity and
          problems of coordination between agencies. Though resettlement officers cope as best
          they can, the result is invariably the development of ad hoc institutional arrangements.
          Local officials exercise considerable discretion as they develop operational routines. This
          allows for cutting corners and corruption. For the affected population, the local
          resettlement officer is the government; his or her decisions are policy. Implementation
          takes on a life of its own."




1
    World Commission on Dams. 2000. The Report of the World Commission on Dams. Dams and Development:
    A New Framework for Decision-Making. Earthscan Publications Ltd, London and Sterling, VA.
2
    De Wet, Chris. Not dated. Improving Outcomes in Development-Induced Displacement and Resettlement Projects.
    Available: http://www.fmreview.org/FMRpdfs/FMR12/fmr12.2.pdf
                                                                                       Appendix 12     105


                     Box 1: Findings of the World Commission on Dams in 2000

"Corruption is another malaise that has dogged resettlement programmes, as usual at the expense of
the displaced people. To consider just one example: `According to National Audit Office, officials had
embezzled 323 million yuan from funds earmarked for resettlement in the Three Gorges Area' (China
Report 1999: 32). Without a doubt every case of misappropriation would inevitably eat into the
already insufficient funds for resettlement, further weakening the programme. Corruption is of course
widespread ... and this simply highlights the need for transparency and people's involvement in every
aspect of the resettlement programme." "... the main complaint of people affected by the Three
Gorges Project is corruption among local resettlement officials which has deprived resettlers of large
amounts of funds for which they are eligible."

Comments by resettlement authority Christopher McDowell in the same report sum up corruption in
resettlement:

        "Corruption by local officials in China and elsewhere has resulted in the siphoning off
        of hundreds of thousands of dollars intended to be used in Resettlement and
        Rehabilitation schemes associated with dam development. As a result displaced
        populations do not have the infrastructure or the financial assistance necessary to
        pursue livelihood strategies essential for re-establishment; (b) Corruption in the
        contracting and sub-contracting procedures have resulted in sub-standard
        constructions. In the Three Gorges project roads and bridges essential for both the
        projects and the resettlement sites are so shoddily constructed that many are
        collapsing. Resettled populations are consequently isolated from other population
        centers, markets and resources, making almost impossible the pursuit of economic
        strategies essential for re-establishment. (c) Corruption in bidding for contracts, tender
        procedures and the granting of contracts increases the overall costs of projects (some
        estimates by 15­30% on average). The 'corruption levy' has to be found from
        somewhere and invariably, though evidence is only now being gathered, the budget
        first targeted for funds diversion is the resettlement and rehabilitation budget. Thus a
        direct consequence of corruption is the reduction in funds available for resettlement
        and rehabilitation. (d) Obfuscating deals between developers and governments [...], is
        resulting in irregular resettlement occurring outside legal norms. Irregular resettlement
        results in increased displacement, minimized protection and knock-on displacement
        where land for resettlers has been secured by unfair means."

Source: World Commission on Dams. 2000. The Report of the World Commission on Dams. Dams and
        Development: A New Framework for Decision-Making. Earthscan Publications Ltd, London and Sterling,
        VA.
106        Appendix 13



                 ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK STAFF QUESTIONNAIRE FINDINGS

Number of possible respondents: 641
Number of respondents: 611

A.         Personal background

           A1.      What is your current position?

                                                               N         %
    Project Officer                                           44         72
    Environmental Specialist                                   3          5
    Social Specialist                                          3          5
    Director/DG                                                6         10
    Other                                                      2          3
    No Answer                                                  3          5
      Total Respondents                                       61        100

           A2.      In which region(s) have you worked?

                                                               N         %
    South Asia                                                 30        49
    East and Central Asia                                      18        30
    Mekong                                                     19        31
    South East Asia                                            26        43
    Pacific                                                    14        23
     Total Respondents                                         61

           A3.      In which sector(s) do you principally work?

                                                                N        %
    Agriculture and Natural Resources                          11        18
    Transport                                                  17        28
    Energy                                                     14        23
    Water Supply/Urban                                         14        23
    Private Sector                                              6        10
    Other                                                      12        20
    No Answer                                                   5         8
     Total Respondents                                         61




1
     Some responses under sections B and C were filtered based on the response to question A6, to reflect only those
     with experience in the specific safeguard. As a result, the number of valid responses for many questions under
     sections B and C was 55 for environmental safeguards, 56 for involuntary resettlement safeguards, and 54 for
     indigenous peoples safeguards. For questions B10, C2, C3, C4, and C5, respondents could give more than one
     answer per question, and as a result to total number of answers added up to more than 61.
                                                                                Appendix 13   107


      A4.     How many years have you been working for ADB?

Years                       N            %
<1                           3            5
1­3                         19           31
4­6                         12           20
7­9                         12           20
10­12                        5            8
13­15                        3            5
> 15                         3            5
No answer                    4            7
    Total Respondents       61          100

      A5.     What was your experience with safeguard issues before you came to ADB?

                                 Environment       Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                  Resettlement          Peoples
                                  N        %       N         %       N         %
None                             13       21      23        38      33        54
Limited                           8       13      19        31      13        21
Some                             21       34      11        18        9       15
Significant                      12       20        4        7        1         2
No answer                         7       11        4        7        5         8
  Total Respondents              61      100      61      100       61       100

      A6.     What is your experience in ADB with the safeguard policies?

                                 Environment       Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                  Resettlement          Peoples
                                  N        %       N        %        N         %
None                              6       10       5         8        7       11
Limited                           9       15       7        11      21        34
Some                             18       30      25        41      21        34
Significant                      23       38      20        33        8       13
No answer                         5        8       4         7        4         7
  Total Respondents              61      100      61       100      61       100

      A7.     How many projects (category A or B) did you prepare and/or administer in which
              there were (to be) safeguard plans or frameworks

                      Prepared          Under Preparation       Administered        Under Administration
                 No. of     No. of     No. of     No. of     No. of     No. of       No. of    No. of
                Projects Responses    Projects Responses    Projects Responses      Projects Responses
Environment         1         5           1         10          1         1             1        4
                    2         7           2          7          2        10             2        2
                    3         2           3          3          3         1             3        4
                    4         1           5          1          5         2             4        1
                    5         3           9          1          7         3             5        3
                    6         3                                11         1             6        1
                   15         2
                   20         1
                   30         1
 Average:         5.7      25.0         2.1      22.0         3.7       18.0          3.0      15.0
108     Appendix 13



                         Prepared            Under Preparation          Administered            Under Administration
                    No. of     No. of       No. of     No. of        No. of     No. of           No. of    No. of
                   Projects Responses      Projects Responses       Projects Responses          Projects Responses
 Involuntary           1          6            1          7            1           4               1          2
 resettlement
                       2          2            2            6           2              6           2          5
                       3          4            3            3           3              3           3          1
                      10          1            4            1           5              1           4          1
                      20          2                                     7              1           5          1
                                                                        9              1           6          1
                                                                                                  30          1
    Average:          4.8      15.0          1.9         17.0          3.1             .0        6.0       10.0
 Indigenous             1         7            1            9            1              2          1          3
 peoples
                        2         4            2            3           2              1           2          5
                        4         1            3            1           3              3           5          1
                        5         1
                       10         1
     Average:         2.4      14.0          1.4         13.0          2.2                       2.0         9.0


B.      How efficient and effective are ADB's safeguard policies?

        B1.      How useful has been ADB's staff training on safeguard policy issues?

                                                    Environment        Involuntary           Indigenous
                                                                      Resettlement             Peoples
                                                     N        %         N       %             N       %
 Not aware of training                               2        4         2       4             1       2
 Never had any training                             10       18       12       21           16       28
 Not useful                                          2        4         2       4             5       9
 Somewhat useful                                    28       50       23       40           19       33
 Very useful                                         7       13       10       18             7      12
 No answer                                           6       11         7      13             6      11
  Total Respondents                                 55      100       56      100           54      100

        B2.      How clear, useable, and complete are the Operations Manuals (OMs) for
                 implementing each of the safeguard policies?

                                                    Environment         Involuntary          Indigenous
                                                                       Resettlement            Peoples
                                                      N        %         N        %           N       %
 Not aware of OMs                                     1        2        1         2           1       2
 I did not read them                                  5        9        3          5          4       7
 Unclear, confusing                                   4        7        6        11           8      14
 Did not resolve all my issues                      28        50       32        56         27       47
 Usable; resolved all my issues                     10        18        6        11           6      11
 No answer                                            7       13        8        14           8      15
    Total Respondents                               55       100       56       100         54      100
Note: Those not answering the question were deemed to be others than mission leaders
                                                                                            Appendix 13   109


         B3.      Have you generally been able to mobilize (i) sufficient and (ii) satisfactory
                  consultants to PREPARE safeguard assessments and plans?

                                                 Environment          Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                                     Resettlement         Peoples
                                                 N          %        N         %        N        %
 Consultant Inputs:
 Not needed any                                  8         15         8         14     13          24
 Insufficient consultant inputs planned          3          5         4          7      4           7
 Sufficient consultant inputs planned           20         36        16         29     11          20
 No answer                                      24         44        28         50     26          48
 Consultant Quality:
 Consultants employed not satisfactory           3          5         2          4      4           7
 Consultants employed satisfactory              16         29        13         23      8          15
 Variable experiences with consultants          17         31        22         39     14          26
 No answer                                      19         35        19         34     28          52
    Total Respondents                           55        100        56        100     54         100
Note: Those not answering the question were deemed to be others than mission leaders

         B4.      Have you generally been able to mobilize (i) sufficient and (ii) satisfactory
                  consultants to help IMPLEMENT safeguard assessments and plans?

                                                 Environment          Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                                     Resettlement         Peoples
                                                 N         %         N         %        N        %
 Consultant Inputs:
 Not needed any                                 14         25        12         21     18          33
 Insufficient consultant inputs planned          6         11         9         16      3           6
 Sufficient consultant inputs planned           10         18         8         14      7          13
 No answer                                      25         45        27         48     26          48
 Consultant Quality:
 Consultants employed not satisfactory           1          2         1          2      1           2
 Consultants employed satisfactory              11         20        11         20      7          13
 Variable experiences with consultants          13         24        17         30     12          22
 No answer                                      30         55        27         48     34          63
    Total Respondents                           55        100        56        100     54         100
Note: Those not answering the question were deemed to be others than mission leaders

         B5.      For mission leaders only: Have you generally received sufficient specialist advice
                  from within your department during project PREPARATION?

                                                 Environment          Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                                     Resettlement         Peoples
                                                  N        %          N        %        N        %
 Not aware of any advice                          1         2         1         2       2         4
 No specialist in division, so no access          3         5         7        13       9       17
 Did not need any                                 1         2         1         2       3         6
 Insufficient (specialist too busy)               7        13         4         7       3         6
 Variable                                         4         7         7        13       6       11
 Sufficient                                      14        25        10        18       5         9
 No answer/non-mission leaders                   25        45        26        46      26       48
    Total Respondents                            30       100        30       100      28      100
110     Appendix 13



        B6.       For mission leaders only: Have you generally received sufficient specialist advice
                  from within your department during project ADMINISTRATION?

                                              Environment       Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                               Resettlement         Peoples
                                              N       %         N        %       N         %
Not aware of any advice                       1        2        1         2      1          2
No specialist in division, so no access       3        5        5         9      8        15
Did not need any                              4        7        3         5      5          9
Insufficient (specialist too busy)            7       13        5         9      2          4
Variable                                      4        7        9        16      4          7
Sufficient                                   10       18        6        11      6        11
No answer/non-mission leaders                26       47       27        48     28        52
  Total Respondents                          55      100       56       100     54       100

        B7.       For mission leaders only: Have you received sufficient specialist advice from
                  RSDD during project PREPARATION?

                                              Environment       Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                               Resettlement         Peoples
                                              N       %         N        %       N         %
Not aware of any advice                       1        2        0         0      1          2
Did not need any                              2        4        3         5      5          9
Insufficient (specialists too busy)           4        7        6        11      7        13
Variable                                     13       24       12        21      7        13
Sufficient                                    9       16        8        14      7        13
No answer/non-mission leaders                26       47       27        48     27        50
  Total Respondents                          55      100       56       100     54       100

        B8.       For mission leaders only: Have you received sufficient specialist advice from
                  RSDD) during project ADMINISTRATION?

                                              Environment       Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                               Resettlement         Peoples
                                              N       %         N        %       N         %
Not aware of any advice                       1        2        1         2      2          4
Did not need any                              8       15       10        18     13        24
Insufficient (specialists too busy)           7       13        9        16      6        11
Variable                                      9       16        7        13      5          9
Sufficient                                    3        5        1         2      1          2
No answer/non-mission leaders                27       49       28        50     27        50
  Total Respondents                          55      100       56       100     54       100
                                                                                                   Appendix 13   111


         B9.      During project preparation, does ADB give you sufficient (i) resources and
                  (ii) time to properly consider project alternatives with less adverse
                  social/environmental impacts?

                                                          Environment          Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                                              Resettlement         Peoples
                                                        N          %           N        %        N       %
 Sufficiency of Resources:
 Generally insufficient resources                      14         25         18         32     16         30
 Sometimes insufficient resources                      17         31         13         23     11         20
 Always sufficient resources                            4           7         3          5       5          9
 No answer                                             20         36         22         39     22         41
 Sufficiency of Time Available:
 Generally insufficient time                           12         22         16         29     13         24
 Sometimes insufficient time                           19         35         17         30     15         28
 Always sufficient time                                 7         13          4          7       5          9
 No answer                                             17         31         19         34     21         39
   Total Respondents                                   55       100          56       100      54        100
Note: High non-response is considered partly due to lower suitability of the question for non-mission leaders.

         B10.     In which stages/forums should safeguard issues in category A or B projects
                  receive more attention (if at all)?

                                                                            Involuntary          Indigenous
                                                         Environment
                                                                           Resettlement            Peoples
                                                          N      %          N        %           N        %
 PPTA                                                    37     67         37       66          36       67
 Processing missions                                     20     36         16       29          16       30
 MRM/SRC                                                  7     13           5       9           5        9
 Board                                                    4      7           3       5           3        6
 Review missions                                         17     31         17       30          18       33
 PCRs                                                    10     18           8      14           8       15
   Total Respondents                                     55                56                   54
Note: Question may have more than one answer.

         B11.     Do you have sufficient time and resources to satisfactorily supervise the
                  PREPARATION of safeguard assessments/plans?

                                                     Environment          Involuntary           Indigenous
                                                                         Resettlement             Peoples
                                                     N         %          N        %           N         %
 Not enough mission resources                       22         40        25        45         16        30
 Enough mission resources                           11         20         7        13          8        15
 No answer                                          22         40        24        43         30        56

 Not enough time for missions                       20         36        22          39       16          30
 Enough time for missions                           10         18         5           9        7          13
 No answer                                          25         45        29          52       31          57

 Not enough time for supervision                   24         44           21         38       17         31
 Enough time for supervision                         7        13            6         11        6         11
 No answer                                         24         44           29         52       31         57
  Total Respondents                                55        100           56        100       54        100
Note: High non-response is considered partly due to lower suitability of the question for non-mission leaders.
112      Appendix 13



         B12.     Do you have sufficient time and resources to satisfactorily supervise the
                  ADMINISTRATION of safeguard plans?

                                                    Environment           Involuntary           Indigenous
                                                                         Resettlement             Peoples
                                                     N         %          N        %           N         %
 Not enough mission resources                       23         42        24        43         16        30
 Enough mission resources                            8         15         6        11          5          9
 No answer                                          24         44        26        46         33        61

 Not enough time for missions                       20         36        21          38       17         31
 Enough time for missions                            7         13         5           9        5          9
 No answer                                          28         51        30          54       32         59

 Not enough time for supervision                   20         36           19         34       13         24
 Enough time for supervision                         8        15            7         13        7         13
 No answer                                         27         49           30         54       34         63
  Total Respondents                                55        100           56        100       54        100
Note: High non-response is considered partly due to lower suitability of the question for non-mission leaders

         B13.     If you had any problems in ensuring the application of safeguards during project
                  administration, then please indicate this:

                                                    Environment           Involuntary           Indigenous
                                                                         Resettlement             Peoples
                                                     N         %          N        %           N         %
 No problems so far                                 15         27         9        16         18        33
 Problems in some projects                          23         42        25        45         13        24
 Problems in all projects                            2          4         4         7          2          4
 No answer                                          15         27        18        32         21        39
   Total Respondents                                55        100        56       100         54       100

         B14.     Among the factors listed below, which FOUR related to ADB would contribute
                  most to better safeguard policy outcomes?

                                                      Environment           Involuntary         Indigenous
                                                                           Resettlement           Peoples
                                                          N      %          N        %          N        %
 More funds for preparation                              18     33         18       32         13       24
 More time taken for preparation                         28     51         29       52         24       44
 ADB funding of land acquisition costs                    3      5         11       20          3        6
 More consultants assigned                                7     13           8      14          7       13
 More training provided to EAs by ADB                    20     36         20       36         19       35
 More time/staff for project administration              24     44         24       43         22       41
 ADB streamlines its safeguard policies                  28     51         28       50         23       43
 ADB divisions streamline their interpretation           12     22         13       23         15       28
 Streamlined ADB procurement processes                    4      7           6      11          6       11
 Other streamlined ADB processes                          6     11           5       9          4        7
 Others                                                                      See below
   Total Respondents                                     55                56                   54
Note: Question may have more than one answer.
                                                                                            Appendix 13   113


Other factors:

Training in social assessment
Aligning impacts to project benefit stream
EA being more accountable to ADB for safeguards outcomes
More training to EAs by ADB
Government's policy more in line with ADB's policies
Better explanation by ADB with a reality check if human resources are available at all
Resolve differences between ADB safeguard policies and government policies

         B15.      Among the factors listed below, which FOUR related to country or EA would
                   contribute most to better safeguard policy outcomes?

                                                       Environment          Involuntary     Indigenous
                                                                           Resettlement       Peoples
                                                        N         %         N        %      N        %
 More internally consistent government
                                                       19       35         20          36   15      28
 regulations
 More progressive government regulations               16       29         16          29   13      24
 Better enforcement of government
                                                       38       69         35          63   25      46
 policies/regulations
 More time taken for project preparation.              18       33         20          36   16      30
 More political will and less political interference   24       44         23          41   22      41
 Combating of corruption or other irregularities       20       36         23          41   20      37
 No answer                                              1        2          3           5    0       0
 Other                                                                          None
   Total Respondents                                   55                  56               54
Note: Question may have more than one answer.

C.       What differences do the safeguard policies make?

         C1.       How have ADB's safeguard procedures added value to your project(s)?

                                                         Environment          Involuntary    Indigenous
                                                                             Resettlement      Peoples
                                                          N         %         N         %     N       %
 No added value                                           6        11         5         9   10       19
 Added value in some projects                            25        45        27        48   22       41
 Added value in all projects                             15        27        15        27    9       17
 No answer                                                9        16         9        16   13       24
  Total Respondents                                      55      100         56      100    54     100

         C2.       For those projects where the safeguards have added value, can you specify the
                   type of added value?

                                                        Environment          Involuntary     Indigenous
                                                                            Resettlement       Peoples
                                                          N        %         N         %      N      %
 Improved project design                                 21       38        13        23      9     17
 More due diligence                                      18       33        13        23    11      20
 More experience in EA                                   14       25        11        20      7     13
 Environment/APs suffer less than otherwise              22       40        28       50     18      33
 Demonstration effect beyond project                     14       25        11        20      7     13
 Others                                                                      See below
 No answer                                               15       27        28        50    26     48
   Total Respondents                                     55                 56              54
Note: Question may have more than one answer.
114      Appendix 13



Others:
Environment: Setting examples of sustainable and responsible development
Involuntary Resettlement: APs benefit
Indigenous Peoples: APs benefit

         C3.      If delays in implementation of your project(s) had to do with safeguard issues,
                  what were main factors?

                                                       Environment          Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                           Resettlement          Peoples
                                                        N        %          N        %         N       %
 Never any delays/no experience                         6       11           2       4         3       6
 Problems with (hiring of) consultants                  4        7           8      14         6      11
 underestimated
 Consultation processes difficult to manage               9        16          14        25        8         15
 EA country system different: more time needed          10         18          19        34       11         20
 EA not committed: hidden agenda                          0          0         10        18       10         19
 Safeguard issues misdiagnosed during preparation         6        11          10        18        7         13
 ADB processes/internal disagreements                   17         31           0          0      16         30
 No answer                                              19         35          20        36       24         44
   Total Respondents                                    55                     56                 54
Note: Question may have more than one answer. The high non-response is considered partly due to lower
      suitability of the question for non-mission leaders or for staff not involved in project administration.

         C4.      What are incremental/transaction costs incurred as a result of applying the ADB
                  safeguards beyond the requirements of the country system?

                                                      Environment      Involuntary             Indigenous
                                                                     Resettlement                Peoples
                                                   N        %          N        %              N       %
 Have not added to cost of project for DMC         4        7           3        5             3       6
 Have added to cost of project 1%­3% for DMC      10       18           5        9             9      17
 Have added to cost of project 4%­10% for DMC      6       11           9      16              6      11
 Have added to cost of project > 10% for DMC       4        7           8      14              2       4
 Do not know what was added cost for DMC          13       24         12       21              9      17
 Usually add to project delays                    18       33         30       54             13      24
 Unusual amount of ADB time and mission cost      11       20         18       32              9      17
 Unusual amount of consultant cost for PPTA        6       11           8      14              6      11
 Do not know about cost for ADB                    4        7           3        5             5       9
 Unharmonized donor safeguards are confusing       7       13           8      14              5       9
 More inconsistent application of country system   3        5           4        7             3       6
 No answer                                         9       16         10       18              8      15
  Total Respondents                               55                  56                      54
DMC = developing member country, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Note: Question may have more than one answer.
                                                                                            Appendix 13   115


         C5.     In your experience, in which countries have the safeguard policies been a major
                 factor in ADB declining to fund specific (sub) projects?

  Environment      No. of                Involuntary     No. of             Indigenous        No. of
                 Responses              Resettlement   Responses              Peoples       Responses
  VIE                2                  INO                3                VIE                 2
  BHU                1                  BHU                1                IND                 1
  IND                1                  IND                1                INO                 1
  INO                1                  PHI                1                PHI                 1
  LAO                1                  VIE                1
  MAL                1
  PHI                1
    Total            8                    Total             7                  Total             5
 VIE = Viet Nam, BHU = Bhutan, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic,
 MAL = Malaysia, PHI = Philippines.

         C6.     In your experience, in which countries have the Safeguard Policies been a major
                 factor in EAs declining ADB loans or parts of loans?

 Environment          No. of           Involuntary          No. of             Indigenous         No. of
                   Responses          Resettlement        Responses              Peoples        Responses
 BHU                     2         BHU                         2             IND                     1
 IND                    1          IND                         2             INO                     1
 KAZ                    1          INO                         2             KAZ                     1
 MAL                     1         VIE                         2             LAO                     1
 NEP                     1         KAZ                         1             MAL                     1
 PAK                    1          MAL                         1             VIE                     1
 PRC                     1         SRI                         1
 SRI                     1
 VIE                    1
   Total                10           Total                    11               Total                 6
BHU = Bhutan, IND = India, INO = Indonesia, KAZ = Kazakhstan, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic,
MAL = Malaysia, NEP = Nepal, No. = number, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PRC = People's Republic of China,
SRI = Sri Lanka, VIE = Viet Nam.

         C7a.    What main differences have you had with EAs while administering projects with
                 significant resettlement issues?

                                                                           N           %
                 Cost of RP preparation in sector projects                11           20
                 Cost of RP implementation                                18           32
                 Definition of encroachers/squatters                      19           34
                 Treatment of encroachers/squatters                       25           45
                 Extent of consultation process                           22           39
                 Definition/level of compensation                         24           43
                 Determination of rehabilitation program                  15           27
                 No answer                                                20           36
                   Total Respondents                                      56
                 Note: Question may have more than one answer.
116   Appendix 13



      C7b.   Frequency of reported differences in administering projects with significant
             resettlement issues

                                                                  N        %
               Reported more than one                             34      61
               Reported only one                                   2        4
               No answer                                          20       36
                 Total Respondents                                56      100
                                                                                   Appendix 14   117


        ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK STAFF SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVING SOCIAL
                   SAFEGUARD POLICIES AND THEIR APPLICATION
            (SUMMARY OF RESPONSES, FOCUSING ON DIVERSITY OF VIEWS)1

A.        Change the Nature of the Policies (12 responses in original):

          (i)      The Involuntary Resettlement (IR), Gender, and Indigenous Peoples (IP) policies
                   should be merged into one Social Safeguard Policy.
          (ii)     The Policy should acknowledge that there are instances wherein certain
                   individuals would be worse off if the project provided overall benefits to the
                   country. We are spending too much time and effort trying to identify each and
                   every individual affected by the project, and that results in delays and cost
                   overruns.
          (iii)    This policy should focus on high-risk projects, but currently, many low-risk
                   projects could be defined as category A. Low-risk projects should be removed
                   from the safeguards, and procedures should be classified as good practices.
          (iv)     The present policy is unclear and impractical. Often the result of applying the
                   policy is the inclusion of small elements in projects to meet policy requirements,
                   but these elements are unsustainable and unlikely to be implemented effectively.
                   The policy needs radical reformulation.
          (v)      Return to reality. Legitimate landowners and squatters within the project area,
                   including too many opportunistic squatters, are too often treated like lottery
                   winners with their compensation and resettlement package, at the government's
                   expense.
          (vi)     Policies have to be more flexible, as countries are not willing to work with the
                   Asian Development Bank (ADB) under the current set of rules. ADB processes
                   have to be streamlined so we need not wait for RSES staff to take 2 weeks to
                   provide comments back to staff at each stage of compliance reviews (checklists,
                   draft resettlement plans [RPs], final RPs, compliance memos, reports and
                   recommendations of the President [RRPs], etc.)--it TAKES TOO LONG to go
                   through this procedure, especially for private sector projects, which have
                   deadlines to meet.
          (vii)    Revise the Operations Manual to get away from the current guidance on IP,
                   which is based on the World Bank approach to projects in South America.
          (viii)   The definition of IP should be modified. IP should be considered as a vulnerable
                   group and be entitled to specific compensation.
          (ix)     We need a clear definition of IP across DMCs, mainstreaming of IP development
                   plans.
          (x)      Admit that for most Pacific countries, all the people (with the possible exception
                   of the Fiji Islands) are indigenous. And stop trying, for the sake of ticking off
                   boxes, to create "sub-groups" or otherwise.
          (xi)     Indigenous people want to mainstream and improve their lives. They should not
                   be encouraged to maintain their subsistence lifestyle.




1
    These are responses in the ADB Staff Questionnaire Survey for this study.
118   Appendix 14



B.     Harmonize Country Policy with ADB Policy (10 responses)

      (i)     The policy is radically different from government practices and those of other
              funding agencies. They need to be harmonized.
      (ii)    We need to evaluate the country safeguard system and, if found acceptable to
              ADB, apply it to ADB-funded projects.
      (iii)   Abandon the policy of compensation of squatters, as in many countries this is
              illegal; ADB's positive treatment causes resentment.
      (iv)    Provide clarity and details at the project preparatory technical assistance (PPTA)
              and processing stage, due consideration of national legislation and of the
              difference between it and ADB policies, and clarity upfront on how these would
              be resolved.
      (v)     Streamline ADB's policy and make it consistent with DMC practices. Should be
              country specific and practicable.
      (vi)    For countries like the People's Republic of China, using the country system with
              regular external monitoring should be sufficient during project administration,
              although due diligence in preparation of RPs during project processing needs to
              be more thorough.

C.     More Emphasis on Resettlement Frameworks and Implementation Supervision
      (8 responses)

      (i)     There is too much emphasis on extensive, detailed reporting at the project
              preparation stage. The result is often the need for extensive rewrites during
              implementation. During preparation, focus on agreeing on procedures and
              entitlements. Detailed surveys of affected people should be left until design work
              is complete and undertaken during implementation. Give project divisions
              responsibility for review, approval, and monitoring of plans.
      (ii)    There should be adoption of a resettlement framework approach to IR and
              negotiating such frameworks with each DMC, greater attention to IR during
              implementation, and more IR specialists in resident missions (RMs).
      (iii)   There should be equal emphasis on outcomes, systematic monitoring, preparing
              RPs based on detailed design, sufficient resources, and experienced IR
              specialists in ADB.
      (iv)    Some flexibility is required to allow timely preparation of RPs; however, ADB
              should be more flexible in the provision of support (if PPTA is too early, TA
              resources should be provided between loan negotiations and loan effectiveness).

D.    Increase Capacity Building Efforts for Better Project Implementation (7 responses)

      (i)     ADB systems are satisfactory, but more training is required for staff responsible
              for project administration.
      (ii)    We need field-oriented specialists who are practical.
      (iii)   EAs need to be better aware and trained
      (iv)    More expert resources for project processing and implementation are needed.
      (v)     Social development specialists need training to improve their capacity to deal
              with IP issues.
                                                                                    Appendix 14   119


E.            ADB Staff Survey Narratives Regarding Delays Associated with IR Policy2

       The following views were volunteered on the question of what constitutes adequate
consultation with Affected Persons (APs):

      (i)        Consultation needs to be appropriate--e.g., the present resettlement policy focuses
                 on copies of RPs being made available to APs. Most APs cannot understand these
                 documents, as they are barely literate. There is a need to focus more on main
                 principles and allow a bigger role for community leaders as mediums for transfer of
                 information.
      (ii)       It is important to go beyond consultation of the elites, the village leaders.
      (iii)      Simple--ask the APs if they are satisfied.
      (iv)       Have one meeting prior to the start of construction where views are taken into
                 consideration.
      (v)        Consultation with APs should be carried out throughout the different stages of the
                 project cycle.
      (vi)       At least 10% of AP should be consulted.
      (vii)      Follow the new consultation handbook in this regard.1
      (viii)     Provisions under the new ADB public communications policy are adequate, in that
                 notice is made of projects before they are even "hard" parts of country strategy and
                 programs. This provides opportunity for early input into project design, to which lip
                 service is currently paid. The current provisions under the safeguards OMs do not
                 really cater to meaningful stakeholder input that can lead to changes in project
                 design.
      (ix)       ADB should try to contact as many people as possible, while recognizing that there
                 will always be people left out of the process through no one's fault.




2
    These are responses in the ADB Staff Questionnaire Survey for this study.
120     Appendix 15



                        EXECUTING AGENCY QUESTIONNAIRE FINDINGS

                 EA Survey Respondents Profile by Country
                                                      Environment        Involuntary   Indigenous
                                                                        Resettlement     Peoples

                  Afghanistan                                1               1             0
                  Bangladesh                                 4               1             3
                  Cambodia                                   4               2             1
                  China, People's Republic of               17              17             5
                  India                                      5               5             1
                  Indonesia                                  1               2             1
                  Kyrgyz Republic                            1               0             0
                  Lao People's Democratic Republic           7               5             3
                  Nepal                                      2               1             0
                  Pakistan                                   2               1             1
                  Philippines                                4               2             3
                  Sri Lanka                                  1               0             0
                  Tajikistan                                 2               1             1
                  Viet Nam                                  10               9             5
                    Total Respondents                       61              47            24
                 Note: The total number of responses received was 67.

1.      Respondent's title/position in the project

                    Title/Position                   Total
 No answer                                            12
 Additional General Manager                            1
 Assistant Chairman of the Board Directors             1
 Chief Health Program Officer                          1
 Deputy Director                                       1
 Deputy General Director                               2
 Deputy Project Director                               1
 Deputy Project Manager                                1
 Director                                              7
 Director of Project Construction Office               1
 General Manager                                       2
 Department Head                                       1
 Principal Secretary                                   1
 Project Coordinator                                   1
 Project Director                                     23
 Project Head                                          2
 Project Manager                                       8
 Vice General Director                                 1
   Total Respondents                                  67

2.      Number of years in charge of/ managing the project

                                 Total
 Average number of years          4.6
 Valid Responses                   57
 Minimum number of years          0.3
 Maximum number of years         15.0
                                                                                                 Appendix 15      121


3.       Previous Experience with ADB-supported projects, Before the Project

                                                     N               %
  Yes                                                30              45
  No                                                 26              39
  No answer                                          11              16
   Total Respondents                                 67             100


4.       Average number of safeguard documents in the project

                       IEE       EIA       EMP        RF      LARP      LAP         RP     IPDF    IPDP      Others
 Mean                    4         2          4       2         2          2        3        3       3           2
 Median                  1         1          1       1         1          1        1        1       1           1
 N                      46        35        36       38        27        26        41      18       13           5
 % of                   69        52        54       57        40        39        61      27       19           7
 response
IEE = initial environmental examination, EIA = environmental impact assessment, EMP = environmental management
plan, IPDF = indigenous peoples development framework, IPDP = indigenous peoples development plan, N = number
of projects with such document LARP = land acquisition and resettlement plan, RF = resettlement framework, RP =
resettlement plan.
Note: The questions requested specification of status of each safeguard document, whether (1) fully implemented, (2)
       updated but not fully implemented, (3) being updated, (4) not updated, and (5) planned. Above figures refer only
       to the total of these documents. Two questionnaires with large number of safeguard documents were excluded
       as the presentation was unclear. These cases concerned two sector projects: Loans 1831-BAN: Second Small-
       Scale Water Resources Development Sector and 1950-PAK: Punjab Community Water Supply and Sanitation
       Sector. For Loan 1831-BAN, the Project Director indicated 125 fully implemented IEEs, 10 updated IEEs but not
       fully implemented, 45 IEEs not updated, and 180 IEEs planned. Also indicated were 75 fully implemented EIAs,
       5 updated but not fully implemented IEAs, 10 not updated IEAs, and/or 90 planned IEAs. Also indicated were
       171 fully implemented EMPs, 15 updated EMPs but not fully implemented, and/or 270 planned EMPs. In
       addition there were 6 fully implemented LAPs, 41 updated LAPs but not fully implemented, 33 being updated,
       and/or 115 planned LAPs. In addition there was one Indigenous Peoples Specific Action Plan being updated.
       For Loan 1950-PAK, the Project Director indicated that the project has 455 fully implemented IEEs and/or
       316 IEES being updated.

5.    Average number of staff and consultant positions filled, and NGOs involved for social
and environmental safeguard measures at this stage

                         Environment                Involuntary Resettlement              Indigenous Peoples
                Staff    Consultants     NGOs      Staff  Consultants NGOs            Staff   Consultants NGOs
 Mean           13             7           4       12           4         1            6           2         4
 Median          3             2           1        3           2         1            2           2         1
 Minimum         1             1           1        1           1         1            1           1         1
 Maximum        90            76          20       50         20          2           20           5        10
 N              37            36          15       27         28         12           11          10         3
 % of all 67    55            55          22       40         42         19           18          16         4
 Responses
NGO = nongovernment organization, N = number of respondents indicating a number for their project.
Note: Valid responses: Environment = 61; Involuntary Resettlement = 47; and Indigenous Peoples = 24.
122     Appendix 15



6.      Stage of implementation of main/oldest plan

                                    Environment         Involuntary Resettlement        Indigenous Peoples
                                   N         %               N             %              N            %
 Not yet started                    11           18               7           15               5           21
 0 to 6 months                       7           11               7           15               6           25
 7 to 12 months                      2            3               1            2               2            8
 1 to 2 years                        6           10               9           19               1            4
 More than 2 years                  30           49             21            45               7           29
 No answer                           5            8               2            4               3           13
   Total Respondents                61          100              47          100              24          100
N = number of valid responses.
Note: This question was used to determine the number of valid responses for each safeguard.

7.      Did any of your staff participate in training workshops or programs provided by ADB?

                                                  Environment     Involuntary Resettlement      Indigenous Peoples
                                                    N      %           N             %              N         %
 Not aware of ADB training workshops/programs     10      16            6           13              4        17
 Never had any ADB trainings                      12      20           12           26              6        25
 No staff participated in ADB trainings           12      20            6           13              4        17
 Only one staff/rep participated in ADB trainings  4       7            2            4              1         4
 Some staff participated in ADB trainings         14      23           13           28              5        21
 All relevant staff participated in ADB trainings  4       7            6           13              3        13
 No answer                                         5       8            2            4              1         4
 Total Respondents                                61     100           47         100              24       100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

8.    How clear, usable and complete are the guidelines available for implementing each of
the ADB safeguard requirements?

                                                          Environment         Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                             Resettlement          Peoples
                                                            N        %        N        %          N        %
 Not aware of any guidelines                                5        8        1        2          1        4
 Did not read any guidelines                                2        3        0        0          1        4
 Safeguard requirements are unclear/confusing               0        0        1        2          3      13
 Safeguard requirements did not resolve all our issues      3        5        9       19          4      17
 Safeguard requirements are somewhat usable               32        52       25       53        10       42
 Safeguard requirements are usable, resolved issues       17        28        9       19          4      17
 No answer                                                  2        3        2        4          1        4
  Total Respondents                                       61       100       47      100        24      100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.
                                                                                             Appendix 15     123


9.     Do you find you get sufficient help from ADB project officers and country offices with
respect to the safeguard requirements?

                                                       Environment             Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                              Resettlement          Peoples
                                                      N         %              N         %         N        %
 From ADB Project Officers:
 Not enough missions                                  8        13          4          9           2          8
 Sufficient missions                                 20        33         15         32           5         21
 Too many missions                                    1          2         1          2           1          4
 Not applicable                                      23        38         18         38          10         42
 No answer                                            9        15          9         19           6         25
 From Country Office:
 No help from country office                          9        15          5         11           4         17
 Sufficient help from country office                 22        36         19         40           9         38
 Not applicable                                      21        34         14         30           5         21
 No answer                                            9        15          9         19           6         25
  Total Respondents                                  61       100         47       100           24        100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

10.     How easily can you apply ADB's Safeguard requirements?

                                                                Environment      Involuntary      Indigenous
                                                                                Resettlement        Peoples
                                                           N         %            N       %        N       %
 Our laws and bylaws require more than ADB requires        3         5           2        4       0        0
 ADB safeguard requirements and country laws are the      12        20           5       11       2        8
 same
 Easy; we meet additional ADB requirements                 7        11        2         4         2          8
 Not easy, but we meet additional ADB requirements        29        48      26        55         14         58
 Not easy; we have to follow country/agency system         4         7      11        23          5         21
 Do not know/not yet clear                                 4         7        1         2         0          0
 No answer                                                 2         3        0         0         1          4
  Total Respondents                                       61       100      47       100         24        100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

11.   Are you reporting to ADB on safeguard issues as per the covenants in the Loan
Agreement?

                                                         Environment           Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                                              Resettlement         Peoples
                                                            N         %         N        %        N        %
 Never any reporting                                        3         5         3        6        5      21
 Not regularly, inadequate                                  6        10         4        9        0        0
 Not regularly, but adequate                                9        15         7       15        5      21
 Regularly, but inadequate                                  3         5         4        9        2        8
 Regularly, adequately                                    31         51       21        45        5      21
 Not applicable                                             1         2         1        2        1        4
 No answer                                                  8        13         7       15        6      25
   Total Respondents                                      61        100       47      100        24     100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.
124      Appendix 15



12.    Among the factors listed below, which FOUR ADB RELATED FACTORS would
contribute most to better Safeguard Policy outcomes?

                                                            Environment      Involuntary           Indigenous
                                                                            Resettlement             Peoples
                                                  N       %                   N         %          N         %
 More funds for preparation                      27      44                  14        30           7       29
 More time taken for preparation                 18      30                  13        28           6       25
 ADB funding of land acquisition costs           11      18                  24        51         13        54
 More consultants assigned                       16      26                  11        23           9       38
 More training for EA staff provided by ADB      53      87                  42        89         16        67
                                                 16
 More time/staff for project administration/project cycle26                  13        28           3       13
 ADB streamlines its safeguard policies          21      34                  17        36           9       38
 ADB divisions streamline their interpretation   11      18                  11        23           6       25
 Streamlined ADB procurement processes           13      21                   8        17           2        8
 Other streamlined ADB processes                 11      18                   7        15           2        8
 ADB follows country/agency system               30      49                  23        49         10        42
 Other factor/s                                   0       0                   1         2           2        8
 No answer                                        1       2                   0         0           0        0
  Total Respondents                              61     100                  47       100         24       100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EA = Executing Agency, N = number             of valid responses,   as determined by
question 6.

13.    Among the factors listed below, which FOUR COUNTRY OR AGENCY FACTORS
would contribute most to better Safeguard Policy outcomes?

                                                              Environment          Involuntary            Indigenous
                                                                                 Resettlement                Peoples
                                                              N         %           N        %             N        %
 Better government policies/regulations                      24        39        20         43             8       33
 Better enforcement of government policies/regulation        40        66        23         49           14        58
 More time taken for preparation                             13        21        13         28             4       17
 Creation of more capacity in EA                             47        77        35         74           21        88
 More EA counterpart funds made available                    25        41        26         55           16        67
 More political will and less political interference         23        38        18         38           13        54
 Combating of corruption or other irregularities             18        30        12         26             5       21
 More authority with project office                          29        48        21         45             6       25
 Other factor/s                                               2         3           1        2             0        0
 No answer                                                    1         2           0        0             0        0
  Total Respondents                                          61      100         47        100           24       100
EA = executing agency, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

14.    Have you noticed safeguard related delays and extra consultant costs caused by (i) ADB
resident mission and (ii) ADB headquarters?

                                                   Environment     Involuntary Resettlement       Indigenous Peoples
                                                    N       %           N             %               N        %
 ADB Resident Mission:
 Short delays                                 7         11            2             4                1           4
 Long delays                                  1          2            3             6                3          13
 Extra consultant cost                        2          3            4             9                1           4
 ADB headquarters:
 Short delays                                 7         11            5           11                 2           8
 Long delays                                  4          7            7           15                 2           8
 Extra consultant cost                        9         15           10           21                 0           0
 No answer                                    9         15            7           15                 7          29
   Total Respondents                         61        100           47          100                24         100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.
                                                                                           Appendix 15         125


15.   Have you noticed safeguard related delays and extra consultant costs caused by (i) your
own agency, and (ii) other agencies?

                                                           Environment       Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                            Resettlement          Peoples
                                                             N       %        N       %          N        %
 Own Agency:
 Short delays                                                8     13        5       11         1         4
 Long delays                                                 1      2        4        9         1         4
 Extra consultant cost                                       9     15        8       17         0         0
 Other Agencies:
 Short delays                                                5      8        2        4         2          8
 Long delays                                                 6     10       10       21         3         13
 Extra consultant cost                                       2      3        5       11         1          4
 No answer                                                   8     13        6       13         7         29
   Total Respondents                                        61    100       47      100        24        100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

16.     How have ADB's Safeguard Procedures (assessments and plans) improved your
project, or components or sub-projects?

                                                          Environment        Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                            Resettlement          Peoples
                                                            N      %          N        %         N        %
 No real improvement in project                             2      3          3        6         2       8
 Improved only SOME components/ sub-projects              33      54        24       51          6      25
 Improved ALL components/sub-projects                     14      23        10       21          6      25
 Do not know                                                1      2          2        4         2       8
 Not applicable                                             1      2          1        2         2       8
 No answer                                                10      16          7      15          6      25
   Total Respondents                                      61     100        47      100        24      100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

17. For those projects where the safeguard procedures improved the project, can you specify
the type of improvement?

                                                           Environment        Involuntary        Indigenous
                                                                             Resettlement          Peoples
                                                            N        %         N        %         N        %
 Improved project design                                 20         33         8       17         3       13
 More due diligence/transparency                         17         28       13        28         9       38
 More experience in EA                                   29         48       22        47         9       38
 Environment/APs suffer less than otherwise              26         43       19        40         8       33
 Demonstration effect beyond project                       3         5         6       13         4       17
 Other improvements                                        2         3         2        4         2        8
 No answer                                               11         18         5       11         6       25
   Total Respondents                                     61        100       47      100        24       100
AP = affected person, EA = executing agency, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.
126     Appendix 15



18.    If delays in implementation of your project(s) had to do with safeguard issues (EMPs,
RPs, IPDP, etc.) what were main factors?

                                                          Environment      Involuntary       Indigenous
                                                                          Resettlement         Peoples
                                                             N     %        N       %         N       %
 Never any delays/no experience                             22    36       9       19        8       33
 Problems with (hiring of) consultants underestimated        2     3       1        2        0        0
 Consultation processes difficult to manage                  3     5      11       23        2        8
 EA country system different (more time needed)             12    20      20       43        4       17
 New EA management differs in views                          1     2       1        2        1        4
 Issues misdiagnosed during preparation                      2     3       3        6        1        4
 ADB processes/internal disagreements                        1     2       5       11        1        4
 No answer                                                  16    26       8       17        8       33
 Total Respondents                                          61   100      47      100       24     100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

19.    What are incremental costs incurred as a result of applying the ADB safeguards beyond
requirements of your country or agency system?

                                                          Environment    Involuntary      Indigenous
                                                                        Resettlement        Peoples
                                                          N     %         N       %        N       %
 Have not added to cost of project for country           27   44      11         23      13       54
 Have added 1%­3% to cost of project for country          8   13        9        19       2        8
 Have added 4%­10% to cost of project for country         6   10        5        11       1        4
 Have added more than 10% to cost of project for country  1     2       4         9       1        4
 Do not know what was added to cost for country           3     5       7        15       1        4
 Usually add to project delays                            4     7       8        17       1        4
 Unusual amount of ADB time and mission cost              1     2       3         6       0        0
 Unusual amount of consultant cost PPTA                   0     0       4         9       0        0
 Do not know about cost for ADB                           5     8       5        11       1        4
 Unharmonized donor safeguards are confusing              2     3       2         4       0        0
 More inconsistent application of country system          2     3       4         9       1        4
 No answer                                               10   16        7        15       5       21
   Total Respondents                                     61  100      47        100      24      100
ADB = Asian Development Bank, N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6, PPTA = project
preparatory technical assistance,

20.     How effective have the Safeguards been in mitigating adverse impacts in the project?

                                                          Environment    Involuntary      Indigenous
                                                                        Resettlement        Peoples
                                                            N      %      N       %        N      %
 Not effective                                             2       3     1        2       2       8
 Limitedly effective                                       5       8     8      17        1       4
 Somewhat effective                                      19       31    16      34        1       4
 Very effective                                          23       38    14      30       10      42
 Do not know if effective                                  4       7     3        6       4      17
 No answer                                                 8      13     5      11        6      25
   Total Respondents                                     61      100    47     100       24     100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.
                                                                                          Appendix 15    127


21.    Have the Safeguard Policies been a major factor in ADB declining to fund parts of your
project?
                                                           Environment      Involuntary     Indigenous
                                                                           Resettlement       Peoples
                                                            N       %        N       %       N       %
 No                                                      31        51      21      45     12        50
 Sometimes                                                 4        7       5      11      0         0
 Yes                                                       9       15      10      21      2         8
 Do not know                                               5        8       6      13      3        13
 No answer                                               12        20       5      11      7        29
   Total Respondents                                     61       100      47     100     24       100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

22.      Have the ADB Safeguard issues been a major factor in your EA declining to pursue a
part of the loan available?
                                                           Environment      Involuntary    Indigenous
                                                                           Resettlement      Peoples
                                                            N       %        N       %      N      %
 No                                                      35        57      26      55      9      38
 Sometimes                                                 7       11       6      13      3      13
 Yes                                                       6       10       8      17      3      13
 Do not know                                               4        7       5      11      2       8
 Not applicable                                            1        2       0        0     0       0
 No answer                                                 8       13       2        4     7      29
   Total Respondents                                     61       100      47     100     24     100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.

23a.     What main differences, if any, have you had with ADB while administering projects with
significant resettlement issues?
                                                                Total
                                                             N        %
 Cost of RP preparation in sector projects                   8        17
 Cost of RP implementation                                  10        21
 Definition of encroachers/squatters                        14       30
 Treatment of encroachers/squatters                          7        15
 Extent of consultation process                               5       11
 Definition/level of compensation                           13       28
 Determination of rehabilitation program                     9        19
 No answer                                                    6       13
   Total Respondents                                        47
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6, RP = resettlement plan.

23b. Frequency of reported differences in administering projects with significant resettlement
issues:
                                                            N         %
 Reported more than one                                    17         36
 Reported only one                                         13         28
 Reported none                                             11         23
 No answer                                                   6        13
   Total Respondents                                       47        100
N = number of valid responses, as determined by question 6.
128      Appendix 15



     Box 1: SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS SUGGESTED BY EXECUTING AGENCIES IN THE
                                 QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY
                (SELECTION OF RESPONSES, FOCUSING ON DIVERSITY OF VIEWS)

A.       Change the Nature of the Resettlement Policy (9 responses)

         (i)      The definition of vulnerable families should be more closely linked with economic criteria. Presently,
                  (a) families below poverty line, (b) women headed families and (c) families having members with
                  physical or mental disability are considered as vulnerable and are offered income generation
                  assistance in addition to the compensation for the assets lost. Well-to-do families under (b) and (c)
                  do not really require assistance for income generation. One needs to therefore define a threshold
                  income above which the (b) and (c) will not be considered vulnerable. an income, two times the
                  poverty line, may be such a threshold. Thus all families below poverty line and families under (b)
                  and (c) but having income below two times the poverty line alone may be considered as vulnerable.
         (ii)     There is also a need to identify a threshold level of loss (may be loss of land below 5% of current
                  holdings) below which compensation for acquired assets at replacement value is considered
                  sufficient and family level survey and entitlements are not required. This is justified based on the
                  fact that if a family retains 95% of its landholdings, it benefits significantly due to project.
         (iii)    Guidelines should be flexible. There are many examples that only rich landlords get benefits from
                  rigid guidelines and entitlement matrix.
         (iv)     The definition of voluntary resettlement should be included in the ADB project documentation. In
                  this project there were many instances of voluntary as well as involuntary resettlement.
         (v)      ADB should finance the cost of compensation. Donors could come forward to address problems
                  relating to involuntary resettlements through extending grants.
         (vi)     Resettlement Plan (RP) should be included in TA or implemented before project implementation.
         (viii)   RPs should be implemented separately and should not be linked with implementation of main
                  scope which increases delays and?) interest payments, while EA/sponsor is deprived of the
                  benefits during the period of the delay.
         (ix)     Explicit stipulation of the safeguard policies in the loan agreement such that any
                  amendments/changes will not affect project implementation. Implementation of IR policies shall not
                  in any way hamper progress of civil works (main component of the project).
         (x)      ADB policies should consider the difficulties in practice and make adjustments in part of working
                  process on the premise of being complied with ADB policies on the whole.
         (xi)     [Resettlement safeguards are] time consuming and cost of the project also rises.

B.        Harmonize Country Policy with ADB policy (8 responses)

         (i)      ADB policies should be adjusted to be more similar to local policies.
         (ii)     ADB and Government need to interact more to ensure suitable regulations which are acceptable to
                  investors.

C.       More Attention For and Flexibility in Implementation (9 responses)

         (i)      ADB documents are too general and should be made more specific in keeping with the personnel
                  at the Bank who actually do the work, review reports, etc.
         (ii)     Better coordination of review process within ADB HQ and more timely submission of comments.
                  Comments should be collated and submitted as ADB comments at one time, not as individual's
                  comments in a piece-meal manner.
         (iii)    Mission teams change too much in their composition. The Environment and R&R (Social) experts
                  should be maintained at least up to the loan signing time to avoid delays.
         (iv)     Resettlement planning should be completed before loan effectivity. It should be agreed by the
                  institution responsible.
          (v)     ADB's requirement regarding submission of the independent monitoring reports on semi-annual
                  basis is excessive. The reports should be submitted on annual basis in the first two years and the
                  final report should be submitted after project completion. Three reports should be submitted to ADB
                  during project implementation.
         (vi)     ADB country office should take responsibility for RPs in order to save time for approval process as
                  well as sustainable supervision of RP implementation.
                                                                                       Appendix 15     129


D.    Increase capacity building efforts for better project implementation (6 responses)

     (i)     Translation of the Policy into Vietnamese, Chinese (3)
     (ii)    Consultant Resettlement should be appointed
     (iii)   Effective enforcement of government policies and regulation to avoid political interference and
             irregularities.
     (iv)    More training and more consultant time is needed to complete RP process
130       Appendix 16



              REVIEW OF COUNTRY SYSTEMS ON INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT

A.        India

1.      In matters of project driven involuntary resettlement of people, India used to have no
policy but relied on the Land Acquisition Act (LAA) of 1894 (amended in 1984), and the National
Highways Act 1957 which cuts some corners of the LAA. The LAA lays down the procedures for
expropriating and compensating land owners and the amendment improved public disclosure of
decisions. However, it does not directly deal with resettlement and rehabilitation of affected
persons (APs), informal dwellers, tribal lands or land donation issues. Therefore it can not
provide the basis for enforcing compliance with many aspects of ADB's Involuntary
Resettlement (IR) Policy. The lack of legal provisions applicable to resettlement operations
means that state and local governments and important public organizations were at liberty to
apply their own systems for a long time.

2.     In February 2004 this changed to some extent, when the Government of India approved
a policy on involuntary resettlement. The National Policy for Resettlement and Rehabilitation
(NPRR) constitutes a big step towards equivalence with ADB's IR Policy standards. This is
shown by the following specifications: (i) the cost of resettlement and entitlements are to be
made part of the project cost; (ii) consent award for compensation of land is allowed (this means
APs can in principle participate in the land valuation process and that the consent of landowner
is essential to finalize the award); (iii) some measure of rehabilitation assistance is to be
provided to APs; (iv) assistance needs to be provided to vulnerable groups like Below Poverty
Line Marginal Farmers, Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes (although it is unclear whether
squatters are included); (v) tribal land issues are to be dealt with separately; and (vi) assistance
needs to be provided to laborers losing livelihood as a result of the project.

3.        However, a detailed comparison between the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the
NPPR and other relevant legislation (Supplementary Appendix B) also shows continuing
divergence. Some main substantive aspects in which the two policies are still far apart are:
(i) the thresholds for the application of the policies are very different (ADB: one AP or more;
NPRR: over 500 AP families displaced in plains and 250 in hills); (ii) the policy seems to be
intended mainly for major infrastructural works like dams (only one brief paragraph addresses
the complexities of linear projects like roads); (iii) no assistance is specified for encroachers and
squatters that need to be moved;1 (iv) the Policy does not discuss replacement value for land,
structures and other assets lost; (v) no provision is made for addressing loss of common
property resources; and (vi) there is little guidance on how to deal with voluntary contribution of
land and structures in cases that projects profess to rely on such donations. It needs to be
emphasized that NPPR is currently under revision ahead of its intended formal enactment. Until
it is fully enacted, it cannot be enforced in India's courts.

4.     Whereas in the above paragraph the focus was on substantive policy elements,
Table A16.1 below summarizes the level of procedural equivalence.




1
    Given a number of recent court decisions in India, it is unlikely that squatters will be given rights to claim either
    compensation or any assistance; a situation that does not imply that assistance may not be given by the
    Government out of policy considerations.
                                                                                            Appendix 16     131


    Table A16: Key Similarities and Differences Between NPRR India and ADB Policy
ADB Policy                                                NPRR
Provide government with technically           Not Equivalent. Not mentioned.
and economically feasible resettlement
alternatives.
Ensure that the displaced persons are         Equivalent. Also discussed in NPRR: Declaration of Affected
informed in time about their options and      Zone- by notification in the Official Gazette; affixation of copy of
rights pertaining to resettlement. No         the notification on-the Notice-Board of the concerned Gram
special period of notification is provided.   Panchayats and other prominent place or places in the affected
                                              zone; publication of the draft scheme / plan in the Official Gazette
                                              to give wide publicity to the same in the affected zone. No
                                              threshold period is indicated.
Consult APs and offer choices.                Not equivalent. Not mentioned.
Prompt and effective compensation at          Equivalent in case AP loses all his land and is displaced.
full replacement cost for losses of           APs will receive land if all land is lost and the APs have become
assets.                                       displaced by the project. Not equivalent if this is not the case.
Provide equivalent productive assets for      In that case, compensation will be paid at a rate negotiated
the loss of residential house,                between the owner and acquiring body (consent award) through
agricultural land etc.                        the provision of the Land Acquisition Act. This Act bases
Cash compensation level should be             compensation on the average of registered land transactions in
sufficient to replace the lost land and       the past 3 years in the surroundings. This is however usually
assets at full replacement cost in local      underreported in the deeds, for tax reasons.
markets.                                      The AP may be allotted house site to the extent of actual loss of
                                              area of the acquired house.
                                              Each PAF owning agriculture land in the affected zone and who
                                              consequently becomes a small farmer shall get one time financial
                                              assistance equivalent to 375 days minimum agricultural wages.

Provide support for the transition period:    Equivalent. Each displaced Project Affected Family shall get a
(i) relocation and transfer expenses;         monthly subsistence allowance equivalent to 20 days of minimum
(ii) assistance for transitional income       agricultural wages per month for a period of 1 year up to 250
and livelihood support.                       days.
Provide assistance and allowances for         Not entirely equivalent. It is only mentioned that (i) Project
rehabilitation: (i) compensation for crop     Affected Families shall be provided necessary training facilities
or business losses; (ii) reestablishment      for development of entrepreneurship to take up self-employment
of agricultural or business production;       projects at the resettlement zone; (ii) Rural artisan/small trader
(iii) assistance for income restoration;      and self employed person shall get one-time financial assistance
and (iv) assistance for restoring social      for construction of working shed/shop. Other types of assistance
services, social capital, community           are not specified, such as microcredit or other assistance to
property, and resources.                      reestablish production, or assistance for restoring social services.
Preference should be given to land             Only for project displaced persons.
based resettlement strategies for
displaced persons whose livelihoods
are land-based.
Eligibility of Benefits include the APs       Not equivalent. No mention of this in NPRR.
who have customary and traditional
land rights recognised under the law.
APs who do not have formal legal rights       Not equivalent. NPRR No mention of squatters and
to land at the time of census but have a      encroachers. However, share croppers, tenants, agricultural
claim to such land or assets and the          labourers are recognized as APs.
APs who have no recognisable legal
right to the land they are occupying.
Particular attention will be paid to the      Equivalent. Each Tribal affected family shall get additional
needs of vulnerable groups among              financial assistance equivalent to 500 days minimum agriculture
those displaced, especially those below       wages for loss of customary rights/usages of forest produce.
  132       Appendix 16



 ADB Policy                                                                   NPRR
 the poverty line, landless,                   Each PAF of BPL category shall get a one-time financial
 elderly,women and children, ethnic            assistance for house construction.
 minorities etc.
 The displaced persons and their               Equivalent. A monitoring cell will be formed. Grievance
 communities will be provided timely and       committee would be formed with representation of women,
 relevant information, consulted on            Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribe.
 resettlement options, and offered
 opportunities to participate in planning,
 implementing, and monitoring
 resettlement.
 Appropriate grievance mechanisms are
 established for these groups.
ADB = Asian Development Bank, AP = affected person, NPRR = National Policy for Resettlement and Rehabilitation.

  5.      The Government of India is well aware of the need to improve resettlement and
  rehabilitation practices in the country. Its approach paper to the 11th Five Year Plan deems this
  important enough to merit the following paragraph.2

            "Our practices regarding rehabilitation of those displaced from their land because of
            development projects are seriously deficient and are responsible for a growing perception
            of exclusion and marginalisation. The costs of displacement borne by our tribal
            population have been unduly high, and compensation has been tardy and inadequate,
            leading to serious unrest in many tribal regions. This discontent is likely to grow
            exponentially if the benefits from enforced land acquisition are seen accruing to private
            interests, or even to the state, at the cost of those displaced. To prevent even greater
            conflict, and threat to peace and development, it is necessary to frame a transparent set
            of policy rules that address compensation, and make the affected persons beneficiaries
            of the projects, and to give these rules a legal format in terms of the rights of the
            displaced. In addition to those displaced by development projects, those displaced by
            social upheavals should also be properly resettled."

  6.      On this basis, ADB should be able to work out a practical agreement regarding the use
  of India's country system, complemented by specific ADB safeguards and assistance packages
  for vulnerable APs.

  B.        People's Republic of China

  7.      Land in PRC is owned either by the State (all land in cities, and much `wasteland'
  elsewhere) or by collectives (agricultural land in rural areas). One law and two regulations have
  governed compulsory land acquisition and involuntary resettlement: (i) the Land Administration
  Law of 1998, which includes land compensation and involuntary resettlement subsidy3 issues
  and which deals mainly with rural farm land owned by collectives, (ii) the Water/Hydro Power
  Resettlement Regulation of 1991, and (iii) the Regulations for the Management of Urban
  Residential Demolition and Eviction (1991, implemented from November 2001), applying to
  resettlement in towns/cities in the context of public works, where all land is owned by the state.

  8.     As far as the Land Administration Law is concerned, in 2004, the convergence of PRC's
  country system with ADB's resettlement policy improved, as the upper limits of the

  2
      Planning Commission, Government of India. (2006). Towards Faster and More Inclusive Growth. An Approach to
            th
      the 11 Five Year Plan. June 14, 2006. Delhi.
  3
      This actually refers to a rehabilitation subsidy; all those affected by land acquisition are entitled to it.
                                                                                                    Appendix 16       133


compensation levels for rural land were reset to a maximum which is theoretically equivalent to
replacement value of land (30 times the average annual output value (AAOV) of the land;
contracts in collectives are for 30 years).4 PRC has also made progress with regulation as to
APs' right to due process. The Ministry of Land and Resources promulgated new Regulations
on Land and Resources Hearings in 2004, which require the land expropriating agencies to
inform affected farmers of their right to a hearing on compensation standards and the
resettlement package. Such a hearing must be held if requested within five days after the
parties are informed. Document No. 28, also approved October 2004, takes this further and
states that before the expropriation is submitted for approval, its purposes, location,
compensation standard and resettlement and rehabilitation measures should be made known to
farmers whose land is to be taken, and the results of the survey on the existing situation of the
land proposed to be taken should be confirmed by the rural collective and farmer households.
Continuing divergence with ADB policy is perhaps most visible in the absence of standards
regarding compensation for structures, permanent and annual crops, and the organization of
grievance redress. PRC does not as such offer entitlements for vulnerable affected people in
the sense of the ADB Policy, but provides a somewhat higher resettlement (rehabilitation)
subsidy to rural people with minimal access to land (see next paragraph). A better system may
be to delink the resettlement subsidy completely from the land size criterion and replace it by a
vulnerability criterion. PRC does not use restoration of livelihood as a guiding principle. In fact,
PRC does not adhere to ADB's principle of addressing resettlement and rehabilitation as part of
the project, which implies that it should be preferably completed by the end of the project; PRC
projects compensate and relocate APs during the project, but the Government is broadly
responsible for providing certain safety nets to ensure people's livelihoods afterwards. The
Ministry of Land and Resources is currently reviewing the land compensation system, aided by
World Bank technical assistance, in order to systematize and unify this.

9.      Compensation rates for expropriation of arable land in PRC have improved steadily in
the past few years; even in remote areas, they are routinely equivalent to between $15,000 and
$50,000 per hectare of arable land. Around urban areas these values can be doubled easily.
Almost always, cash compensation is relied on; this is also almost invariably favored by the
farmers who lose their land.5 Apart from land compensation and resettlement subsidy, the law
provides for compensation for temporary use of land and loss of young crops. The approach is
entitlement based: if the budget initially approved by MOF and the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC) for land compensation and resettlement is not sufficient, then local
governments who administer this will need to request NDRC for more budget, and request the


4
    It could well be argued that 30xAAOV exceeds by far the replacement value, as AAOV is a gross output value,
    from which the farmers labor and other costs are not deducted.
5
    From 1999 onwards, compensation for farm land lost has been calculated at between 6 and 10 times its AAOV, in
    accordance with the size of the land contract that the affected farmer has as a member of the rural collective. If the
    farmer has a contract for more than 0.5 mu (1 mu = 1/15th ha) per member of his household, then he (she) is
    entitled to 6x AAOV in cash compensation plus 4xAAOV "resettlement" (=rehabilitation) subsidy in the case of
    compulsory land acquisition, or to replacement land of comparable size and quality (but the latter is rarely
    available). If the land holding is between 0.3 and 0.5 mu, the entitlement is (8+5)x AAOV; if smaller than 0.3 mu,
    then the compensation is (10+6)xAAOV. Actual compensation provided can however be influenced by
    (i) compromises between administrative areas with different practices and different standards for land qualities
    and/or AOVs, (ii) provincial budgets, and (iii) interpretations by local governments regarding the applicability of the
    latest nationally approved compensation standards, when certain divergent standards for compensation have been
    enshrined in project agreements. ADB supported RP entitlement matrices may also play a role in the divergence
    from the norms. Over the years, compensation and resettlement subsidies have experienced an upward trend of
    the upper limits prescribed by the law; in October 2004, they went from 16xAOV to 30xAOV (unfortunately, the
    lower limits often used in practice did not rise). Currently, national standards for different classes of land and crop
    yields may be set that do not vary by province or sector, such as has been the case so far.
134       Appendix 16



EA to certify this. Auditors involved in determining project acceptance at the time of project
completion need to assess whether the budget was appropriately spent.

10.     The other two regulations, one for dams and one for urban demolition have upheld more
conservative compensation rates and have been more controversial for this reason, but are
currently under revision. For urban dwellers who need to be displaced, rehabilitation assistance
can be provided but not in cash and not in the context of the project causing the displacement;
actual programs of rehabilitation are not mandated but are contingent upon local government
interest and budgets available. The Water / Hydro Power Regulation is also under review. This
policy relies on post-resettlement plans for the rehabilitation of dam reservoir displaced persons.
The plans are not very much regulated and in practice this leads to variable rehabilitation efforts
of the local authorities. In some cases, many inventive measures have been tried by caring local
governments. In some projects, farmers losing land were offered an option to obtain town
registration, a benefit that used to be highly valued, due to the advantages it provides the family
in respect of work permits and opportunities, education for children and other social security
benefits. (However, these advantages are now valued substantially less, as peri-urban land
values continue to rise, while urban unemployment rises.)

C.        Viet Nam

11.     Legislation concerning compulsory land acquisition has undergone a great deal of
change in Viet Nam since the approval of the Land Law in December 2003. Like in PRC, all land
belongs to the State, but occupiers have been receiving Land Use Right Certificates issued by
Peoples Committees of Provinces or Districts in the last decade. The administration of the Land
Law and the granting of Land Use Rights is the responsibility of the Ministry of Natural
Resources and Environment (MoNRE). Currently, approximately 70% of homestead and
agricultural land in rural areas has been granted Land Use Rights (on 20-50 year basis
depending on the approved use of the land), and around 50% of urban land. The original
provisions relating to the recovery of land and compulsory acquisition of property attached to
land by the State were contained in the Land Law and Decree 22/1998/ND-CP which elaborated
the system of compensation, resettlement and assistance. In 2001, the Vietnamese
Government accepted an ADB TA,6 to help a drafting board chaired by the MoF to draft a new
decree on compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation assistance. Because at a later stage
the Government decided to completely review the Land Law 1993 and pass a replacement Land
Law (taking effect in July 2004), the TA was completed only in 2006. By then it had however
had a significant effect on highlighting resettlement issues in the new land law and in a set of
new decrees.7

12.    The combined result of the new Land Law and its various subordinate decrees is that
Vietnamese standards of compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation assistance have been
raised significantly and have become more compatible with the relevant policies of the ADB,
World Bank and other international donor agencies. The decrees require that a census of APs is
held, socioeconomic effects assessed, and a Compensation, Resettlement and Rehabilitation
Assistance Plan prepared. Compensation must be provided for loss of land, crops and trees as
well as buildings and other structures attached to recovered land. Decree 197 establishes for

6
    TA 3727-VIE: Enhancing the Legal and Regulatory Framework for Compensation, Resettlement and Rehabilitation
    Assistance in Viet Nam, for $310,000, approved 24 September 2001.
7
    The new Decree 197/2004/ND-CP on compensation, resettlement and assistance which replaced Decree 22 was
    accompanied by a new Decree 181/2004/ND-CP on the implementation of the Land Law and Decree
    188/2004/ND-CP on valuation of land use rights and price frame. These decrees were later supplemented by
    Decree 17/2006/ND-CP issued in February 2006.
                                                                                 Appendix 16    135


the first time that the focus of compensation is placed on the actual value of the land recovered
(in the disguise of the value of owning land use rights) and not the arbitrary and artificial price
shown in the official price frames issued by the central Government. If implemented as
intended, APs should be compensated and assisted to at least the standard that they
experienced before the land was recovered.

13.     Even in spite of this convergence, there is still some significant divergence with the ADB
policy: (i) the objective of minimization of involuntary resettlement is not addressed by the Land
Law (it is part of the project planning and development process); (ii) the approval of the
compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation assistance plan does not need to be given before
the approval of a project; (iii) the decrees still permit the use of frame prices set by Provincial
People's Committees (frame prices have been notoriously inaccurate in both urban and rural
areas, but now they have to incorporate market prices and are getting closer to actual market
values in the last two years); (iv) some squatters are not compensated for loss of access to
land, depending on the length and nature of their occupancy, while they get compensation only
for structures if these are built in areas with no land use plans or if they were built after such
plans with official permission, (v) assistance needs to be given to vulnerable APs but the actual
amounts, within the maxima set by Decree 197 or its implementing circular 116, are decided by
the Chairman of the local People's Committee with no prescribed objective criteria; (vi) there are
no requirements for public consultation before the notification of the project, (vii) obligations on
public disclosure are less demanding (20 days before scheme approval) than those in ADB and
WB policies, and (viii) there is no requirement for independent external monitoring or evaluation.
It can be concluded that there is still some distance to go before there can be full alignment
between ADB/World Bank and country systems.

14.      In practice, the good legal progress is compromised by the lack of capacity and
ingrained bureaucratic attitudes of many Government officials mainly in provinces, districts and
communes. As there is no prescribed template or standard form for the plans they are
frequently different between different provinces and projects. Sometimes the plans follow the
ADB or WB models but at other times a very much diluted amalgam of such models is followed.
This is the a consequence of having devolved the authority for compensation, resettlement and
rehabilitation assistance to provinces and major cities with little oversight from the central
Government other than for very large projects or projects overlapping two or more provinces.
The experience to date seems to be that, in the few provinces and cities with significantly higher
levels of capacity among officials, the standard of such plans closely approximate the format
and standard of plans that are required by the ADB and the WB for projects that they are
financing. In other cases compensation, resettlement and assistance plans are of more inferior
quality.

D.     Philippines

15.     The Government of the Philippines as of yet does not have a specific law which
comprehensively addresses the complex issues of involuntary resettlement. There are laws
which provide a part of the legal framework for addressing such issues. Apart from the
Philippine Constitution of 1987 which lays the basis, there is RA 7279 of 1992, otherwise known
as the Urban Development and Housing Act, and lastly the Republic Act 8974 of 2000, also
named the Act on the Acquisition of Right of Way, Site or Location of Government Infrastructure
Projects. The Philippine Constitution guarantees payment of just compensation for private
property taken for government use. The Urban and Housing Act defines the procedures for the
relocation of illegal settlers in urban areas. RA 8974 sets the system for land acquisition and
defines the procedures and valuation methods to be used.
136    Appendix 16



16.      RA 8974 prescribes that land acquisition shall be done in three ways: (i) by donation,
(ii) by negotiation; and (iii) by expropriation. The act stipulates that the first option to be
considered is by donation. Property owners shall be asked to donate the land needed for the
government infrastructure projects. This is commonly done when the land needed is not sizable
as in the case of irrigation canals or a few square meters for drainage and road improvements;
and/or in situations where the private owners stand to benefit from the government project as in
the case of irrigation or road access. If the private owners refuse the request for donation, the
act prescribes that the government initiates negotiation with the private owners. The
government shall initially offer the zonal value of the needed property as determined by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue. This zonal value is usually lower than the fair market value and is
based on values identified by real estate brokers and developers. If this is not acceptable to the
property owners, the governments continue the negotiation to determine the fair market value of
the property. The Act defines fair market value as the value which will allow the property owner
to acquire similarly situated land of approximate size. The fair market value laid down by the Act
is essentially equivalent to the cost of replacement of the land. If the negotiation fails, the
government initiates expropriation by filing an expropriation case in court with a mandate to pay
the property owner the value of the property based on zonal valuation of the Bureau of Internal
Revenue. If the owner refuses to accept the offer, the court shall decide within 60 days the just
compensation of the property based on conditions defined in the Act. These conditions include:
(i) the classification and use for which the property is suited based on the approved land use
and zoning ordinance of the municipality or city concerned; (ii) the development costs for
improving the land; (iii) the value declared by the property owners as shown in their latest Tax
Declaration Certificates or Sworn Statements; (iv) the current market selling price of similar
properties in the vicinity based on the records on Deeds of Sale in the Office of the Register of
Deeds concerned; (v) the reasonable disturbance compensation for the removal and or
demolition of certain improvements on the land and for the value of improvements thereon;
(vi) the size, shape or location, tax declaration and zonal valuation of the land; (vii) the price of
the property as manifested in the ocular findings, oral as well as documentary evidence
presented; and (viii) such facts and events as to enable the affected property owners to have
sufficient funds to acquire similarly situated lands whose areas and values approximate those
required from them by government which will enable the property owners to rehabilitate
themselves as early as possible. The government shall then pay the property owners the
difference between the amount already paid and the compensation value defined by the court.
The Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 8974 stipulate that the replacement cost
method shall be used for determining the value of improvements and structures on the land and
the IRR defines this as the amount necessary to replace the improvements and structures
based on the current market prices for materials, equipment, labor, contractor's profit and
overhead and all other attendant costs associated with the acquisition and installation in place
of the affected improvements and structures.

17.      RA 7279 or the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992 prohibits the demolition or
eviction of illegal settlements unless resettlement sites acceptable to the relocatees are
available. The Act requires that basic services such as infrastructure, utilities and social
services; and employment opportunities shall be provided in the resettlement sites. The
Implementing Rules of the Act defines the procedures and guidelines for relocation including
identification of resettlement sites; census and tagging operations; consultation process;
preparation and development of resettlement sites; dismantling of structures; relocation and
post resettlement operations.

18.   Another legal basis for compensation is Executive Order (EO) 1035 (1985) which
preceded RA 8974. EO 1035 prescribes the procedures and guidelines for the expeditious
                                                                                  Appendix 16    137


acquisition by the government of private real properties for government infrastructure projects. It
defines the compensation of agricultural crops affected by government right-of-way, site or
location of government infrastructure projects. This includes the payment of financial assistance
to displaced tenants, cultural minorities and settlers equivalent to the average annual gross
harvest for the last three years but not less than P15,000 per hectare; and disturbance
compensation to agricultural lessees equivalent to five times the average gross harvest during
the last three years. Trees are valued based on the current market value determined by the
Office of the Assessors of the concerned municipality or city.

19.      As mentioned, the legal framework for involuntary resettlement in the Philippines is
constrained by the lack of a law which specifically addresses involuntary resettlement. Thus
compensation based on replacement cost is limited only to the payment for land and structures;
and agricultural crops affected by government projects. These are the areas where Philippine
laws and the ADB policy converge. The Urban Development and Housing Act only covers urban
illegal settlers, although for them it prescribes the provision of resettlement sites, basic services
and employment opportunities for relocatees; and requires full consultation and the involvement
of affected families/persons in site selection and design.

20.     To converge with ADB's policy, the Philippine legal framework would need to be
expanded to include a specific and comprehensive law which will govern involuntary
resettlement in both urban and rural areas. Existing laws do not order the payment of relocation
and transfer expenses; assistance for transition and livelihood support; special assistance to
vulnerable people, reestablishment of agricultural and business production; assistance for
income restoration and restoring social services, social capital, community property and
resources (though this is partly covered by the Urban Development and Housing Act).

21.      Although illegal settlers have no right to compensation for lost access to land occupied
by them, some government agencies have devised ways to help illegal settlers to such access
by providing relocation sites at affordable, almost giveaway, rent or price. With the assistance of
ADB, affected families in the Southern Philippines Irrigation Sector Project, relocated to a
resettlement site received free core housing, a truck to service the community; and land at 25%
of the price paid by government to purchase this land. Resettled non-titleholder families in the
Sixth Road Project were given replacement land at giveway prices. Although illegal settlers
relocated from the Pasig River were not compensated for land and structures, they were
provided housing units with very low amortization and deferred payment for several years. In
spite of the limitations of existing laws governing involuntary resettlement, government agencies
have been able to provide a wider range of benefits than prescribed by existing laws, in
compliance with the requirements of ADB Policy. In the three projects evaluated in the
Philippines, the entitlement packages defined in the RPs provided for a wide range of
entitlements including relocation and transfer expenses; some amount for transition expenses in
the form of food allowance and transportation subsidy (Pasig, Sixth Road and the Southern
Philippines Irrigation); disturbance allowance of P10,000 per family (Sixth Road); compensation
for income loss based on latest tax record (Sixth Road); rental subsidy (Pasig and Sixth Road);
rehabilitation assistance of P15,000 per family (Sixth Road); compensation to cover cost of
reconnecting facilities such as water, power and telephone (Pasig and the Southern Philippines
Irrigation project); and livelihood support through training programs and micro credit (Pasig,
Sixth Road and the Southern Philippines Irrigation project).
         138      Appendix 17



             TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE REGARDING LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT
                                        SINCE 1994

             Table A17.1: Asian Development Bank Technical Assistance Related to Indigenous
                              Peoples or Involuntary Resettlement, 1967­2005
                                         IP and IR                    IPb                       IR                      Total
                                             Amount                    Amount                    Amount                  Amount
                                     No.      ($)a            No.         ($)a          No.        ($)a           No.      ($)a
By Type
Advisory TA                            2     1,300,000          12     6,399,300          19     4,747,400         33   12,446,700
Project Preparatory TA                 1       150,000           6     3,500,000           3       550,000         10    4,200,000
Regional TA                            0             0          11     6,800,000           4     1,936,000         15    8,736,000
Total                                  3     1,450,000          29    16,699,300          26     5,652,000         58   25,382,700
By Sector
Agriculture and Natural
Resources                              0              0         10     6,824,300           4     1,425,000         14     8,249,300
Education                              0              0          6     3,475,000           0             0          6     3,475,000
Energy                                 0              0          1       150,000           0             0          1       150,000
Health, Nutrition, and Social
Protection                             1       800,000           7     3,500,000          14     3,902,000         22     8,202,000
Law, Economic Management
and Public Policy                      0             0           1       550,000           2       931,400          3    1,481,400
Multisector                            0             0           3     2,050,000           0             0          3    2,050,000
Transport and Communications           2       650,000           1       150,000           6       975,000          9    1,775,000
 Total                                 3     1,450,000          29    16,699,300          26     5,652,000         58   25,382,700
By Country
Afghanistan                            0             0           1       850,000           0             0          1       850,000
Bangladesh                             1       500,000           0             0           3       560,000          4     1,060,000
Cambodia                               0             0           1       600,000           2       550,000          3     1,150,000
China, People's Republic of            0             0           4     2,100,000           3     1,831,400          7     3,931,400
India                                  1       800,000           1       150,000           1       150,000          3     1,100,000
Indonesia                              1       150,000           0             0           3       690,000          4       840,000
Lao People's Democratic
Republic                               0             0           5     2,974,300           0             0          5    2,974,300
Nepal                                  0             0           1       200,000           1       150,000          2      350,000
Pakistan                               0             0           0             0           2       250,000          2      250,000
Philippines                            0             0           1       375,000           1       100,000          2      475,000
Sri Lanka                              0             0           0             0           4       556,000          4      556,000
Viet Nam                               0             0           4     2,650,000           2       460,000          6    3,110,000
Regional                               0             0          11     6,800,000           4     1,936,000         15    8,736,000
Total                                  3     1,450,000          29    16,699,300          26     5,652,000         58   25,382,700
ADB = Asian Development Bank, IP = indigenous peoples, IR = involuntary resettlement, No. = number, TA = technical assistance.
a
  Total of ADB amount, Japan Special Fund, and other sources of funds.
b
  TA amounts may be entirely or only partly devoted to IP issues.
Source: ADB TA database.
                                                                                            Appendix 17     139


       Table A17.2: Technical Assistance Related to Involuntary Resettlement (IR), 1994­2005a
 DMC                                    TA Name                                      TA        Total        Date
                                                                                    Type                  Approved
 BAN    Support to the Roads and Highways Department for Safeguard Policy
        Compliance                                                                   AD       500,000     23-Nov-04
 IND    Capacity Building for Social Development                                     AD       800,000     23-Dec-99
 INO    Social Development for the Interisland Transport Development                 PP       150,000     09-Nov-04
 BAN    Enhancing Capacity of Infrastructure Agencies in Management of
        Involuntary Resettlement                                                     AD       150,000     28-Nov-02
 BAN    Development of a National Involuntary Resettlement Policy                    AD       350,000     21-Dec-04
 BAN    Independent Review Panel for the Environmental and Resettlement
        Aspects of the Jamuna Bridge                                                 AD        60,000     26-Jun-96
 CAM    Enhancing the Resettlement Legal Framework and Capacity Building             AD       400,000     18-Dec-04
 CAM    Resettlement Study and Social Impact Assessment for the GMS
        Cambodia Road Improvement Project                                            PP       150,000     11-Apr-02
 IND    Resettlement and Environmental Assessment for the West Bengal
        Corridor Development Project                                                 PP       150,000     13-Nov-00
 INO    Capacity Building in Resettlement Management                                 AD       325,000     07-Nov-96
 INO    Land Acquisition and Resettlement Program for the Proposed North
        Java Road Improvement                                                        AD       100,000     24-Nov-94
 INO    Capacity Building for Resettlement Management in Road Projects               AD       265,000     27-Dec-94
 NEP    Preparation of National Resettlement Policy Framework                        AD       150,000     28-Oct-04
 PAK    Rural Livelihood Enhancement Through Participatory Resettlement in
        Irrigation Development                                                       AD       150,000     13-Jun-03
 PAK    Social Impact Analysis and Resettlement Planning                             AD       100,000     03-Jul-01
 PHI    Capacity Building for Resettlement Management in Development
        Projects                                                                     AD       100,000     12-Dec-95
 PRC    Strengthening the Involuntary Resettlement Practices in the Yichang-
        Wanzhou Railway Project                                                      PP       250,000     11-Nov-02
 REG    Review of National Resettlement Policies a d Experience with
        Involuntary Resettlement Projects                                           REG       831,000     10-Mar-98
 REG    Regional Workshop on Involuntary Resettlement                               REG       105,000     08-Apr-98
 REG    National Resettlement Policy Enhancement and Capacity Building              REG       500,000     20-Sep-00
 REG    Capacity Building for Resettlement Risk Management                          REG       500,000     19-Dec-02
 SRI    National Policy on Involuntary Resettlement                                  AD       250,000     27-Aug-99
 SRI    Support to Transport Sector for Resettlement Capacity Building               AD        56,000     07-Aug-01
 SRI    Capacity Building for the National Policy on Involuntary Resettlement        AD       150,000     11-Dec-01
 SRI    Implementing the National Involuntary Resettlement Policy                    AD       100,000     15-Dec-03
 VIE    Strengthening of Resettlement Management Capacity in the Ministry of
        Agriculture and Rural Development                                            AD       150,000     04-Sep-98
 VIE    Enhancing the Resettlement Legal Framework and Institutional
        Capacity                                                                     AD       310,000 24-Sep-01
 PRC    Capacity Building for Social Assessments                                     AD       781,400 18-May-00
 PRC    Capacity Building for Natural Resources Legislation                          AD       800,000 24-Dec-96
 VIE    Strengthening the Capacity of Local Stakeholders for Implementation of
        Son La Livelihood and Resettlement Plan                                      AD     1,000,000     14-Nov-05
 SRI    Independent External Monitoring of Resettlement Activities of the
        Southern Transport Development                                               AD       336,000     19-Dec-05
AD = advisory, ADB = Asian Development Bank, AFG = Afghanistan, BAN = Bangladesh, CAM = Cambodia, IND = India,
INO = Indonesia, IP = indigenous peoples, LAO = Lao People's Democratic Republic, NEP = Nepal, OED = Operations
Evaluation Department, PAK = Pakistan, PHI = Philippines, PP = project preparatory, PRC = People's Republic of China,
REG = Regional, SRI = Sri Lanka, TA = technical assistance, VIE = Viet Nam.
a
  Selection of TA on IR based on rapid assessment by OED of TA papers. Selection of TA on IP based on information from
  ADB's IP website in combination with rapid assessment by OED of TA papers.
Sources: ADB TA database and ADB website. Available: www.adb.org.
140       Appendix 18



                      ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
                              ON INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT

1.     TA 5781-REG: Review of National Resettlement Policies and Experience with
Involuntary Resettlement Projects addressed policy requirements in seven selected
developing member countries (DMCs): Bangladesh, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines,
People's Republic of China (PRC), and Viet Nam. The technical assistance (TA) developed
National Resettlement Action Plans (NRAPs). These NRAPs recognized that, while ADB's
Involuntary Resettlement (IR) Policy sets broad principles to minimize displacement, and restore
incomes for affected persons (APs), these principles are implemented in projects through the
DMCs' frameworks for land acquisition. While the legal basis for land acquisition and
compensation in South Asian countries has been long established, many DMCs in East and
Southeast Asia have land laws that were only recently developed. Most DMCs at the time
lacked comprehensive national standards for involuntary resettlement. The NRAPs therefore
contained recommendations to enhance national policy standards, enact the policy principles
through the legal frameworks, develop appropriate institutional structures, and build capacity for
implementation.1 ADB's TA completion report (the TCR) rated the TA as highly successful. It
was also strongly endorsed by the Operations Evaluation Department's Special Evaluation
Study in 2000, and it won a Canadian International Development Agency award.

2.      TA 5935-REG: National Resettlement Policy Enhancement and Capacity Building
was designed to strengthen DMC capacity to enhance involuntary resettlement policy, and legal
and institutional frameworks supported by continued regional consultations, by implementing
selected NRAP activities in PRC, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, and Philippines, and by extending
the NRAP planning process to one new country, Cambodia. According to the TCR, the regional
TA selected catalytic activities from each NRAP. A Cambodia NRAP was prepared, discussed,
and endorsed at a national workshop; and a draft National Resettlement Policy was prepared. In
Indonesia, the outputs including a refined draft Land Acquisition and Resettlement Act, an
administrative and Institutional Framework, Resettlement Guidelines, and a proposal on
capacity building. In addition to the national workshop, several provincial level consultations
were conducted. In Nepal, final amendments were made to the Land Acquisition Act, and its
Implementation Regulations were prepared, together with an Operations Manual (OM) and
proposal on capacity building. A draft Resettlement Policy was also prepared. In Pakistan the
draft National Resettlement Policy was refined, and a Resettlement Ordinance prepared,
together with accompanying notes on implementation. Other outputs included an OM and a
proposal on capacity building. Progress was made in defining the necessary outputs in the
Philippines, which included a draft National Resettlement Policy, a draft executive order on
Resettlement, Resettlement Guidelines, and a capacity building proposal. In the PRC the
Ministry of Lands and Resources requested two special studies, a Report on the PRC Legal
Framework, and a Report on Rural Land Reform and Poverty Issues in relation to resettlement.
As with TA 5781-REG, the TA was intended to build awareness among stakeholders. The TCR
rated the TA as successful.

3.      TA 6091: Capacity Building for Resettlement Risk Management was all but
completed by the time of drafting of this study (July 2006), but a TCR had not yet been filed.
The TA responded to findings of the OED study, a regional workshop held under TA 5935, and
international discussion on models of resettlement risk management. The TA focused on

1
    Under RETA 5781 it was agreed that the World Bank would support further policy enhancement work in
    Bangladesh. Meanwhile, the Government of Viet Nam requested ADB for TA for the purpose of resettlement policy
    enhancement, and this was separately processed and approved.
                                                                               Appendix 18    141


generating instruments needed to address risk management, asset valuation, and livelihood
rehabilitation; and prepared case studies for PRC, Cambodia, and India. Whether viable risk
management systems have been developed remains to be seen, but the TA delivered some
good studies on income restoration, impact of resettlement in PRC, and asset valuation
techniques.

4.      Other Technical Assistance. Of the nationally oriented TAs, those for Sri Lanka and
Viet Nam have had particularly good impact. In Sri Lanka, ADB TA assisted in designing a
national resettlement policy that in some ways is more advanced (lower thresholds for RP
preparation) than ADB's, and which was approved in 2001. However, the policy is hampered by
lack of implementation capacity, and is yet to be fully enacted so that courts can enforce it. For
Viet Nam, the assistance of the TA has already been discussed earlier; the new policy allows
ADB-supported projects to set legally enforceable standards, but other types of projects with
resettlement can go ahead with lower standards that would be unacceptable to ADB, if
provincial peoples committees so decide. Of the other countries, ADB TA assisted in the
formulation of resettlement policies in Bangladesh, Cambodia, PRC, Indonesia, and Nepal. In
the PRC, TA contributed to the Land Management Law of 1998; the significant contribution is
assessed in Appendix 10, although there are still shortcomings from a resettlement perspective
to the 1998 law. The majority of the other TAs are for capacity building on resettlement
management. Where ADB did less, it was often because another international agency assisted
the government already in this field.

5.      Based on partial and anecdotal evidence, the conclusion seems nevertheless warranted
that there has been relatively high value added to many of these IR TAs and regional TAs.
142       Appendix 19



        COMPENSATION AND RESETTLEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                          AND IN THE NETHERLANDS

A.        Compensation and Resettlement Policy and Practice in the United States of
          America

1.      The United States (US) Constitution requires the state to make "just compensation" for
government taking of citizens' property for public use. The prevailing US jurisprudence adopts
"fair market value" of the expropriated asset as the standard for determining compensation for
state expropriations. The fair market value is commonly defined as "the amount that the land
might be expected to realize if sold in the open market by a willing seller to a willing buyer."1

2.       However, since fair market value as a basis for compensation does not take into account
the replacement of land and improvements, relocation and moving costs, costs to terminate and
restart utilities and services, lost business revenue, squandered customer goodwill, and
demoralization costs, courts have acknowledged that under certain circumstances, an
alternative measure of just compensation might be in order. Over the years, the US has
developed both statutory laws and case laws to address the issue of insufficiency of fair market
value compensation to achieve the legislative objective of ensuring that affected property
owners do not bear the cost of public projects that will benefit the whole society. When the
compensation determined cannot fully compensate affected property owners or restore their
lifestyle, some courts in the US adopt an approach of paying a premium on top of the fair market
value of the property at issue. For instance, the US Congress authorized a premium in the New
Hampshire Mill Act requiring a 50% premium over fair market value when grist mill owners
flooded upstream lands.

3.      Resettlement. Perhaps the most important law governing resettlement assistance in the
US is the 1970 Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Act (the Uniform Act) and its
relevant regulations. The objective of the Uniform Act "is to ensure that such persons shall not
suffer disproportionate injuries as a result of programs and projects designed for the benefit of
the public as a whole and to minimize the hardship of displacement on such persons."2 The act
requires the expropriating agency to provide advisory assistance and financial benefits. These
payments are in addition to any amount the agency must pay the property owner when it
condemns or otherwise acquires property. The main contents of this codified law are as follows.
The expropriating agency must send a representative of the agency to contact each person who
will be displaced by the project as early as possible in the land acquisition process. The
representative must explain the benefits for which the person is eligible, as determined by
federal law. If the property owner disputes the adequacy of the benefits thus offered, he/she
must request a reconsideration by the expropriating agency. If he/she is still not satisfied,
he/she can appeal to the agency commissioner, and then to the courts.

4.       Resettlement Plan. The expropriating agency must provide an advisory assistance
program for eligible people, including (i) determining the need for relocation assistance;
(ii) providing information on the availability, prices, and rentals of comparable properties;
(iii) assisting affected businesses in becoming established in a suitable new location;
(iv) supplying information on federal and state programs offering assistance; and (v) providing
other services to minimize the hardship of relocation.

1
    Knetsch, Jack L. and Thomas E. Borcherding. Expropriation of Private Property and the Basis for Compensation,
    29 University of Toronto Law Journal 237 (1979).
2
    The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Act (1970), 42 U.S.C 4601 et seq., §201(b).
                                                                                                  Appendix 19      143


5.      Replacement Housing. The agency must ensure that there is adequate housing for the
affected people. Specifically, the agency must ensure, before displacement occurs, that (i) the
number of replacement units equals the number of displaced households; (ii) the replacement
units are decent, safe, and sanitary, and in areas that are at least as desirable as the
individual's current neighborhood; and (iii) the units are available at rents and prices that the
displaced people can afford. A person cannot be forced to move from his home unless the
relevant department determines that such replacement housing is available.3

6.       Relocation Assistance and Other Assistance. Under the Uniform Act, in addition to
fair market value, the expropriating agency must pay affected people (i) actual and reasonable
expenses in moving the family, personal property, farm operation, or business; (ii) actual direct
losses of tangible personal property resulting from the move or from the closure of a business;
(iii) actual and reasonable costs in searching for a replacement business; and (iv) actual and
reasonable expenses necessary to reestablish a displaced farm, nonprofit organization, or small
business at the new site. Property owners are also reimbursed for conveyance taxes, any
mortgage prepayment penalty, and current property taxes. The law provides additional benefits
for people displaced from their dwellings. In the case of people who have owned their homes at
least 180 days before acquisition negotiations began, the expropriating agency must pay (i) the
amount needed, in addition to compensation for the acquired property, to buy a comparable
home; (ii) the cost of higher interest rates, if the home is mortgaged; and (iii) reasonable closing
costs for acquiring the replacement home, including the title search and recording fee. For other
people displaced from dwellings they have occupied for at least 90 days (owners or tenants),
the acquiring agency must pay the rent for a comparable dwelling. Alternatively, the displaced
person can claim money to make a down payment on a home.

7.      The conclusion is that, on substantive issues (compensation and assistance), the US's
compensation policy in the case of expropriation and displacement can be seen as similar or
better than the ADB Policy (e.g., in establishing replacement cost it also includes compensation
for depreciation of assets and lost good will in case of land acquisition and resettlement, which
is not specified by the ADB Policy). The US, like many other western countries, has relied more
on its court system to create case law and precedent; this works as de facto policy, although it is
partly formalized in the Uniform Act. On the other hand, the US relies on the working of its social
safety net to address categories of vulnerable people when they are affected by public projects.
Rehabilitation measures are generally not included in resettlement operations unless in cases of
mass displacement, such as with dams, or in cases of resettlement of Native Americans. On
procedures, e.g., regarding the need for public consultation and approval of an RP before
project approval and award of contracts, compensation before resettlement, public disclosure of
the plan, grievance redress, and monitoring requirements, ADB's policy seems more cautious
and elaborate. However, these measures may well be required more in the DMCs than in
countries like the US. A legal requirement to minimize displacement and to investigate all
project alternatives was not encountered.

B.        Land Expropriation and Compensation in the Netherlands

8.      In the Netherlands, the government has at least two legislations available that allow
expropriation by the government of private land from its owners for projects that are in the public
interest: the Expropriation Law and the Law of Preferential Rights of Municipalities. The second
3
    According to 49 CFR 24.2(a)(8)(iv), the comparable form of housing must reflect appropriate local housing codes
    or, in absence of local codes, the policy of the displacing agency. For example, if it is "culturally" a part of the
    lifestyle for six children to share a bedroom, it is not acceptable to base the computation of the replacement
    housing payment on a dwelling that would require six children to share a bedroom.
144    Appendix 19



is indirectly of interest, as it gives the right to local governments in certain cases to have a first
option to purchase a private property in the public interest. The Expropriation Law is the most
relevant to this study. A government body such as a municipality can initiate an expropriation
procedure when it cannot agree with an owner through voluntary negotiation on a willing-seller,
willing-buyer basis. The basic rule is that the owner may not deteriorate in income and assets.
The court system is the ultimate arbiter. There are two phases, an administrative phase and a
court phase. The administrative phase starts when the municipality approves an expropriation
plan and makes it publicly available for appeal in the town hall. If prospective APs appeal
against the plan and this appeal is not regarded as sufficient ground for withdrawal of the plan
by the local council, the plan with the registered appeals is submitted to the central government
for consideration. The APs are in position to demand a hearing at this stage. The central
government can decide to reject the plan on the basis of the appeal. After approval of the plan
by the government, the municipality can start a court procedure. It can request a judge to issue
an order to evict the AP. The court judge also determines the compensation that the
municipality has to offer to the AP. Usually, independent assessors are arranged to determine
the compensation. Appeal can still be made to the Supreme Court.

9.      The compensation is always determined in monetary value, but the government can
consider offering the owner replacement land. The compensation has to be at least as high as
the value of the lost asset. In addition, compensation must be paid for depreciation in value of
other assets if relevant, and for relocation costs and income losses during the transition phase.
From this, it is clear that Dutch policy for compensation for losses is at least as good as ADB's;
its public communications policy can be judged better, as all public projects need to be
registered in provincial or municipal land use / zoning plans, which are publicly disclosed and
open for appeals. The well-developed court system as well as a particular body in the central
government (called "the Crown") function as the grievance redress system.

10.     Given the lengthy and onerous expropriation process, local governments resort to the
expropriation procedure only by exception, and generally have the authority to negotiate a land
price that can be considerably above the replacement value of the lost asset, so that it is
sufficiently attractive for the owner to accept it, as this reduces the period of uncertainty over the
final decision, and the associated loss of investment opportunity.

C.     Adverse Possession in United States of America and United Kingdom

11.      Laws of adverse possession have some relevance to the discussion, as some ADB staff
commented in their questionnaire response that ADB's policy may be too generous in its
prescription of the treatment of squatters. It is not true that Western countries do not have any
legislation dealing with squatters. The laws they have on adverse possession can be regarded
as somewhat akin to ADB's policy to provide squatters with compensation for loss of their
structures (not land), and further relocation and rehabilitation assistance if they are vulnerable.
Adverse possession laws are not very common in Asia, and in fact most Asian governments as
well as courts have ruled against the granting of rights to squatters (i.e., nonlegalizable
nontitleholders) who lose their access to land and therefore do not provide compensation for
lost access to land and even structures. Thailand is perhaps an exception. Under Thai law,
squatters can apply for legal title to a plot of land after 10 years of continuous occupation,
                                                                                                Appendix 19      145


although few succeed in doing so in practice.4 The remainder of this section discusses the
nature of adverse possession laws in US and United Kingdom (UK).

12.      Adverse possession against a titled owner is a route to acquiring legal rights (or title) to a
real property in addition to conventional means, such as transaction, government granting, and
creation of rights through law, under certain conditions for a statutory period of time.5 In the US,
these conditions include (i) actual possession of the land in question, (ii) continuously,
(iii) exclusively, (iv) open and notoriously, (v) against the titled owner's willingness, and (vi) for a
statutory period of time. To establish the actual possession, the claimant must perform some
physical acts of possession in connection with the land, such as using the land for farming or
grazing, improving the land, or setting up an enclosure on the land.

13.     Within the statutory period of time, the claimant must exercise possession and use of the
land continuously without interruption. Any interruption of this continuity may terminate the
counting of the statutory time. However, this does not require the claimant to be on the land all
the time; it will be sufficient if he/she can use and enjoy the land as an average owner of similar
property would have used and enjoyed it.6 The claimant must be able to prove that the land
he/she possesses is not publicly accessible; otherwise it cannot be claimed as a specific
individual's property through adverse possession.

14.    The claimant must also possess and use the land openly and notoriously in a way that a
reasonably prudent owner in the exercise of ordinary care should discover that such possession
and use constitute a claim to his property. The purpose of requiring open and notorious
possession is to place the titled owner on notice of such adverse activity so that the titled owner
has an opportunity to take action to vindicate his/her ownership rights.

15.     Although almost all state laws in the US contain the above conditions, the time
requirement is different from state to state. In general, the claimant must possess and use the
land for at least 10 years.7 The requirement may be reduced to a fewer number of years if the
claimant obtained the possession through a contract of transfer (even fraudulent), a deed for
partition, or a decree of court. The law does not usually apply to publicly owned land. However,
historically, the government has sold millions of acres of land at very low prices to squatters.

16.     The UK adverse possession law requires 12 years of adverse possession to defeat the
owner's title. However, the adverse possessor must file an application two years before heshe is
legally awarded ownership, namely, at year 10 of adverse possession. The two-year waiting
period is for the registered owner to defeat the claim. To substantiate his/her claim of ownership
through adverse possession, the claimant must establish possession as a fact. Second, he/she
must show the requisite intention with regard to the possessed land. Third, he/she must show
the possession to be adverse, which is overlapping to a certain degree with the second
requirement.8



4
    Millions of people in Thailand continue to live on what is technically public land in legal limbo, without papers,
    without clear rights. Speculators exploit this ambiguity by using various informal means to get land purchase
    records back-dated or documents issued in their names, and then accusing villagers of encroaching. Available:
    http://www.achr.net/000ACHRTsunami/Thailand%20TS/Land-1.html
5
    Black's Law Dictionary (1990).
6
    3 Am. Jur. 2d, Adverse Possession § 54.
7
    In Washington State, the requirement is at least 7 years, and having paid all taxes on the land.
8
    Mark Thompson, Modern Land Law (Second Edition) (2003), at 202.
146    Appendix 20



                     MAIN FINDINGS FROM PROJECT CASE STUDIES:
                        PROCEDURAL AND EFFICIENCY ISSUES

A.     Due Diligence Issues

1.      Were alternatives to avoid/minimize IR explored at the time of project design? This
important question led the project case study consultants to different answers, depending on the
nature of the projects and information available but also their individual perceptions. Consultants
in India and Philippines mostly argued that alternatives were not sufficiently explored, those in
the People's Republic of China (PRC) that they were. The scale and nature of many of the
projects in the PRC may have had an influence on this perception, as may have the PRC's
rigorous environmental impact assessments, which also integrate comparisons and thorough
consideration of resettlement requirements. As the findings of the Special Evaluation Study on
Environmental Safeguards demonstrates, environmental assessments in the PRC are more
rigorous than in most other developing member countries (DMCs), which is one reason why so
many of Asian Development Bank (ADB) loans are placed in the A category. The feasibility
studies and reports and recommendations of the President (RRPs) generally did not provide
information as to the comparison of various project alternatives with attendant financial, social,
and economic costs. More fundamentally, however, the comparison of project alternatives in
terms of their implications for involuntary resettlement was seldom clear cut. Incomparable
advantages may need to be compared. The opinion of a project management consultant
interviewed was that the owners of the illegal shacks on the canal/river banks in a project in
India, who were relocated, would not have needed to be moved if different dredging and
cleaning techniques had been used. The issue is, however, as much one of political choice
about an orderly environment and long-term advantages versus short-term disadvantages, as
one of financial choices--whether to build something cheaper or more expensive. The two dam
cases studied in the PRC led to displacement of over 75,000 affected persons (APs), often
across long distances. Alternatives to power and water supply would have had larger financial
and certainly different environmental costs. The cost of decommissioning dams is often not
included in economic analysis. The ADB Policy does not give much guidance regarding the
comparison of alternatives, and the principle of avoidance of resettlement seems primary. It is
unclear whether and to what extent projects with much lower economic and financial returns
should be accepted on the basis of what level of reduction in resettlement needs. This makes
the guidelines on the avoidance and minimization of resettlement relatively difficult to use in a
practical sense, or at least, less amenable to independent evaluation. Neither is there clarity
regarding the role of national government decision making with respect to choice of resettlement
options. The assessment of project alternatives is often hampered by the fact that governments
do the initial selection of projects eligible for financing by ADB. Governments may not wish to
endorse a wide ranging analysis of project alternatives, and may not be very receptive to the
findings, if they identified a completely different type of project, with a different parent agency.

2.      Was an analysis of the DMC's framework for resettlement conducted? The answer
provided by the consultants in charge of the case studies to this question was uniformly "yes."
This is not surprising, given the frequency of resettlement operations in the many infrastructure
projects approved for the three case study countries. In countries with relatively fewer
infrastructure operations, the answers may be more variable, especially with respect to older
operations. Most of the study's consultants were less confident about the compatibility of a
DMC's framework with the ADB policy, and the measures undertaken to address the
discrepancies. Problems were encountered with the interpretation of the question whether the
compensation for land and structures was equivalent to market or replacement value, and the
legality and enforceability of special assistance to APs for relocation, transitional income loss,
                                                                                                Appendix 20      147


and rehabilitation assistance. Whether the agreements reflected in the resettlement plans (RPs)
are actually enforceable in courts is a moot point, and the agreements regularly need to be
reconfirmed with governments and executing agencies (EAs) even after their approval earlier.
Although there is little procedural compatibility with country or EA systems, many resettlement
specialists argue that, in practice, many solutions can be worked out in individual projects by
supplementing the country's mandatory compensation and resettlement requirements with
additional assistance specifically targeted to vulnerable groups. This study concurs with this
view, also after comparison of experiences with some comparator organizations.

3.      Were the RPs or Resettlement Frameworks (RFs) prepared before project
approval? The submission of short RPs before the Management Review Meeting (MRM) and
full RPs before loan approval has been a standard ADB requirement for many years. However,
ADB's Operations Manual (OM) section F2/OP contains a clause that allows project approval
even without an RP that is fully endorsed by the government, as long as a covenant is included
in the loan agreement that this is submitted soonest. No such case was found among the
projects studied, although in all the sector projects, RPs for subprojects that were not prepared
before loan approval were submitted after project start. The case of the Philippines' Sixth Roads
Project, approved 30 September 1996, was an exception. It is illustrative of the situation in
some older projects in ADB's portfolio, such as for instance the Nam Teun Hinboun Hydropower
Project in the Lao People's Democratic Republic. The RRP for the Sixth Road Project, mainly
concerned with road rehabilitation, announced no need for involuntary resettlement,1 and
consequently no covenant was written in the draft loan agreement that if resettlement might be
found to be needed, an RP needed to be submitted to ADB for approval. An RP was in this case
successfully prepared only long after the resettlement operation, due to a succession of events
and misunderstandings. By the time of appraisal, two stretches of road had not completed
detailed engineering design, namely, those in Mulanay in the Bondoc peninsula and the first
stretch of road, about 20 km, out of Zamboanga city. These two roads subsequently had the
main resettlement problems in the project. For the latter the government decided to construct a
4-lane road compared with the existing 2-lane facility (this decision was made after the loan was
approved). In the Bondoc peninsula, the Mulanay road site developed a problem after approval,
as a seawall collapsed that had protected a number of encroachers. The EA moved these
quickly to a resettlement site made available by a local government unit, and before ADB was
made aware of the issue. As the loan agreement signed 23 June 1997 did not include
resettlement clauses, the EA was originally reluctant to write RPs post-facto. The drafts of the
needed RPs (separate RPs were issued for land acquisition and for structures) were eventually
prepared but proved unacceptable to ADB, until the project was suspended. A draft was
approved only after many iterations, and after the suspension was lifted, some assistance was
provided to those vulnerable APs that could still be traced, as not all had moved to the
resettlement site nearby.

4.     Did the RPs meet with the normal standards required (at the time)? If not, what
were the shortcomings? OM F2/OP of end-2003 was a watershed in terms of specifications
for RPs, and all RPs prepared long before this time were more uneven in their organization and
treatment of needed procedures. Social assessments, census, and socioeconomic surveys
were not focused on issues of vulnerability as much as those attempted in the last few years.

1
    Originally this project only included interurban roads, and for many roads the detailed engineering designs were
    completed. However, the cadastral surveys had not yet been undertaken. At the time of appraisal there was no
    indication that any land had to be acquired that required resettlement, and thus the environment specialist
    indicated that a resettlement plan was not required. The only requirement was to preserve an old bridge located in
    Quezon Province, built during the Spanish period. However, it was recognized that the government did not formally
    own some of the rights-of-way, and this would be established only after completion of the cadastral surveys.
148    Appendix 20



Entitlement matrices were not as elaborate and well tested as those routinely prepared after the
OM. Arrangements for public disclosure, independent grievance redress, and internal and
external monitoring were not as systematically addressed. As discussed elsewhere in the
report, in the past, fewer RPs were prepared for cases where there was little or no actual
displacement, but only partial land or other economic losses. Those cases then often later ran
into problems during implementation and needed special attention as a result of ADB's
enhanced safeguard controls and growing expertise. One late case is the Rural Roads (Sector)
Project I, where ADB has tried to come to terms with the widespread practice in the India-wide
program for rural road rehabilitation and blacktopping, to rely on voluntary donations of slices of
land when roads needed to be widened or differently aligned. Given the program's wide
coverage of thousands of rural roads in two states, and in spite of agreements made during loan
negotiations, EAs have opposed the formulation of individual RPs for each road. This has led to
delays in ADB approval for loan reimbursements. (A follow-on project for Rural Roads in the
State of West Bengal now accepts land donation by roadside communities under very tight
documentation conditions.)

5.       Were the RPs approved by the EA/Borrower before Board approval of the RRPs?
This was generally formally the case except where involuntary resettlement proved to be an
unexpected need during project implementation, sometimes as a result of changing alignments
of roads, or changed scope of the project. Sector projects, which are defined by the
identification and preparation of usually many subprojects in different locations after loan
approval, are a special case. The RF, approved by the government before loan approval, is to
cater to sector projects. Another case is that some RPs have been prepared by consultants and
were approved by governments without careful scrutiny of their provisions. This was the case
with the Guizhou Shuibai Railway Project. This case also underestimated the number of APs by
a wide margin. The problem during implementation is exacerbated when project administrators
are changed and new administrators are not aware of the provisions, or distance themselves
from the RP on the basis of their apparent variance with the legal framework in the country. The
ownership of many RPs is often low, a circumstance that cannot even be countered by the
routine statement on the front page of most RPs that "this is not an ADB document." The project
director of the Rural Roads I (Sector) Project in one state, although having been in position for
some time, professed never to have seen the RP for his project, and questioned its legitimacy.

6.      Were there changes in land acquisition/resettlement conditions? If so, were
updates of the RP submitted to ADB? In at least four cases in the PRC--older cases-- no
update was offered to ADB when changes were made in the conditions under which land
acquisition and resettlement were to take place. This reflects the great discretion ADB accorded
to Chinese authorities in the past, especially in road and railway cases. The previous OM of
1997 is also not entirely clear on the need for RP updates. ADB's due diligence activities in the
PRC are, however, increasing, which has led to added value for APs, e.g., more attention for
restoration of land temporarily used by road construction contractors. In the Philippines, no
update was offered for the Pasig River Project, even when a new government in 2001 imposed
a moratorium on resettlement operations, which lasted several years.

7.     Were there delays in comments or approvals by ADB? This is a complaint often
heard in the study team's discussions with authorities. Delays in the approval of (updated) RPs
by ADB proved to be a major bottleneck in at least four cases in the sample of projects studied.
The final approval of the RP for the Sixth Road Project took at least five drafts and over a year
of preparation, during which the project as a whole could not proceed. Delays were also
encountered in the Southern Philippines Irrigation Sector Project. The RP was revised five times
and was delayed due to lack of clarity on the requirements of the ADB policy. These were
                                                                                Appendix 20    149


elaborated and explained in more detail as the RP preparation progressed, which took nearly
three years to complete. In the Pasig River Project, the RP was also revised five times over
more than one year before it was approved by ADB (before approval of the loan). In the Rural
Roads Sector Project in India, delays in disbursements were experienced due to delays in the
submission by the EAs of the agreed upon RPs for the roads planned. But a special
administration mission that included a resettlement expert from ADB for more than 10 days in
October 2005 helped the EA to prepare the Land Acquisition Plan. ADB approved this quickly
afterwards. In the West Bengal Transport Project, approval from ADB regarding the RP for
seven rural access roads was provided in record time. In the case of the Kolkata Environmental
Improvement Project, ADB approved the revised entitlement matrix within a month's time. In the
PRC, approvals were also generally provided quickly, but the problem in some cases was lack
of submission of updated RPs, even when the numbers of APs had risen a lot, such as in the
Guizhou Shuibai Railway Project, and Guanxi I. One reason for the lack of updated RPs was
the lack of supervision of resettlement operations by ADB.

8.       Were consultations held with APs at the RP preparation stage? The definition of
consultation that ADB has traditionally employed is very wide. The study team usually found
evidence of some form of consultation, comprising meetings of consultants with authorities,
community leaders, and usually some APs during field visits, and also census and
socioeconomic surveys of these APs. However, formalized community meetings with recorded
agreements prior to major decisions were usually not relied on in the past, even in the cases of
mass movements of people, such as the two dam cases and the Pasig River resettlement. For
APs in India, the Revenue Department was often the face of the project, and EAs were seldom
directly associated with land acquisition or even resettlement. Staff of field units of EAs usually
had had no training in public consultation for resettlement. With the increasing focus on public
disclosure and consultations to obtain verifiable broad community support, this is now changing
at least for the larger and more recent resettlement operations. In the West Bengal Transport
Project, 80% of APs were aware about the impending resettlement operation. In the Kolkata
Project, it was 63%. A survey of the Rural Road I project in Chattisgarh provided poorer results;
however, the project claimed that consultation and community participation had been
institutionalized for each of the hundreds of subproject roads through transect walks before the
finalization of the design of the alignment. The older transport projects in PRC hardly involved
public consultation of the type favored by ADB. More recently, there has been some
improvement, although a limited concept of public consultation still predominates.

9.      Were consultations held with APs at the RP implementation stage? Findings from
the case studies here are similar. There may be more evidence of consultations during
implementation in newer than in older projects, as a result of the increasing number of sector
projects that require RPs after project approval, and of the Environment and Social Safeguards
Division of the Regional and Sustainable Development Department's insistence on the updating
of the RPs after the more detailed design of especially road and railway works. Consultations in
the PRC varied with the organization in charge. In Wenzhou, the municipality's Resettlement
Office was very experienced, highly committed, and had high political backing for consultation
for rehabilitation of APs of the Zhejiang-Shanxi dam in the "post-resettlement phase." In the
area of the Mianhuatan Dam Project, less was done in terms of postresettlement rehabilitation
works and thus there were also fewer consultations.

10.     Were nongovernment organizations (NGOs) involved? If so, were they involved in
time? In the PRC, NGOs are almost non-existent in this field, and in the rural areas, village
collectives and internal groupings were sometimes viewed as the "grassroots-based" equivalent.
Even outside the PRC, NGOs were not always relied on in the sample, in spite of the
150    Appendix 20



suggestions in the policy (para. 27) to involve such NGOs or other local organizations. The
Kolkata Project and the Pasig River Project in the sample used NGOs and community
organizations most. The NGOs involved in the Pasig River Project were effective in carrying out
the tagging operation and organizing the affected families, but according to the findings of a
survey they did not involve all APs in the consultation process. They focused on community
leaders, who were less effective in communicating information regarding the relocation plans,
compensation packages, and resettlement sites. Miscommunication and misunderstanding led
to a belligerent and one time bloody confrontation with APs. In the Kolkata Project, the
resettlement process is still ongoing. NGOs hired cover a broad range of training and
microcredit-based activities in the project, and no complaints were heard from APs visited.
Indeed there was much appreciation of their role and rapport with APs.

11.     Were monitoring arrangements made? The policy states that the RP should indicate
the monitoring and evaluation requirements. OM F2/OP, para. 46, specifies that EAs are to
submit quarterly or semiannual progress reports, and that monitoring and evaluation reports are
required, "preferably from an external monitoring and evaluation agency." In the study's sample,
which combines older and newer projects, the existence of special monitoring arrangements for
resettlement was usually corroborated, but they were not always established at the beginning as
they should, but midway or only at the end of the operations, presumably from the mistaken
assumption that ADB would be interested mainly in a post-audit or evaluation of the impact on
APs. In the Sixth Road Project, monitoring arrangements were made very late, as ADB
discovered the extent of impact relatively late, at around the time of the midterm review of the
project. The Rural Roads Sector Project did not have separate monitoring arrangements,
arguably because there was formally no need for resettlement or even formal land acquisition.
However, project implementation consultants were supposed to incorporate the checking of the
processes and agreements as to land donations. Sometimes the project relied only on an
external agency, such as the Guangxi Roads Project, which relied on the Guangxi Academy of
Social Sciences. In the PRC, most of the projects with resettlement had external monitoring
arrangements, and produced regular monitoring reports. Monitoring reports were often not
prepared, specifically for resettlement operations. In those cases where they were, they were
prepared only at the end due to late organization of external monitoring, after protracted periods
of procurement of the consultants.

12.      Were grievance redress mechanisms included? Were they fully independent of
project or local government authorities? The experiences were variable. The RPs usually
specified what APs could do to address a grievance about the project. Grievance mechanisms
were usually located within the government or project structure. Only rarely, fully independent
mechanisms were created to deal with grievances. In the PRC road and railway cases, the
grievance mechanism usually included a stepwise system starting from village authorities, then
county, then municipal authorities, as these were in charge. As the complainant can threaten to
move to the next level of grievance redress, there can be effective pressure on village
authorities to address the grievance, which is their job. On the other hand there is significant
pressure on the individual as a member of the village collective to conform to the collective's
official position. The village collective constitutes a large part of the social safety net. The setup
of the grievance redress from village upwards encourages practical complaints and discourages
the posting of grievances that challenge the system, such as those regarding compensation
rates and how these are determined. The study team generally did not find any fundamental
complaints being registered, in spite of the expression of disappointment with the compensation
rates in individual interviews (particularly in the dam cases). In the Wenzhou Resettlement
Office, dealing with the Zhejiang-Shanxi Dam, a permanent grievance section was set up
regarding the dam resettlement process, with proper administration and handling of grievances.
                                                                                                  Appendix 20      151


In the Mianhuatan Dam Project, such a section was not available, and grievances were filed
with the general municipal resettlement office. In the Philippine cases, grievance redress was
available to all three projects, but became available late in the Sixth Roads project. In the Indian
cases, the Kolkata Project and Rural Roads had no grievance redress system, and relied on the
project team itself to attend to the grievances. In the West Bengal Corridor Project, a grievance
redress committee and land advisory committee were formed by gazette notification in each of
the districts involved; 1022 grievances were lodged up to the time of the case study, and these
were addressed in 12 meetings of the two committees. It was very effective: 958 grievances
were expressed regarding the exclusion of APs from the 2001 RP census list. In other projects
studied in India, such as the Rajasthan Urban Project, the Western Transport Corridor project
and the Power Transmission project, grievance redress mechanisms did not work very well.2 In
most cases in India, the grievance redress committee, which has an EA representative, was
headed by the District Collector.

B.         Land Acquisition and Resettlement Issues

13.     Was land acquisition completed before project works started? If not, was this a
problem? OM F2 is not restrictive with respect to the procedures for the completion of land
acquisition before start of works or resettlement. Many countries have rules about this
themselves, and where they do, they need no further safeguard enforcement from the side of
ADB.

14.     Was payment of compensation for land loss completed in time? The Policy of 1995
does not make a statement on this, but OM F2/OP para. 38 requires delivery of compensation
to APs and allowances and house reconstruction, prior to their being dispossessed or displaced.
In several projects studied, the government proved unable to provide the compensation before
relocation of APs, and for instance in the PRC, compensation was sometimes delivered to "land
loss APs" (as opposed to relocatees) in installments over a period of time, well after actual land
loss was experienced. In the Southern Yunnan Project, payment of compensation was 1-2
years late due to late payments by the road agency to local governments administering the
compensation, and insufficient budgets of the latter. However, when actual relocation was
involved, compensation was usually provided in time to APs. In the West Bengal Corridor
Project, compensation for structures, initially provided in a lump sum equal for all nontitleholders
along the road, was later corrected through an ADB intervention, in order to ensure that the
compensation was equivalent to the replacement value of the structure actually lost (resented
by APs). In some other projects studied, compensation had also been awarded very late. As
mentioned, due to particular problems, compensation for structures and other assistance was
provided years after actual relocation in the Sixth Road Project.



2
    Staff of the India Resident Mission disputed these OED findings. They stated that ADB had fielded a special loan
    administration mission to the Western Transport Corridor Project in August 2004. The mission spent 8 days in the
    field and reported that the grievance redress mechanism was working well. The record books of grievance redress
    were reviewed; 399 grievances were reported in 2004, of which 324 (81 percent) were resolved by the existing
    mechanism. Staff admitted that the situation might have changed at the time that OED conducted their survey,
    since land acquisition and resettlement and rehabilitation activities had been completed (except litigation cases),
    and NGOs had been demobilized. Regarding the Power Transmission Project, the project completion report (PCR)
    had confirmed that the grievance redress mechanism had functioned well. Only one AP had complained about the
    delay in dispensation of compensation amount, but this was due to legalities pertaining to establishment of
    ownership; one other AP complained about not having proper access to his remaining land, which the Committee
    and project authorities subsequently agreed to attend to. The limited surveys held for this special evaluation study
    registered much dissatisfaction with the compensation awarded, sometimes five years late.
152    Appendix 20



15.     Was relocation completed before the start of civil works? This is not a requirement
of the policy but is a requirement sometimes included in loan agreement covenants.
Resettlement sites or housing for APs obviously need to be constructed and available before
relocation can start. Adherence to these standards was sometimes fundamental, as in the case
of dam reservoir resettlement projects. But also in other projects, such as the Southern
Philippines Irrigation Project, they proved to have been generally met, with the general
exception of the roads and railway projects. Resettlement sites in the West Bengal Corridor,
Pasig River, and Sixth Road projects were either problematic in terms of location or facilities
and access to public services or common property resources. Where such sites were not
offered (for instance as a result of the wish of the APs to self-relocate), many APs wished to
occupy temporary shelters or stay with relatives in order to see the road works progress before
they started their own construction work, or wished to add their own savings to compensation
received before building a new house at their own pace. For this reason, the requirement has to
be applied flexibly. Overall, APs proved reasonably satisfied as long as they were warned in
time about the compensation and assistance offered, and the date when the move needed to be
made. The desire to know well in advance when the APs needed to move was seen as crucial,
even more so in some cases than the levels of assistance themselves. Too often, there were
either no clear dates set for APs in different road locations, or if they were, they proved wrong.
This uncertainty caused considerable inconvenience and even unrest. Another issue was the
quality of resettlement sites that were offered to APs; this varied. In some cases, it took a few
years for any resettlement site to gain access to the necessary facilities, causing much
inconvenience by APs in the transition period.

16.      Were relocation assistance measures included? Did APs find them sufficient? In
all cases reviewed, relocation assistance was provided, and generally it was appreciated. In two
cases there were complaints, the West Bengal Transport Corridor Project, and the Pasig River
Project. The latter's resettlement was partly done hurriedly by the government before actual
approval of the ADB loan and in anticipation of approval, and for this reason was not closely
monitored by ADB. In the Sixth Road and the Southern Philippines Irrigation projects, APs
received very generous relocation assistance as a result of ADB involvement, which consisted
of free transport to resettlement sites, free food allowance for three days, and varying rates of
disturbance allowance given by each sending local government unit ranging from an equivalent
PhP40 to PhP140 (at $=PhP50). In the Mianhuatan Dam resettlement case, standards for
moving expenses were inconsistently applied. A moving and relocating subsidy was paid to
most APs, but each county or city district had a different amount, ranging from $10 to $60 per
person (at $=Y8), and there were also cases where the moving subsidy was paid at over $60
per household. The West Bengal Transport Project provided nonlegalizable APs (small
business enterprises [SBEs] and Informal dwellers) with (i) rental assistance for one month at
$5 ($=Rs50), income and shifting assistance at $40 for APs and $30 for SBE owners, and
(iii) special assistance for the vulnerable at $10. The APs were not happy, because they were
told earlier that the SBEs were to relocate through a corridor management plan under a new
license or contract agreement, which they preferred, as it would bring stability to their
businesses and improved facilities. This plan, however, did not move forward.

17.     Was other compensation provided in time (structures, trees, crops, transitional
business losses)? In most cases, when compensation was offered for lost assets, it was
offered in a timely fashion, i.e., before relocation. The Sixth Road Project was an exception, for
reasons already discussed. In the Pasig River Project, the compensation was integrated in a
resettlement package that consisted of the right of the affected squatters to rent a unit in a
resettlement site and eventually buy this after five years at subsidized rates. In a power
transmission project in India that succeeded an earlier completed project used as a case study,
                                                                                Appendix 20    153


ADB required a RP indicating the exact number of APs to be compensated for temporary crop
losses as a result of the construction of the transmission towers. The EA argued that it could not
list the plots and names of their owners long before the actual positioning of the towers, as this
depended on terrain and a multitude of other factors. Furthermore, since the compensation due
was only for crop losses, the determination of the actual loss during the works on the plot was
prescribed by law. Based on documents cosigned by the AP and the EA, the district collector
would then determine the compensation afterwards, usually some six months later.
Compensation for business losses sustained during the period of transition is an altogether
different chapter, and some of the case studies had problems in establishing whether the
projects had been able to provide any compensation at all. As mentioned, uncertainty as to the
actual need for resettlement in road projects for which the alignment is not yet fully determined
can lead to large indirect losses, related to the ripple effect on investment decisions. This by
itself is often a strong argument in favor of speedy resettlement planning as part of either
detailed design of the project (often after project approval) or as part even of implementation, if
such implementation is done incrementally. In depth resettlement planning as part of the
feasibility study is then counterproductive, as the announcement of tentative resettlement
requirements can foster such uncertainty unnecessarily and can also foster a false sense of
certainty about the need for resettlement, which may be later reversed.

C.     Sufficiency of Compensation

18.     The OM is not fully clear on the definition of the term compensation as opposed to
assistance (or even "entitlements"), as was also pointed out earlier. This study sees
entitlements as those compensations mandated by the country's laws or policies, and in
practice they mainly cover physical assets such as land and structures, but not economic or
livelihood losses such as business losses and losses due to longer travel time, etc. The latter
are generally part of either "relocation assistance" or "rehabilitation assistance." OM F2/BP
para. 4, however, states: "All compensation is based on the principle of replacement cost."
A footnote explains replacement cost as the cost based on the method of valuing assets to
replace the loss at market value, or its nearest equivalent, plus any transaction costs such as
administrative charges, taxes, registration, and titling costs. Where national law does not meet
this standard, the replacement cost will be supplemented as necessary.

19.     Was compensation for land paid in accordance with standards set in the RP or
RF? Most RPs and all RFs have an entitlement matrix that does not specify actual
compensation amounts but reiterates the policy principle of compensation at replacement cost
and without indicating how this is actually to be squared with the normal land loss valuation
processes in the country. This means that actual amounts of compensation are seldom
mentioned in RPs and RFs, except in the PRC (among the case study countries). In India,
compensation levels as sanctioned by authorities are usually based on the average of land
sales in the surroundings--a value that underestimates the real value due to systematic
underreporting of sales prices for fear of taxation. With great difficulty, consent awards can be
negotiated based on special approvals by district collectors. In the PRC, the average annual
output value (AAOV) method is used; the calculation of replacement value is impossible, as
rural land is not marketable; farmers losing land cannot so far acquire this elsewhere. In the
Philippines, a more realistic assessment can be made of market value of the land, if the
landowner is not happy with the zonal value offered, enforced by court decisions. In Viet Nam,
the compensation is determined by people's committees, within a prescribed band width. Thus,
in the absence of actual amounts being mentioned in RPs, it proved difficult to assess whether
the compensation provided to APs for land loss met with the criterion of replacement cost.
However, RPs for the PRC sometimes specified actual amounts per category of unit of land,
154       Appendix 20



which could be compared with actual amounts received. In the cases where this was possible,
these amounts were not met due to changes in provincial and lower level government
standards. In the Sixth Road Project, lands for compensation were classified as severely and
marginally affected properties, either eligible or non-illegible for compensation. APs who did not
have documents of ownership were not entitled to land compensation, while those who had
documents of ownership were compensated according to land values agreed upon between the
APs and the EA, and based on a contracted land appraiser's assessment of the replacement
cost.

20.     Did compensation for land lost meet the standard of replacement cost? In the three
projects investigated in the Philippines, most of the APs were squatters, but where they were
not, the compensation for land generally met the standard of replacement cost. Applicable laws
governing land acquisition for government projects allow that the requirements of the ADB
policy are met. However in the PRC, compensation for loss of land was felt as being short of
replacement cost in the earlier dam cases, Mianhuatan and Zhejiang Shanxi, as the
compensation rates under the hydropower regulation have not been as generous as the ones
under the Land Management Law of 1998. They were, however, better in the road and railway
transport projects. They were best in the urban environments of Shanghai Suzhou Creek and
Fuzhou; however, in some rural areas, a smaller or larger part of the compensation for loss of
land was retained by the village collectives, to be spent for public purposes. In India, the award
of compensation is based on the calculation of average sales of land in the vicinity over the last
three years, which one study estimated is generally underreported at about 40% of the real
value.3 The difference was made up partially by (i) the Land Acquisition Act allowing for an
additional 30% solatium and additional 12% per year of delay in the award, and (ii) projects
awarding additional assistance to landed APs. The limited surveys done for several projects in
India indicated the likelihood of discontent among a number of APs with compensation levels
(West Bengal Corridor, Western Transport Corridor). In the Rajasthan Urban Project and the
Power Transmission Project, compensation may have been based on replacement value, but
this did not increase the satisfaction of the APs significantly. In the Western Transport Corridor
project, the compensation was awarded at replacement cost, but arrived only after a long and
uncertain process of arbitration.

21.      Was compensation for other assets (structures, crops, trees) paid in accordance
with standards set in the RP or RF? In all cases where such standards were needed,
compensation was indeed paid broadly in accordance with the standards set. This, however,
does not imply uniformity in such compensations across the country where the project case
studies took place. In the Philippines, compensation for mango trees on one island in the same
(sector) project proved to be very different from compensation on another island, with little
justification.

22.    Was compensation for business losses paid in accordance with or higher than in
the RP? Business losses were generally not fully taken into account, especially in the older RPs
and their entitlement matrixes. Income assistance for the period of relocation (transitional
income) was provided in some older projects in India and PRC. In the Philippines, the Sixth
Road Project provided for income loss based on tax records of APs. Business losses of
squatters were not taken into account in proportion to their losses, other than indirectly through
the provision of a standard assistance package that was equal for all those who moved. As ADB
increasingly focuses on business losses in RPs, APs such as scavengers of open dump sites
who are displaced when the sites are replaced by controlled landfills, and water vendors robbed

3
    TA 6091: Capacity Building for Resettlement Risk Management, for $500,000, approved 19 December 2002.
                                                                               Appendix 20    155


of business because of the extension of piped water systems, are compensated more
systematically. In the Suzhou Creek project, farmers who used to rent out part of their houses to
migrants illegally were not compensated for the loss in income.

23.      Were nonlegalizable nontitleholders (squatters) compensated for loss of
structures and other (nonland) losses? The IR Policy is not fully clear on the eligibility of
compensation for losses of access to land by nontitleholders. It states: "The absence of formal
legal title to land by some affected groups should not be a bar to compensation," which seems
to imply that loss of land needs to be compensated for; the principle of replacing what is lost
would also require that squatters who are moved need a home, i.e., a location with a structure.
However, OM F2/OP is very clear on this matter and excludes such eligibility for compensation
of land; it offers squatters only assistance with relocation and rehabilitation. In cases where
squatters were the main APs, such as in the Kolkata and Pasig River projects, they were offered
replacement housing on conditions of either heavily subsidized price or subsidized rent.

D.     Sufficiency of Assistance to the Vulnerable

24.      Were vulnerable people assisted during relocation? This was usually the case in
Philippines and PRC, and it was generally in conformity with the RPs. In the India case study,
fewer APs needed to be moved, and the Kolkata Project was the main case: good relocation
assistance was provided. In the Western Transport Corridor Project, 44 vendors were to move
to a vendor market resettlement site. However, although the households were evicted from the
national highway in 2002, the allotment of the new shops was made only in 2003. For one and a
half years, the households had to work as laborers to make ends meet. No assistance was
provided to them during this period, and it took these households nearly two years to reestablish
their livelihoods. The association of the vendors would have thought it beneficial if, instead of
the assistance of Rs. 2000 (around $50 in 2003) allocated to each household, the project had
made some working capital available to the members or provided them with linkages to financial
institutions, so that they could reestablish their businesses. Large relocation expenses were
incurred in many cases in Philippines and PRC, such as in the Zhezijang Shanxi Resettlement
Project in Wenzhou, which provided transportation subsidy, the cost of a meal during moving,
medical costs during moving, transportation costs and transportation damage to
goods/household items, lost labor time due to moving, and transitional rent subsidy. Income
assistance to bridge the time taken by relocation was often provided in lump sums. As
mentioned, the government moved the APs away from he two sites investigated for the case
study of the Sixth Road Project without much assistance, in the absence of an RP. However,
upon approval of the RP, those who could still be traced were extended an entitlement package
that included (retroactive) transportation allowance, rental subsidy, disturbance allowance, and
income loss allowance. Compensation to cover the costs of reconnecting utilities was also
provided.

25.     Were vulnerable people assisted in their need for rehabilitation? As per the
procedures, the need for income rehabilitation measures for vulnerable people is determined
based on their socioeconomic profile, on consultations, and on the state of the economy in the
area. When greenfield resettlement sites are involved, usually a lot of public facilities and
services are required in addition to income restoration activities. There are no hard and fast
rules for the most effective types of rehabilitation assistance, and each RP has formulated
different rehabilitation measures, as also negotiated with governments. This is even the case in
the PRC, a country with a system that provided its population with jobs and a social safety net in
the past. The rehabilitation measures included in RPs studied by this study were different in
each project and province in accordance with their resources. The two similar dam reservoir
156    Appendix 20



resettlements had postresettlement rehabilitation programs that were different in their coverage.
Postproject rehabilitation is usually not part of investment projects in the PRC, and is at the
discretion of local governments, which may have different resources, standards, and practices.
The Kolkata project provided relatively more rehabilitation assistance than the other cases in
India, where the assistance to the vulnerable was usually confined to cash lumpsums to such
generic categories female-headed households, scheduled tribes, scheduled castes, disabled
and elderly households, and households below the poverty line. This led to cases where the
policy provision for additional assistance was utilized by households headed by women but who
were not poor. Similarly, households that had a `Below Poverty Line' card obtained special
assistance but sometimes the really poor did not have such cards. The conclusion of very
variable application of the policy principle to focus on vulnerable APs also proved to apply in the
Philippines. Like many other countries, the Philippines has no policy prescribing extra
assistance to vulnerable groups, or prescribing the level of rehabilitation assistance.
Rehabilitation cannot be claimed by APs, titled or nontitled, in the context of projects, and
therefore, APs are dependent on ad hoc project decision making, which can be sparing or
generous. In some project sites, good rehabilitation activities were undertaken, in others less. In
the Southern Philippines Irrigation Project, a very good deal was made for vulnerable APs.
A group of 41 nontitled families occupying government land classified as timber land got a
concrete house in addition to compensation for their old traditional huts, a plot of land at 25% of
the purchase price of government and at very liberal terms, a service truck, income loss during
demolition, transfer and house construction, relocation expenses, a piped water system, power,
road access, access to health and educational facilities, and a chapel. Rehabilitation in the form
of livelihood training, technical assistance in farm technology and production, and microcredit
continue to be provided to APs. In the Pasig Project, no special deals were made for particularly
vulnerable APs; all APs were treated in the same way. APs received transportation allowance,
food allowance during the transition period, daily shuttle service to Metro Manila, a flexible rent
scheme prorated according to capacity to pay, basic utilities and services, a college, a church,
and day care centers. All APs in the Sixth Road Project were also treated in the same way.
The EA provided a disturbance allowance of $200 per family (at $=PhP50), rental subsidy,
compensation for income loss, rehabilitation assistance of $300 per family, and compensation to
cover the cost of reconnecting utilities.

26.     Were nonlegalizable nontitleholders (squatters) assisted in economic
rehabilitation? In both Philippines and India, squatters were among the main APs. In the Pasig
River, Southern Philippines Irrigation, Kolkata, and West Bengal projects, some assistance was
provided in terms of training programs and microcredit. In the Sixth Road case studied, a
rehabilitation program was provided belatedly for the Mulanay resettlement site in Bondoc, for
reasons discussed earlier. Due to ADB's insistence, some measures were indeed directed at
resettled squatters.

27.      Were rehabilitation assistance measures sufficient for restoration of livelihood
according to the APs? Several questionnaire surveys and in-depth interviews conducted with
APs established that there were large differences in the appreciation by APs of the rehabilitation
assistance provided, and that APs particularly complained about the lack of economic
opportunities provided in the usually more remote resettlement sites. The evaluation of the
extent of rehabilitation is bedeviled by the lack in the Policy of an overall point of reference, for
example a target of full economic and social rehabilitation within two years of actual
resettlement. If such a criterion would be taken, then in most projects studied outside the PRC,
in Philippines and India, the rehabilitation of APs has not been fully achieved yet. This is in spite
of the satisfaction by many with improved living conditions as a result of better housing and
other conditions. In the PRC, income levels were generally quickly restored, barring exceptions
                                                                              Appendix 20   157


in the two dam projects, although at the cost of significant changes in lifestyle and types of
employment.

28.     Were rehabilitation measures continued after the project? According to the IR
Policy, continuation of the rehabilitation measures after the project may be required, including
ADB's monitoring of this. In the PRC, the economic rehabilitation in case of mass movements of
people, as in the two dam reservoir cases, is seen as a postresettlement issue, and is pursued,
albeit with varying focus. In the Suzhou Creek Project in Shanghai, where, due to urban
renewal, people were placed in apartment buildings outside the center, such postresettlement
work is not seen as necessary, as the people are viewed as benefiting from being in close
proximity to the city center. In the road and railway cases, no economic rehabilitation work was
done, and rehabilitation was viewed as part of the resettlement or rehabilitation subsidy (4-6 x
AAOV), a component of the cash compensation offered to APs who lost their land. In India,
economic rehabilitation activities were part of NGO work postresettlement for the Kolkata
Project; in the West Bengal Corridor Development and Western Transport Corridor projects,
rehabilitation activities were much less prominent. In the Philippines, the Pasig River Project
APs received much training and some microcredit, but the distance of the sites to the center of
Manila (1 hour travel time) remained a main disadvantage for many of the resettlees. the
Southern Philippines Irrigation project APs received livelihood training and microcredit.
158     Appendix 21



      IMPACT OF CASE STUDY PROJECTS ON HOUSING, RESETTLEMENT SITES, AND
                         RESTORATION OF LIVELIHOODS

1.       Housing. Almost uniformly, housing quality for affected persons (APs) improved after
resettlement, not only housing in resettlement sites, but also houses such as those built by APs
themselves in the People's Republic of China (PRC) and in India road projects. In the PRC, the
dam resettlement projects offered cash compensation for lost housing and land, but APs were
required to use townhouse designs prepared by the project. In many cases, the compensation
was not sufficient to build the 3- or 4-storey townhouse as planned by the authorities. APs
therefore had to invest their own savings or borrow, which led to some indebtedness that
persists to this day. However, in the Shanxi water supply projects, many families of four
members or more were offered two housing units, the second of which could subsequently be
rented out. Also, a number of ground floor workshop areas near urban streets were rented out,
sometimes as shops. When the debts (mortgages) are paid, the value of the properties are
certain to go up by very much. A minority of farmers that had opted to resettle nearer to the
reservoir, higher in the hills and away from the busy coastal areas, now regret that choice, and
have become seriously indebted as their incomes are very low due to reduced production
resources or common property resources. Mostly these are older farmers, of less interest to
employers in the "new economy' of the coastal areas. Urban projects such as Suzhou Creek
Rehabilitation in Shanghai resettled people that used to live in tiny degraded tenements in
waterlogged areas in big apartment buildings on the outskirts of this megacity. They were
uniformly very happy in spite of the longer travel distances, as their new and much larger
apartments gained in value and enhanced their living standards. Expressway and railway
construction projects had seldom engaged in creating resettlement sites in the PRC, and cash
compensation was uniformly relied on to provide APs with sufficient funds to make their own
arrangements within the ambit of their village collectives. Usually, they would find a "foundation
plot" for a new house, for which the project often already provided architectural designs. Since
compensation standards have gone up significantly in the PRC over the past 10 years, the
compensation offered was often sufficient for building a much better, concrete and brick house.
In India, the Kolkata Project case is illustrative. Thousands of nontitled canal bank dwellers were
first moved to a temporary camp in the immediate vicinity, and in 2005 the process begun to
transfer them to 4-storey, 17 square meter apartment blocks built by a company several
hundred meters further away. The dwellers do not need to pay for the apartments; half of their
cost will be paid for by the project, the other half by a national program for poverty relief. Poor
squatters who used to live in shacks along the canals will now have to live together in 4-storey
buildings, pay bills for services, and make joint maintenance arrangements. Whether they will
stay in the apartments remains to be seen; the influence on this from squatting syndicates
cannot be assessed at this stage, neither that of other factors such as the payment of 5% of the
cost of the apartment. In the Philippines, the Pasig River Project offered 20­30 square meter
housing to thousands of affected families in various resettlement sites 10­50 kilometers from
Manila. The families would not own the land, but could opt to buy it at subsidized rates, whereas
the monthly rent was also offered at rates of around $10 a month equivalent. In the resettlement
site of the Sixth Road Project in Munsayac in the Bondoc Peninsula, land was offered free to the
squatter families, barring registration and titling fee; concrete roads, concrete septic vaults,
power, and piped water were offered as well. As per the surveys held, APs both in the Kolkata
Project and the three Philippines cases were almost uniformly satisfied with housing conditions,
calling them greatly improved as compared with their previous housing situation.

2.    Resettlement Sites. Small sites housing 50­200 families were constructed in the West
Bengal Corridor, Sixth Road, and Southern Philippines Irrigation projects; larger complexes
were built or acquired under the Kolkata and Pasig River projects; some were not fully complete
                                                                                   Appendix 21   159


with facilities, but overall, over the years, good progress was made. In the Pasig River Project,
the majority of the APs were satisfied with the improved environment, access to services and
access to utilities; and almost 90% were satisfied with the housing conditions. More than 50%
felt better off in the resettlement site compared with their original location, although 60% felt that
it was more difficult to get to employment centers from the resettlement sites. APs of the Sixth
Road project overwhelmingly expressed satisfaction with the housing conditions and access to
services and utilities. In the Southern Philippines Irrigation Project, all APs stated that they were
much better off in the resettlement site and noted that they were satisfied with the better living
conditions, access to services and utilities; and access to the town center from the resettlement
site. In the West Bengal Corridor project and Western Transport project, market or shop
complexes were built, however not to the liking of the APs due to their distance from the main
road. In road projects in the PRC, the different situations have already been described.
Greenfield resettlement sites were seldom developed for APs, but APs were regularly fitted in
new township developments planned with a wider purpose than housing APs exclusively,
whereas smaller scale resettlement would often be handled relying on generous compensation
for lost assets on the one hand, and cooperation from village collectives on the other. In the
Mianhuatan Project, more than two thirds of APs were relocated to agricultural regions that were
not far from their original homes. About 37% of APs voluntarily chose near-reservoir agricultural
resettlementcompared with only 3% in the Zhezijang-Shanxi water supply project. All
interviewed APs reported that they were offered at least two options in terms of resettlement
sites. As with overall housing conditions, APs in the various projects were often satisfied with
the residential qualities of the resettlement sites built for them, especially after the teething
problems were by and large over. APs were often not satisfied with the locations of the sites,
and were not satisfied because of not having been able to choose themselves whether to be in
a resettlement site or get cash compensation in order to settle on their own.

3.       Access to Livelihood Opportunities. In the projects reviewed that affected farmers (or
fishers, as in the Mulanay area) most APs lost more land than they gained after resettlement.
The land-for-land option that the ADB Policy favors could not always be exercised. The two dam
reservoir resettlement projects operated on the principle of providing new land to APs but
succeeded in doing so only in part; smaller parcels were provided, along with compensation for
land losses. Many farmers made even more use of casual labor opportunities than they did
before, or utilized microcredit to start small businesses (carpet weaving with carpet looms, etc.),
leaving the farming of their share in the replacement land offered to their communities to a few
farmers who would then provide them with a share of the produce. As a result, income from
farming decreased, but income from other sources increased, also as a result of the booming
economy in the eastern seaboard. In the other projects in the PRC that took away land from
farmers, the remaining land was often redistributed among farmers of the village collective, so
that all shared equally in the land loss. In the three projects evaluated in the Philippines, APs
from the Southern Philippines Irrigation Project expressed most satisfaction about the access to
livelihood opportunities. However, they still complained that after three years they had not
regained the income levels they had had in the former location, since they were starting anew
with their agricultural activities including propagation of fruit trees, which take much longer to
mature and bear fruit. Furthermore agricultural lands given them were much smaller than the
lands they occupied around the dam area. In the Pasig River, APs rued that the distance from
Metro Manila adversely affected their access to livelihood opportunities and emphasized that
the reason why they illegally settled along the banks of the Pasig River was its close proximity
to livelihood and employment opportunities. Many of the APs of the Sixth Road Project
relocated some distance from their former location along the easement of the national highway.
Their former location accorded opportunities for small-scale commercial activities, and farmers
had better access to markets in their former location along the highway. APs in the PRC overall
160    Appendix 21



did well, as far as economic opportunities other than farming were concerned, even if they were
forced by circumstances to work as casual migrant laborers or to do petty business. The PRC
economy was able to absorb most in the margins of the new economy. Most problematic was
the situation for older and illiterate farmers, who generally could not find a place in the new
economy. For these, the limited social safety nets that the government provides, for instance
through the "five insurances scheme," needed to be employed, but are not able to lift these
people out of poverty.

4.      Can APs be held to be on the way to restoring their livelihood? In the PRC, the surveys
confirmed that this was the case for between 70% and 85% of the APs, but not the case for the
elderly and some other vulnerable categories. Some would, however, also have been among
the poorest if they had not resettled. The greater access to land before resettlement would have
provided them with a larger and more secure source of livelihood than is available to them
today. In the Philippines, income restoration has not been fully achieved for many in the Pasig
River and Southern Philippines Irrigation projects. In India, the results were most disappointing,
with the large majority of APs claiming they were worse off than before (except in the Kolkata
project). APs surveyed in at least 9 of the 16 case study projects stated that they had
complaints against the resettlement process.
             MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY
                  ON INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT SAFEGUARDS



         On 6 October 2006, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       I.       General Comments

       1.      Management welcomes OED's Special Evaluation Study (SES) on ADB
       involuntary resettlement safeguards and appreciates efforts to complete the
       study in a short time. As requested by OED, Management's response focuses on
       the final recommendations of the SES.

       2.      Management is aware that the findings of the SES are subject to
       significant limitations as described in para. 9 of the SES and as highlighted in
       detailed interdepartmental comments on the draft report. We nevertheless
       believe that the recommendations directed at the safeguard policy update (paras.
       166­171) and the recommendations for involuntary resettlement implementation
       (paras. 172­173) are highly relevant. We would emphasize, however, that both
       sets of recommendations should be further reviewed and considered in the
       context of the safeguard policy update, including its consultation process. The
       current status and timeline of the safeguard policy update is provided on
       http://www.adb.org/Safeguards/.

       II.      Comments on Recommendations

                A.    Recommendations for the Update of the Safeguard Policies

                      (i)    "Management and the Board need to reconcile the
                             difference between the 1995 Policy and the currently
                             applied policy" (para. 166)

       3.       Management recognizes that there are ambiguities in the 1995 Policy on
       Involuntary Resettlement. We believe that successive versions of the Operations
       Manual were able to clarify these ambiguities and elaborate on operational
       procedures consistent with the intent of the policy. Management acknowledges
       the need to ensure that the updated policy to be submitted for Board approval
       provides full clarity on its scope, objectives, and principles. We also believe that
       the policy should be accompanied by clear operational procedures for delivery of
       results.
               (ii)    "The policy should have a results-based framework-
                       distinguishing desired impact, outcomes, outputs,
                       activities, and inputs both at macro (country) and
                       micro (project) level" (para. 167)

4.      Management agrees that achievement of results should guide the policy
update. The substance of the recommendation as laid out in para. 167 deserves
further review.

               (iii)   "The updated policy should highlight a set of
                       performance standards" (para. 168)

5.      Management agrees in principle that the concept of performance
standards is relevant and merits consideration in the safeguard policy update.
We note that a set of performance standards for safeguards have been
introduced for the first time in the context of International Finance Corporation's
recently approved safeguard policies and procedures, and experience with these
may be relevant.

               (iv)    "The updated policy should elaborate on the objective
                       of greater reliance on country executing agency
                       systems for land acquisition and resettlement
                       safeguards" (para. 169)

6.      We agree that consideration should be given to greater reliance on
country systems where this does not compromise achievement of safeguard
policy objectives. We would note that it is already an established practice for
resettlement frameworks and plans to take into account country and executing
agency systems, with filling of gaps as required to meet ADB safeguard policy
provisions. Over time, such gaps can be expected to diminish, especially with
support of development partners, although this might only be a longer-term
prospect in several developing member countries (DMCs). We would point out
that TA 6285-REG: Strengthening Country Systems is reviewing possible
approaches for assessing country systems and their increased application. The
results will be considered in the safeguard policy update. We are also in close
consultation with the World Bank on the performance of its pilot program on the
application of country systems.

               (v)     "The updated policy should have clear guidelines and
                       procedures regarding the identification of resettlement
                       operation needed" (para. 170)

7.      Management agrees with this recommendation. We have noted the
issues and recommendations summarized in Box 3 and agree these should be
considered as part of the safeguard policy update. The need for clarity in
guidelines and procedures will be addressed through the revisions to the
Operations Manual that will accompany the updated policy and through the
revised Handbook on Involuntary Resettlement that will follow. A key issue will be
to formulate operational procedures that improve the relevance and effectiveness
of resettlement planning and implementation, and address opportunities to
reduce transactions costs.
               (vi)   "The updated policy should be clearer on guidelines
                      and procedures regarding compensation and
                      assistance within resettlement operations" (para. 171)

8.     Management agrees that the issues and suggestions in Box 4 should be
considered in the safeguard policy update. The need for clarity in guidelines and
procedures will be addressed in the revisions to the Operations Manual and the
Handbook.

       B.      Recommendations           for      Involuntary        Resettlement
               Implementation

9.       The SES finds that there are significant constraints on staff resources to
implement the Involuntary Resettlement Policy and to ensure strong engagement
with executing agencies in this regard (para. 172). Management agrees that this
issue warrants serious attention. We have noted that among the three suggested
options to address this issue, one is to consider "changing the policy in ways that
will be less staff intensive for ADB". In this regard, Management believes that the
emphasis should be to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of operational
procedures without compromising policy delivery. This will be explored in the
safeguard policy update, along with options to optimize internal resource
allocation.

10.    The SES makes three further recommendations.

               (i)    "Formulate a time-sequenced implementation plan"
                      (para. 173 [i])

11.    As part of the safeguard policy update process, we agree that the
updated policy and operational procedures should be accompanied by a time-
bound action plan that includes a realistic assessment of resource requirements
and their optimal allocation. The options offered for inclusion in this plan will be
considered, including the need to strengthen specialist expertise in resident
missions and to review responsibilities of RSES and the Operations
Departments.

               (ii)   "Improve IR monitoring" (para. 173 [ii])

12.     Management agrees that monitoring and supervision of involuntary
resettlement implementation needs more attention. We would note that the policy
update is looking at ways to balance procedural requirements during processing
with increased attention to project implementation. We would point out that
partnerships with nongovernment organizations and civil society organizations
are already being integrated into resettlement plan implementation and
monitoring processes, particularly in DMCs with a strong and reputable
nongovernment organization base. This recommendation merits attention in the
safeguard policy update.
               (iii)   "Get more involved in building country systems and
                       capacity" (para. 173 [iii])

13.    Management agrees that the strengthening of country systems and
capacity is a sound development objective that should continue to be pursued.
RETA 6285 will elaborate an approach for assessing equivalence between
country systems and international best practice, as well as associated capacity
constraints. This will allow identification of gaps at country and sector levels for
targeted capacity building by ADB and other development partners.
                            BOARD OF DIRECTORS
                    DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE


                  CHAIR'S SUMMARY OF THE COMMITTEE DISCUSSION
                               ON 9 0CTOBER 2006


Independent Evaluations of ADB's Safeguard Policies

1.     In November 2005, in the process of reviewing the proposed work program of the
Operations Evaluation Department (OED) for 2006­2008, the Development Effectiveness
Committee (DEC) recommended that an independent evaluation by OED precede
Management's planned review of ADB's safeguard policies. OED had originally proposed
evaluation of the safeguard policies in 2008, after updates of the policies had been considered
by the Board in 2006. DEC argued that the value and impact of independent evaluation would
be greater before rather than after Management review of the policies. The findings of the
evaluations could thus be fed into the Management review and the Board's consideration of
updated or revised policies. Accordingly, the evaluations were advanced to 2006.

2.      Furthermore, DEC recommended that sufficient time be allowed between completion of
the evaluations and preparation of the Board W-paper (the working paper to be discussed by
the Board, after being posted on the ADB website for public consultation for a 90 day period,
and before a final policy paper with Management's recommendations, or R-paper, is considered
by the Board). This way an effective feedback process involving further consultation could take
place. It was likely that some fundamental issues would be identified in the consultation process
and through the evaluation, that would require more than a "fine tuning" of the policies. At the
same time, Board consideration of Management proposals for safeguard policy revisions should
not be delayed beyond 2007 given their importance to ADB operations.

3.      Management agreed with DEC's recommended approach and process. Consequently,
OED has completed its evaluations of the safeguard policies for the environment and
involuntary resettlement. Given their potentially contentious nature and that various
stakeholders are known to have differing views on the policies, DEC decided to discuss the
evaluations individually at separate meetings. The goal set by DEC members for themselves
was to identify the most central issues and to try to narrow differences of views through an
objective consideration of the issues.

Special Evaluation Study on Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards

4.      On 9 October 2006, DEC discussed OED's independent assessment of the
effectiveness of ADB's 1995 Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (IR). On 5 October,
Management had given its response to the evaluation. The evaluation has identified issues and
made recommendations for consideration in the proposed update of the IR safeguard policy.
Based on its review of the report, DEC considers that, as in the case of the environmental
safeguards policy, the process it had recommended--allowing time for an independent
evaluation to feed into Management's review of the policy--has yielded useful results.

5.     At the outset, DEC made it clear that it considers the stretch of 11­12 years before a
formal policy review is submitted to the Board for consideration to be excessive and failing to
comply with the requirements in the original policy. The 1995 IR Policy, as approved by the
Board, required annual progress reports for the Board and a policy review, including
recommended modifications, after 2 years. While progress reports on policy implementation
were submitted by Management in 1997 and 1999, which included reporting of significant
expansion of the requirements of implementation of the 1995 policy, no policy review with
recommended policy modifications was submitted to the Board for approval, even when ADB
reorganized its business processes in 2002. DEC considers this a lapse in internal good
governance in relation to the IR policy. Such lapse is further highlighted by the highly
controversial perceptions among stakeholders--including affected persons--surrounding ADB
IR policy implementation. In this light, the upcoming policy review Board paper is expected to
clearly specify the changes proposed in reference to the 1995 policy, the reason and purpose
for each proposed change, and the resource implications.

6.     As in the case of environment policy implementation, the key issue facing IR policy
implementation is that of binding constraints in ADB, the staff resource constraint in particular.
The policy review needs to address this issue fully and realistically.

7.      The three areas specified in paragraph 8 in reference to the environment safeguard
policy, which require further discussion in the DEC before some consensus can be reached,
similarly hold in the case of IR safeguard policy. However, there appears to be significantly less
divergence of view on engaging affected persons and civil society persons to assist in IR
monitoring in addition to consultants.

8.      Specific to IR considerations, DEC members share a view that while the policy should
correctly set high standards, its application in country and project specific contexts involves a
complicated social process that requires time and common sense, and by which standards and
results may be achievable only in a progressive manner. This means that the policy is not
necessarily compromised by an approach that explicitly follows a roadmap with progressive
milestones that, in the medium term, leads to satisfactory results for affected persons. While
DEC is concerned about the transaction costs of policy implementation, it is also concerned
about the opportunity costs of countries and ADB shying away from good projects that involve
IR and the marginal costs of "reaching the last affected person" in implementing the policy.
Some DEC members propose replacing the "no one worse off" requirement with a less onerous
provision.

9.      DEC generally endorses the directions set out in the recommendations of the evaluation
report. In particular, DEC recommends that the revised policy paper:

       (i) recast the IR policy in a comprehensive results framework covering both the country-
             level safeguard system and the impact on affected persons at project level, clearly
             defining what ADB wants to achieve and how this is envisioned to be achieved;
       (ii) within such a framework, provide clear guidelines on the principles, degree, and
             approaches by which flexibility may be exercised in application of the policy. Such
             guidelines should in particular address the issue of how results of the "no person
             worse off" aspiration are to be measured in practice or replace this provision with a
             more workable undertaking that advances the broad intent of the policy less rigidly;
       (iii) given the evaluation's finding that ADB technical assistance (TA) may have found a
             niche in IR policy development and capacity building in client countries, enhance the
             role of TA as a matter of good practice by defining a framework for such TA in the
             country partnership strategy (CPS) ;
       (iv) provide an agreed policy and practical guidelines on squatter rights, incorporating a
            small number of widely agreed basic principles with sufficient flexibility to allow local
            regulations and provisions to apply in the majority of cases; and
       (v) specify how ADB will assist in the transaction costs incurred by countries to
            implement the IR policy.

10.     The review of the IR policy, to which the independent evaluation report feeds into,
should be undertaken by ADB as a delayed but nonetheless prime opportunity to make further
headway toward better results on this highly charged development issue. DEC believes that a
necessary condition for effective use of this window for improvement is to carry out a
reasonable process of open and inclusive dialogue involving all stakeholders particularly on
issues that are not clear cut. Management is encouraged to ensure such a dialogue, which may
require an iterative process exceeding ADB's conventional consultation activities.

Comments of NGO Forum on ADB

11.     After the DEC meetings, on 3 November 2006, committee members received and, by
this Chair's Summary, publicly acknowledge the comments of the NGO Forum on ADB on the
two evaluation reports, respectively entitled "Safeguarding Safeguards" and "Stocktaking ADB's
Role in Displacement". These stakeholder comments have been forwarded to the staff directly
involved in the policy review and, with the agreement of the NGO Forum, have also been
publicly posted on the ADB website, accompanying the evaluation reports.



                                              Agus Haryanto
                                              Chair, Development Effectiveness Committee
                                              22 December 2006
