                     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
                   Operations Evaluation Department




                         SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY


                                           ON


   ADB SUPPORT TO PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN INDIA




In this electronic file, the report is followed by Management's response and the Board of
Directors' Development Effectiveness Committee (DEC) Chair's summary of a discussion of the
report by DEC.
Evaluation Study




Reference Number: SST: IND 2007-22
Special Evaluation Study
September 2007




ADB Support to Public Resource Management in
India




 Operations Evaluation Department
                                          ABBREVIATIONS

             ADB         ­     Asian Development Bank
             ADTA        ­     advisory technical assistance
             DMC         ­     developing member countries
             FY          ­     financial year
             OED         ­     Operations Evaluation Department
             TA          ­     technical assistance
             TCR         ­     technical assistance completion report
             VAT         ­     value-added tax

                                    WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

                                        Re/Rs ­ Indian Rupee

                                                NOTES

       (i)      The Government of India financial year runs from 1 April to 31 March of the
                following year.

       (ii)     In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                              Key Words
adb, asian development bank, finance financial reforms, public resource management, Indian
public enterprises reforms, good practices, policy evaluation, reform, India, Assam, Gujarat,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, policy loans, technical assistance, political economy




Director General :       B. Murray, Operations Evaluation Department (OED)
Director         :       R. K. Leonard, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED

Team Leader          :   P. Robertson, Evaluation Specialist, Operations Evaluation Division 1,
                         OED
Team Members         :   O. Nuestro, Evaluation Officer, Operations Evaluation Division 1, OED
                     :   B. Q. Cafirma, Operations Evaluation Assistant, Operations Evaluation
                         Division 1, OED

                             Operations Evaluation Department, SS-81
                                           CONTENTS

                                                                                              Page

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                 iii
I.     INTRODUCTION                                                                               1
       A.   Objective and Method                                                                  2
       B.   Organization of the Report                                                            2
II.    PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT CONTEXT AND FRAMEWORK                                           3
       A.    Political Economy Context                                                            3
       B.    Public Resource Management Analytical Framework                                      5
       C.    Technical Assistance                                                                10
       D.    Implementation Arrangements                                                         10
III.   EVALUATION FINDINGS                                                                       11
       A.   Relevance                                                                            12
       B.   Effectiveness                                                                        14
       C.   Efficiency                                                                           16
       D.   Sustainability                                                                       16
       E.   Impact                                                                               17
IV.    CONCLUSIONS                                                                               17
       A.   Lessons                                                                              17
       B.   Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats                                    23
       C.   Towards Good Practice Standards                                                      24

APPENDIXES
1.    Basic Data                                                                                 26
2.    Summary of Public Resource Management Program Design and Evaluation                        28
      Findings
3.    Summary of Key Elements in Program Implementation Arrangements                             50
4.    An Overview of Public Enterprise Reform in India                                           51
5.    ADB Assistance to the States of, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and Assam                64
6.    Summary of Lessons from Evaluations of ADB Programs in Support of Public                   68
      Sector Reform


Attachments:           Management Response
                       DEC Chair Summary



The guidelines formally adopted by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.
To the knowledge of the management of OED, there were no conflicts of interest of the persons
preparing, reviewing, or approving this report.
                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

         For three and a half decades after independence, the gross domestic product growth of
the Indian economy was low at 3.5% per year. However, in the latter half of the 1980s it quickly
accelerated to over 5%. Economic liberalization provided the initial spur for this growth, but an
expansionist fiscal stance of the central government and a hike in public sector wages in 1989
consolidated it. The gross fiscal deficit of the center and states steadily increased from 5.9% in
1984 to 9.4% in 1992, and outstanding liabilities of the central and state governments relative to
gross domestic product rose from 46.4% in 1983 to 61.4% in 1992. By the early 1990s, this
fiscal expansion-led growth became inherently unsustainable. The fiscal imbalance spilled over
into balance of payments and, exacerbated by a sharp increase in oil prices caused by the Gulf
crisis, an economic crisis was triggered in the country.

        The stabilization and structural adjustment reforms initiated in 1991 required
containment of fiscal deficits at both the central and state levels. At the state level, in addition to
containing deficits, reforms had to address the issue of enhancing allocation and technical
efficiency in public spending and creating an enabling environment for private sector
participation in accelerating economic growth. Economic liberalization required creation of a
competitive environment for domestic manufacturers. The hardening central finances reduced
the resource transfers to states. A policy change in the mid-1990s allowed reform-oriented
states to negotiate loans from multilateral institutions. Given that fiscal reform was an inherent
part of loan negotiations, allowing states to borrow from multilateral institutions could achieve
the objectives of improving their finances, augmenting outlay on social and physical
infrastructure, restructuring public enterprises, and creating an enabling environment to attract
private sector involvement in infrastructure development. Between 1996 and 2005, the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank provided loans to support fiscal reform in six
states.

        Following the pay increases in 2000, the finances of all state governments sharply
deteriorated. Stagnant tax revenues and declining central transfers relative to the state domestic
product were compounded by increasing deficits and debt on the one hand, and rising interest
rates on the other. In response, the central Government introduced a medium-term fiscal reform
program that required the states to reduce the ratio of revenue deficits to their total revenues by
five percentage points every year to be eligible to receive a portion of grants. Problems in the
design of this performance-linked grants program led the Twelfth Finance Commission to
recommend an incentive-based debt restructuring program to be outlined in a Fiscal
Responsibility Act. This would provide a binding legal and administrative framework guiding
fiscal consolidation efforts and entitle states that passed the act to restructure and consolidate
market and central government loans at substantially reduced interest rates, and from 2006
waive loan repayments due until 2011.

        The Government of India's policy change created an opportunity for a strategic shift in
ADB's country strategy and program to support state governments' reform efforts as an entry
point for future loans assisting sector-specific reforms. ADB was the first multilateral
development bank to support subnational public resource management reforms, first in Gujarat
state, followed by Madhya Pradesh and Kerala states. However, by the time the Assam public
resource management program was approved, ADB had already approved a loan to the power
sector. Beginning in 1992, stand-alone advisory technical assistance (TA) was provided to
support national-level policy reforms (public enterprise, taxation, pension, and budgeting), and
in the states of Karnataka, Sikkim, and West Bengal to prepare for fiscal reform. Since the mid-
1990s, ADB has supported public resource management programs in four states through two
                                                                                                    iii


programs and two cluster loans (totaling $825 million), with TA grants accompanying each loan
(a total of 12 TA grants valued at $6.958 million), and a $25 million TA loan project in the Assam
program.

        Overall, ADB's public resource management program in India is rated relevant. The
three policy-based loans and associated TA are rated relevant, with the ongoing Assam
program being potentially relevant. The national-level TA, which focused primarily on tax
administration capacity development, is also rated relevant. The public resource management
programs enabled ADB to support the Government of India's policy to assist state fiscal
reforms. This provided external recognition and support for more politically difficult reform
measures. The need to develop institutional capacity to manage complex reform processes was
recognized and addressed through TA providing technical solutions and training. ADB
developed a comparative advantage in state-level fiscal reforms, with lessons influencing other
public resource management programs in India and the region.

        All four policy loans had common structural features, with interventions addressing
revenue, expenditure, and service delivery reforms. Differences of emphasis and specific
actions across these three dimensions reflected incorporation of lessons, evolving fiscal
conditions, central government policies, and state-level priorities. For example, the Assam
program design considered the importance of pension reform, performance-based budgeting
and expenditure monitoring, and the need to reduce the specificity of conditions associated with
public enterprise reform. The Kerala government's concern to prioritize governance reforms
resulted in service delivery initiatives, with local governments dominating the revenue and
expenditure reform aspects of the program.

         Overall, the public resource management program, including the national- and state-
level TA, is rated effective. Both revenue and fiscal deficits show significant interstate variations.
External factors such as an earthquake and communal disturbances in Gujarat, bifurcation and
floods in Madhya Pradesh, national salary award increases, and one-off state-level decisions to
reduce debt levels put pressure on fiscal deficits in the early 2000s. However, the change over
the past decade is positive, particularly in the past 2­3 years. The introduction of value added
tax is expected to enhance states' own revenue. The programs were effective in improving
revenue legislative and regulatory frameworks as well as administration systems and
procedures, including automating tax administration and preparing for the introduction of value-
added tax. Multi-year expenditure planning was introduced but not widely implemented until the
central Government's fiscal responsibility legislation was introduced. Treasury payment systems
were automated. Power sector subsidies were reduced with some difficulty in two states. Public
enterprise reforms had varied success, with a number of poorly performing enterprises merged,
divested, or operationally closed; but improving corporate governance was less effective.
Perhaps the most effective and far-reaching measures have been the small number of critical
legal, policy, and institutional reforms establishing power and port sector regulatory authorities
and attracting significant private sector, and ADB, investment in the power and transport sectors
in particular.

        Only the Kerala and Madhya Pradesh programs had an explicit poverty reduction
impact or outcome. As the projected fiscal space was not created, social sector allocations in
these states did not increase, and the outcomes were not achieved. However, in all states social
sector budgets were protected from expenditure compression, and significant central
government vertical programs in health, education, and poverty reduction ensured that the
generally poor level of social development indicators did not worsen. The Gujarat outcome was
iv


to promote industrialization and was achieved, and Assam's fiscal consolidation outcome looks
likely to be achieved.

       Overall, the public resource management program is rated likely sustainable, although
the sustainability of individual policy and technical interventions is mixed. By providing state
governments with an opportunity to chart their direction and by improving institutional capacity
to implement complex fiscal reforms, the public resource management program has helped to
change attitudes to reform, increasing the likelihood that the broader reform agenda will be
sustained.

        Either during or after program completion, all four states entered into a compact with the
central Government committing to a legal and administrative fiscal reform framework for at least
5 years. The influx of private investment in upgrading infrastructure has been a key factor in
stimulating economic growth, with the success in Gujarat being the most pronounced. Assisting
state governments to realign their service delivery role, particularly in the many poorly
performing public enterprises, is a long-term and politically fraught process to which these
programs gave much needed impetus. TA impact was varied, but where it was successful--
e.g., establishing a nodal agency for infrastructure development and managing public enterprise
reform in Gujarat, computerizing tax administration in Madhya Pradesh, assisting three state
governments to prepare reform programs, and building central government tax administration
capacity--it was also most likely sustainable. Finally, although not explicitly recognized in the
program designs, each contributed to the state government's anticorruption efforts through such
measures as simplifying the taxation system, computerizing expenditure treasury and debt
accounts, establishing independent utility regulatory authorities, and closing loss-incurring public
enterprises. Overall, the impact of the resource management programs was substantial.

       The overall rating for the resource management programs is successful.

         The study has identified seven lessons: (i) Effective political economy analysis will
improve reform design. (ii) There is no blueprint, but there is a sequence to reforms. (iii)
Coherent application of design tools is needed to achieve development results. (iv) Developing
"soft" capacities is necessary to sustain reforms. (v) Reform actions supporting anticorruption
efforts should be explicitly identified. (vi) Clarity in the roles of resident mission and
headquarters staff in sustaining policy dialogue during implementation will improve
effectiveness. (vii) Mechanisms are required to monitor ADB Board concerns. The study
identifies strengths to build into design, weaknesses to avoid, opportunities upon which to
capitalize, and threats and risks to mitigate from the experience of the India programs.

        The study concludes that ADB should maintain its support to state-level public resource
management reform. The study proposes that consideration should be given in the design of
future public resource management programs to the following good practice standards:

       (i)     Sufficient time and resources are required for policy dialogue and
               communications campaigns involving all stakeholders in formulating and
               implementing long-term fiscal reforms.

       (ii)    Program design should be internally coherent, focusing on key elements of the
               government's fiscal reform agenda, avoiding broader governance reforms until
               fiscal consolidation measures are in place.
                                                                                      v


(iii)   Sufficient TA resources should be made available over the long term to respond
        to the changing nature of reform processes.

(iv)    Implementation arrangements should be based on existing institutional structures
        and provided with adequate resources, including technical advice.




                                                   Bruce Murray
                                                   Director General
                                                   Operations Evaluation Department
                                      I.       INTRODUCTION

1.      The Asian Development Bank (ADB) began supporting public resource management
through technical assistance (TA) to the Government of Singapore in 1971.1 However, it was not
until the mid-1980s that further TA in this sector was approved.2 In 1993, the first public
resource management loan was approved to Sri Lanka.3 Two years later, with the approval of
ADB's Governance Policy,4 the link between the quality of governance and sound development
management was formalized within a four-pronged framework to improve governance:
accountability, participation, predictability, and transparency. With the policy's approval, ADB's
support for governance policy and institutional reform, including public resource management,
increased significantly, starting in 1996 with a state-level policy-based program loan in Gujarat,
India.5

2.     A policy change by the Government of India in the mid-1990s encouraged multilateral
development banks to enter into partnerships with selected state governments. This created an
opportunity for ADB to realign its India country strategy to support improved public resource
management as an entry point to a sustained state-level engagement in selected sectors. This
was an innovative strategy, with ADB being the first multilateral development bank to finance
subnational fiscal reforms. Following ADB's lead, by 2004 seven states had taken loans to
support fiscal reforms with either ADB or the World Bank.6

3.       Over an 8-year period, ADB approved policy-based loans supporting four states'
implementation of fiscal reforms. The Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh7 programs were designed
as three-tranche, policy-based program loans of $250 million each for 2 and 3 years,
respectively. The first tranche was to be released on loan effectiveness, with the other two
during the life of the program when tranche release conditions had been met. The Kerala8 and
Assam9 programs were also policy-based loans but followed a cluster loan modality of two
subprograms totaling $300 million for Kerala over 3 years, and $225 million for Assam over 5
years. The design of the second subprogram was contingent upon the successful performance
of the first. Kerala's first subprogram of $200 million was for 2 years with two tranches, with the
first tranche being released on loan effectiveness. However, Kerala's second subprogram was
not designed, as the state was considered "fiscally stressed" and unable to meet the
Government of India's requirements to borrow from multilateral agencies. Assam's first
subprogram of $125 million was for 2.5 years with three tranches, with the first tranche also
released on loan effectiveness. Assam's first subprogram also had a $25 million project loan for

1
    ADB. 1971. Technical Assistance to Singapore for the Improvement of National Accounts. Manila. (TA 0045 for
    $34,700, approved on 20 January).
2
    In Thailand and some Pacific island nations.
3
    ADB. 1993. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loan to the
    Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Financial Management Training Program. Manila. (Loan 1275
    SRI[SF] for $16.2 million, approved on 29 November.)
4
    ADB. 1995. Governance: Sound Development Management. Manila.
5
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors for the Gujarat Public Sector
    Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 1506-IND for $250 million, approved on 18 December).
6
    ADB supported Gujarat (1996), Madhya Pradesh (1999), Kerala (2003), and Assam (2004); and the World Bank
    supported Uttar Pradesh (2000), Karnataka (2001), and Andhra Pradesh (2002).
7
    ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors for the Madhya Pradesh Public
    Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 1717-IND for $250 million, approved on 14 December).
8
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors for the Modernizing
    Government and Fiscal Reforms in Kerala Program. Manila. (Loan 1974-IND for 200 million, approved on 16
    December).
9
    ADB. 2004. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors for the Assam Governance
    and Public Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 2141-IND for $125 million, approved on 16 December).
2


equipment and capacity building. A total of $850 million of ordinary capital resources was
disbursed through these four loans, with only the Assam program ongoing in 2007. Almost $1
million was provided through 1 preparatory (Assam) and 11 advisory TA grants to build capacity
accompanying the four loans. A further $4 million financed seven stand-alone advisory TA
grants to the central Government, and one in each of two other states.10 Appendix 1
summarizes basic data on the four program loans and 21 TA operations being assessed in this
study.

A.      Objective and Method

4.      The objectives of this special evaluation study were to assess the effectiveness of ADB's
public resource management loans and associated TA in India over the period 1995­2005, and
to identify lessons to contribute to the India country assistance program evaluation and to a
special evaluation study of ADB's support for public financial management and public sector
reform to be conducted in 2008. The study was a desk review, drawing on reports from a range
of sources including Operations Evaluation Department (OED) evaluations of different aspects
of ADB's support to public resource management in India completed since 2000,11 and a
recently completed evaluation of policy-based lending.12 Regional department design, progress,
and completion reports, and a joint regional department review and assessment of 10 public
resource management programs in the region have been used.13 Reports of World Bank state-
level experience are cited in the study.

B.      Organization of the Report

5.      Chapter II of the report provides an overview of the political economy context for the four
public resource management programs, followed by an analytical framework to describe the key
features of the four programs. The chapter ends with an outline of the different implementation
arrangements established by the state governments to manage the reform programs. Chapter
III presents the findings of the evaluation against the five criteria of relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency, sustainability, and impact. Chapter IV identifies a number of issues arising from the
implementation of the programs and uses a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
framework to identify a number of good practices. The chapter concludes with
recommendations to improve the effectiveness of future state-level resource management
programs.




10
   West Bengal and Sikkim.
11
   ADB. 2000. Special Evaluation Study of Effectiveness and Impact of ADB Assistance to the Reform of Public
   Expenditure Management in Bhutan, India, Kiribati, and Lao People's Democratic Republic. Manila.
   --. 2004. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance for Fiscal
   Management and Tax Administration in India. Manila.
   --. 2007. Performance Evaluation Report for India: Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program. Manila.
   --. 2007. Performance Evaluation Report for India: Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program.
   Manila.
12
   ADB. 2007. Policy Based-Lending: Emerging Practices in Supporting Reforms in Developing Member Countries.
   Manila.
13
   ADB. 2007. Program Completion Report for India: Modernizing Government and Fiscal Reforms in Kerala
   Program. Manila.
   --. 2007. Progress Report on Tranche Release India: Assam Governance and Public Resource Management
   Program. Manila.
   --. 2007. A Comparative Assessment of ADB's Public Resource Management Reform Programs. Manila.
   Available: http://cop.asiandevbank.org:8040/sard/goto/etsw/view?pk=0551.
                                                                                                                  3


     II.       PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT CONTEXT AND FRAMEWORK

A.         Political Economy Context

6.      Following independence in 1947, the Indian economy developed under the socialist
model championed by Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, where public enterprises
were an engine of India's economic and industrial growth. Over the next three and a half
decades the average economic growth rate was 3.5% of gross domestic product per year.
Economic liberalization policies in the early 1980s and an expansionist fiscal stance of the
central Government spurred economic growth to over 5% annually in the latter half of the 1980s.
However, the gross fiscal deficit of the central and state governments steadily increased from
5.9% in financial year (FY)1983 to 9.4% in FY1991. Outstanding liabilities of central and state
governments relative to gross domestic product also rose, from 46.4% in FY1981 to 61.4% in
FY1991. The fiscal expansion-led growth was inherently unsustainable. The fiscal imbalance
spilled over into the balance of payments, and the sharp increase in oil prices caused by the
Gulf War triggered an economic crisis in the country.

7.       In response to the crisis, stabilization and structural adjustment reforms were initiated in
1991 to containing central and state fiscal deficits. At the state level, in addition to containing
deficits, reforms aimed to improve the efficiency of public spending, and to attract private sector
investment to stimulate economic growth. Economic liberalization aimed to create a competitive
environment for domestic manufacturers and investors. Recognizing that hardening central
finances reduced resource transfers to states, in 1995 the central Government allowed reform-
oriented states to negotiate loans from multilateral institutions. Fiscal reform was an inherent
part of the public resource management programs that ADB and later the World Bank were
considering. Allowing the states to borrow from multilateral institutions could achieve multiple
objectives: improving state finances, increasing social sector expenditure, restructuring public
enterprises, and encouraging private sector investment in public infrastructure. However, by
1999, only 2 of India's 16 major states had negotiated loans.14 The central Government
introduced a memorandum of understanding in 1999 that allowed those state governments
choosing to sign to formalize their medium-term fiscal consolidation strategies.

8.        The Fifth Pay Commission awards, which were phased into the states by FY1999,
effectively increased salaries by 30%, and, as pensions were indexed to real salaries, pension
liabilities also rose. Indeed, the finances of all state governments showed a sharp deterioration
following these pay increases in FY1999. Stagnant tax revenues, a decline in central transfers
relative to the state domestic product, and increasing off-budget liabilities15 further aggravated
the situation. The problem was compounded by increasing deficits and debt on the one hand,
and rising interest rates on the other, leading to a severe liquidity crunch and further intensifying
the pressure for state-level fiscal reform.

9.      The finances of states in India in general, and in particular those of relatively poor states
like Madhya Pradesh,16 are heavily dependent on transfers from the center. These transfers
take place through three channels: the finance commission; the planning commission; and
central government managed programs of various central government ministries, which often
bypass state government budgets. The Eleventh Finance Commission was in the process of

14
   Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh with ADB.
15
   Particularly in the power sector, where the financial implications of the 1980s decision to provide free power to
   farmers, and state guarantees on state electricity board loans were coming to home to roost.
16
   Of the 16 large or "general category" states, 7 are "poor" or "low income states" including Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
   Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh.
4


making its recommendations when, in late 1999, ADB approved the Madhya Pradesh program.
The Eleventh Finance Commission's report was submitted in 2000, with its award period
beginning FY2001­FY2005. There was a substantial increase in the amounts received as the
state's share in central taxes following this award, as the Eleventh Finance Commission
recommended sharing of all central taxes instead of only two--personal income tax and Union
excise duty--which had been the norm until then. This recommendation was implemented
through a constitutional amendment. Grants, however, showed a drop compared with FY1999
levels after a small increase in FY2000 and in subsequent years from all the three sources
noted above. The net increase in current transfers from the center was thus modest.

10.      Following the recommendation of the Eleventh Finance Commission, the Ministry of
Finance replaced the memorandum of understanding system with a fiscal reforms facility--the
medium-term fiscal reforms program--requiring the states to reduce the ratio of revenue deficits
to their total revenues by five percentage points every year to gain eligibility for receiving a
portion of grants. Problems in the design of this performance-linked grants program included the
size of incentive-linked transfers being too small to influence state fiscal performance, multiple
schemes segmenting the incentive, and the scheme design failing to address the causes of
deteriorating state fiscal performance.17 The Twelfth Finance Commission recommended that
the facility be replaced with an incentive-based debt restructuring program.18 To be eligible, the
states are required to pass a fiscal responsibility act.19 This would entitle them to receive the
benefit of restructuring and consolidation of market loans and loans from the central
Government with a substantially reduced rate of interest. A state could also waive loan
repayments for the next 5 years beginning in FY2005 directly linked to the reduction in its
revenue deficit. For example, the Kerala government's Fiscal Responsibility Act (2003)
ambitiously mandated elimination of its revenue deficit by FY2006.20 However, as a result of the
Kerala government approving the eighth state pay commission's recommended pay increases
to civil servants, the revenue deficit was expected to be 6% in FY2006, and the fiscal deficit
4.3%, virtually unchanged from FY2001, 2 years prior to the program's approval.

11.      Changes in the political landscape at both the central government and state levels
through the 1990s influenced fiscal stability and policy reform. After many years of one party
forming a ruling majority, coalition governments were established at the center. Regional parties
won election to state governments and became "pivotal" partners in central government
coalitions. This changed center­state relations, with, among other things, concerns being raised
about unequal treatment of various states by the center. With an eye on the electoral cycle,
political parties increasingly introduced competitive populism into the policy environment. These
factors adversely affected fiscal discipline in the states.




17
   Rao. M. G. 2004. Linking Central Transfers to Fiscal Performance of States. Economic and Political Weekly. 39
   (17): 1820­1825.
18
   The Twelfth Finance Commission also recommended increasing the amount transferred to states from the divisible
   pool of taxes from 29.5% to 30.5%.
19
   This is also referred to as the fiscal responsibility and budget management act. To date nine states have passed
   such an Act: Assam, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar
   Pradesh. One incentive to sign the act into law was that central loans agreed to prior to 31 March 2004 and those
   outstanding as of 31 March 2005 would be consolidated as loans for a new period of 20 years, repayable in 20
   equal installments at a reduced interest rate of 7.5%.
20
   Kerala was the second state to promulgate this act following Karnataka in 2002.
                                                                                                                  5


B.      Public Resource Management Analytical Framework

12.    Public resource management, like all public sector reform programs, is concerned with
change management. In this case the aim is to address structural and institutional constraints to
achieving sustained fiscal stability, and thereby to contribute to improved economic growth and
poverty reduction. Fiscal consolidation is achieved through interventions across three broad
dimensions--revenue, expenditure, and service delivery.21 Changes in the scope and emphasis
of the policy actions across the four ADB programs reflect state-specific priorities and
incorporate lessons from implementing public resource management programs. This section
summarizes the interventions supported by the four loans and associated TA across the above
three dimensions. A summary of the key design features and evaluation findings for each
program is provided in Appendix 2.

        1.       Revenue

13.    Improving the states' revenue focused on (i) broadening the base of own-source taxes
and nontaxes that make up around 65% of all state revenues--the balance being transfers from
the central Government--and (ii) improving the efficiency of tax administration systems and
procedures. The states' powers to specify and levy taxes, duties, fees, or royalties are
prescribed in India's Constitution.22 Historically, sales taxes generated around 60% of states'
own revenue, with the balance from stamp duties and registration fees; motor vehicle, goods
and passenger taxes; and state excises on alcohol.

14.    Value-Added Tax. Proposals to introduce a value-added tax (VAT) date back to the
1991 Tax Reform Committee, which recommended replacing the state sales tax regimes with a
VAT system on the basis that the VAT would increase the administrative efficiency and the
amount of revenue generated by the states. From 1995, ADB provided four TA grants totaling
$2.25 million to build capacity in the central Government23 and three TA operations24 supporting
the program loans to the Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Kerala state governments to put
administrative systems and procedures in place to implement the VAT. Introducing the VAT was
a tranche condition in all three programs, with Kerala focusing on the VAT to the exclusion of
other own-revenue sources. In 1999, the central Government announced that the VAT would be
introduced in 2002. However, the variance in sales tax rates across India's states led to
considerable debate over the impact on revenues of introducing harmonized or floor rates for




21
   These dimensions become outputs in a program results chain.
22
   The Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution (1950) specifies the responsibilities of the Union (central
   Government),       the    states,    and   the   dual    responsibilities known     as   concurrent.   Available:
   http://indiacode.nic.in/coiweb/fullact1.asp?tfnm=00%20511.
23
   ADB. 1995. Technical Assistance to India for the Improvement of State Sales Tax Structure and Administration.
   Manila. (TA 2362-IND, for $99,500, approved on 14 July); ADB. 1995. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity
   Building of Income Tax Administration. Manila. (TA 2432-IND for $550,000, approved on 26 October); ADB. 2002.
   Technical Assistance to India for Value Added Tax Reform Capacity Building at Post-implementation Stage.
   Manila. (TA 3856-IND, for $600,000, approved on 11 April); ADB. 2003. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity
   Building for Tax Administration. Manila. (TA 4263-IND, for $1,000,000, approved on 16 December).
24
   Support for tax reform was included in each of the following TA operations: ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to
   India for Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances. Manila. (TA 2668-IND, for $600,000, approved on 23 October); ADB.
   1997. Technical Assistance to India for Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance Reform
   and Institutional Strengthening. Manila (TA 2943-IND, for $780,000, approved on 15 December); ADB. 2000.
   Technical Assistance India for Supporting Fiscal Reforms in Kerala. Manila. (TA 3576-IND, for $1,000,000,
   approved on 13 December).
6


the VAT. It was not until 2006 that this was resolved and the VAT was finally introduced
nationwide.25

15.    Own-Source Fees, etc. With regard to improving other state own-source revenues, in
general the programs' strategies were to reduce the number of fees and improve the efficiency
of administrative systems. Reforming the stamp duty was common to all programs, including
reducing stamp duty rates, improving land valuation procedures, and automating information
systems. Although both the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs included reforming state
road transport public enterprises, only the Gujarat program included reforms to goods,
passenger, and vehicle taxes.

16.     Local Government Revenue. To support fiscal decentralization to local governments,
the Gujarat program focused on reforming property taxes collected by municipalities, and the
abolition of octroi taxes26 in all local bodies except municipal corporations, for which there did
not appear to be a viable alternative. TA was provided in Madhya Pradesh to improve local
governments' revenue-generating potential by improving fiscal data collection and building
analytic capacity, but there were no supporting loan conditions to reinforce and sustain the new
systems.27 The Kerala program focused on improving local government financial management
capacity rather than improving revenues. The Assam program sought to improve the generating
capacity of property tax for local bodies through implementing zonal valuation based on market
rates.

17.      User Fees. Improving revenue from user charges was linked to broader policy reforms
of key sectors such as power and transport. Imposing or increasing user charges was a
politically fraught exercise, particularly in the power sector, where for decades free electricity
had been provided to rural areas. The Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs included
conditions specifying power tariff increases and setting toll road charges. The Gujarat program
also supported increased port and irrigation charges. The political support necessary to
establish a utilities' pricing commission in Madhya Pradesh was not sustained, nor was the
proposal repeated in other programs. As the Kerala government was reluctant to levy user
charges for public services, the program there focused on improving the financial health of the
state's electricity board without specifically identifying tariff increases. A loan supporting power
sector reform preceded the Assam program, which focused on approval of a user fee policy and
increasing revenue from user fees in education, health, transport, and water supply.

18.     Tax Administration. TA was provided to improve tax administration systems,
procedures, and the institutional capacity of central and state finance departments. Emphasis
was placed on automating the tax administration system and training officials in tax assessment
and enforcement. Finance departments were reorganized to rationalize the number of
administrative departments to more efficiently manage revenue collection. Apart from the
positive financial value of nontax reforms, improved transparency and accountability, resulting
from simplifying and automating overly complex administrative procedures, had a significant
anticorruption benefit by limiting the opportunity for discretion by officials in applying rules.

25
   Although variants of the VAT on manufactured goods were introduced from the mid-1990s in Andhra Pradesh and
   Maharashtra, Haryana was the first state to enact legislation, on 1 April 2003, to fully replace its state sales tax with
   the VAT, defying central government policy to delay its introduction. Kerala followed two years later on 1 April
   2005.
26
    Octroi, dating back to Roman times, is a local tax collected on various articles brought into a district for
   consumption.
27
   ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh. Manila. (TA
   2944-IND, for $700,000, approved on 15 December).
                                                                                                        7



          2.      Expenditure

19.       Expenditure management interventions addressed both capital and recurrent
expenditure, with the former focusing on planning--institutionalizing the formulation of prioritized
capital investment plans within medium-term fiscal frameworks--and improving debt
management. Interventions addressed recurrent expenditure, which accounted for up to 80% of
state budgets, with policy reforms focusing on controlling wages and associated pension
liabilities; reducing subsidies, particularly for rural power users and to loss-incurring public
enterprises; and improving financial management capacity.

20.      Budget Preparation. When the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs were designed,
central and state governments formulated 5-year multisector development plans and annual
budgets. However, there was little integration within the budget process. These two programs
introduced multiyear planning processes based on medium-term revenue projections to be
linked to prioritized expenditure plans. In 1999, the central Government introduced a
memorandum of understanding requiring state governments to outline their medium-term fiscal
strategies. The following year a performance incentive was introduced, and to further encourage
fiscal discipline, the central Government introduced a legislative mechanism in 2001
institutionalizing medium-term fiscal and expenditure frameworks in state government planning
processes. The Kerala program emphasized the need to ensure that the annual budget was
integrated with investment plans, included forward estimates for 2 years, and was passed by the
state assembly before the beginning of the fiscal year. The Assam program focused more
broadly on the budget process through strengthening budget preparation transparency, limiting
the ambition of annual budgets within a medium-term fiscal planning horizon, and increased
emphasis on budget execution monitoring and reporting. All programs supported improvements
in the administrative efficiency of state treasury and finance offices through automating business
processes.

21.      Debt Management. With the cost of interest payments on state debt doubling over the
period 1980­1995, improving debt management became a key concern. The ability of finance
officials to produce and analyze accurate data was constrained by both their own capacity and
the off-budget borrowing by public enterprises, the servicing of which was buried in capital
expenditure in the budget. Although none of the programs included debt restructuring
conditions, institutional reforms to the finance departments in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh
included building capacity to produce and analyze relevant data. One of the benefits of signing a
fiscal responsibility act was that state governments such as Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and
Assam were able to restructure debt held by the central Government. While debt management
was not part of the Kerala program, a condition of the Assam program was to prepare an
automated inventory of debts. The TA in West Bengal28 included an analysis of the state's debt,
with recommendations for restructuring being positively received by the state government.

22.     Salaries and Pensions. Wages accounted for the largest proportion of states' current
expenditures, averaging 37% across all states in FY2001. Pensions accounted for 9% of current
expenditure. In the 1980s and 1990s, the central government pay commission awards to
increase salaries of civil servants were implemented by state governments with immediate
negative fiscal consequences. All four programs included conditions to control expenditure on
salaries by imposing a civil service hiring freeze, maintaining a low net attrition rate, abolishing

28
     ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance to India for West Bengal Development Finance. Manila. (TA4370-IND for
     $800,000, approved on 6 August).
8


vacated posts, automating employee databases, and implementing minimum tenure guidelines.
In both Kerala and Madhya Pradesh, the conditions were challenged in the courts and were
discontinued. Only the Assam program included measures to address pension liabilities--
including an automated database and reforming pension policy and administration.

23.      Public Enterprises. The impact of loss-incurring public enterprises on state
governments' fiscal health was recognized in the central Government's Industrial Policy
Resolution of 1980,29 which for the first time formally acknowledged the need to promote
competition in the domestic market and encourage the private sector to invest in industrial
growth. This significant shift in the Government's policy of maintaining a direct presence in
industry sectors was based on a recognition that too many public enterprises were
underperforming and becoming a drain on the exchequer. More than 10 years later, the 1991
Industrial Policy Resolution outlined a strategy to address long-standing problems with public
enterprises, including closing nonviable enterprises, divesting government control, merging
similar enterprises, and/or instituting corporate governance reforms. To assist in establishing
social security mechanisms to protect workers affected by closure, ADB provided TA in 1992 to
establish such a mechanism for central government enterprises.30 Public enterprise reform was
an integral part of all four state programs, with TA31 to manage the reforms including social
safety net mechanisms, and with loan funds supporting the adjustment costs of public enterprise
reform. Whereas the conditions and covenants in the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs
specified in considerable detail the reform strategy for selected public enterprises, the Kerala
program specified key policy changes to establish mechanisms, and the Assam program
identified reform processes as conditions.

24.     Expenditure Management. All four programs supported the prioritization of expenditure
at the department level aggregated into a state-level plan. The core investment plans prepared
under the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs were to be linked to an annual budget cycle,
but the small number of departments preparing plans limited the effect on the overall budget.
The introduction of fiscal responsibility legislation in Kerala and Assam required medium-term
expenditure frameworks to be prepared across the government and linked to fiscal
frameworks.32 However, institutionalizing new expenditure management procedures across
government departments was challenging, and with tightening fiscal conditions limiting the
space for increased social sector allocations, there was little incentive to implement new
planning processes. Programs did develop the capacity of the departments of finance and
treasury payment and cash management controls through automating systems and reforming
monitoring procedures such as expenditure tracking surveys and reports. The Kerala program
was alone in planning to build local government financial management capacity.33 The Assam


29
   The      Government       of     India's  industrial  policy   resolutions    from   1948      are    available at
   http://siadipp.nic.in/publicat/nip0791.htm. A detailed chronology of India's divestment policy and updates on the
   status of central and state public enterprises divestment programs is available at www.divest.nic.in.
30
   ADB. 1992. Technical Assistance to India for Assessment of National Renewal Fund. Manila. (TA 1722-IND, for
   $99,500, approved on 29 June).
31
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Restructuring Program for State-Owned Enterprises in Gujarat.
   Manila (TA 2552-IND, for $600,000, approved on 2 April); ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity
   Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net in Madhya Pradesh. Manila. (TA 3338-IND, for
   $600,000, approved on 14 December).
32
   The Kerala program makes reference to ADB and World Bank expenditure management resource materials such
   as ADB. 1999. Managing Government Expenditure. Manila. World Bank. 1998. Public Expenditure Management
   Handbook. Washington D.C.
33
   Madhya Pradesh included a TA to develop local government management information systems, but this was not
   successful, nor was it complemented by policy actions in the loan program.
                                                                                                                      9


program was the only one to address public procurement, supporting the adoption of a new
procurement manual.

         3.       Service Delivery

25.     Service delivery interventions focus on (i) legislative, regulatory, and institutional reforms
to encourage private sector investment in public services--infrastructure, utilities, and public
enterprises; and to a lesser extent on (ii) poverty reduction measures including improved
delivery of social services. The support to specific legislative and policy measures to attract
private investment played an important role in ADB's longer term state-level partnership
strategy. This laid the foundation for follow-up sector-specific loan projects to inject capital for
infrastructure and develop institutional capacity to embed sector-specific policy reforms.

26.      Public-Private Partnerships. Of the four programs, the Gujarat one most actively
pursued interventions to encourage private sector investment to narrow the state's infrastructure
gap to achieve its economic growth outcome. In particular, the state government enacted
legislation that established a legal framework for public-private partnerships including
competitive bidding procedures, and an institutional framework34 to manage infrastructure
development. Reforming public utilities through unbundling and establishing independent
regulatory authorities in the power sector was common to the Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and
Kerala programs.35 In Gujarat, regulatory and institutional reforms in the port and road sectors
were implemented. In Madhya Pradesh, the roads and housing sectors were chosen along with
drafting state environment and resettlement policies. The Assam program completed diagnostic
studies of policy and institutional requirements to enhance public-private partnerships, and
single-window clearance facilities were introduced.

27.     Social Service Delivery. All programs make reference to contributing to poverty
reduction through creating fiscal space for increased allocations to social services--as an
impact and outcome (Kerala and Madhya Pradesh), or more broadly in the rationale (Assam
and Gujarat). Of the four programs, the Kerala program was atypical, as its outcome was to
modernize governance through simultaneously implementing fiscal consolidation measures and
improvements to state and local governments' public service delivery. The program's support to
pro-poor planning and poverty monitoring, including social audits to improve the targeting and
quality of poverty reduction programs, was not sustained. Although a number of service delivery
projects were implemented, reforming local government offices responsible for rural
development and their asset management systems had mixed success. Even if the government
had a strong commitment to implement necessary fiscal reform measures, which proved not to
be the case, the public service delivery reforms were premature, as a sound financial base had
not been created.

28.     The Gujarat program focused on increasing economic growth through stimulating
industrialization, with the explicit expectation that fiscal space would neither be created to
increase social service expenditure, nor improved with social service delivery. Although the aim
of fiscal consolidation in Madhya Pradesh was to increase social sector expenditure, with the
exception of a successfully achieved covenant to support a one-off diarrhea disease control
project in all villages, the program focused on policy and institutional interventions to create

34
   The Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board, chaired by the chief minister, formulates policy, sets strategic vision
   including priority projects, and coordinates and supervises the state's infrastructure development.
35
   In Assam, ADB supported a power sector loan that included policy reforms prior to approval of the pubic resource
   management program.
10


fiscal space. The Assam program also avoided specific social service delivery interventions,
focusing instead on policy and institutional reforms to achieve fiscal consolidation.

C.      Technical Assistance

29.     ADB's 1995 Governance Policy recognizes that a government's "institutional capacity to
conduct public business determines in large part its ability to undertake economic reforms and
implement projects successfully. Right from the start, therefore, lending to the public sector has
been accompanied by TA for institutional strengthening" (footnote 4, p. 26­27). TA financed by
grant funds in support of the four program loans provided 523 person-months of national and
international experts, with the Assam TA loan project providing an additional 459 person-
months.36 TA focused on developing technical solutions and transferring technical skills to
government officials. Project preparatory TA was used only in the design of the Assam program,
and advisory TA was employed for 2 years to support the design of the Kerala program.
Although ADB staff and state government officials designed both the Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh programs, both approved advisory TA prior to loan approval to ensure that technical
advice was in place before the loan was approved. This strategy has considerable merit.
However, as all three policy-based loans suffered delays either in approval or in meeting the
planned schedule for the second or third tranches, the TA needed to be extended for an
average of 16 months, without additional financing. In Kerala, the advisory TA was extended by
21 months, and two small-scale TA grants were approved. Only the Assam program included a
TA loan project, which provided increased resources and transferred management responsibility
to the state government. Although this was a positive development over previous arrangements,
ADB's requirement that procurement follow ADB's guidelines imposes a potential burden on
state governments. To minimize the burden, ADB needs to provide technical advice through TA
to assist government to manage the procedures and ensure that its concurrence procedures are
efficiently executed to avoid unnecessary delay.

D.      Implementation Arrangements

30.      With the exception of Assam, all state governments established at least one cabinet-
level committee, chaired by the chief minister, to oversee implementation of the reforms. The
Kerala and Madhya Pradesh state governments established one committee each, whereas the
Gujarat state government established three--expenditure prioritization, public finance reform,
and public enterprise reform. While Gujarat established three executive-level working groups to
assist its public finance reform committee, the other state governments established at least one
executive-level committee, chaired by the chief secretary,37 to manage and coordinate reform
actions. Kerala had one committee; Madhya Pradesh had two--public finance reform and public
enterprise restructuring; and Assam had three--a program steering committee, an empowered
committee for public administration, and a public enterprise reform committee. Gujarat was the
only state to establish a special purpose Board with statutory authority to promote privatization
in key infrastructure sectors.

31.     The state finance department was the program executing agency in all states. However,
in Kerala the Office of the Chief Secretary was also an executing agency. Each state had
different program steering committee arrangements. Gujarat did not establish a program

36
   The Gujarat program had 165 person-months, Madhya Pradesh had 156 person-months, Kerala had 79 person-
   months, and Assam had 123 person-months. The number of consultant person-months provided through three
   small-scale TA activities is not available.
37
    In Assam, the empowered and public enterprise committees were chaired by an additional chief secretary.
                                                                                                                   11


steering committee, whereas in Madhya Pradesh the cabinet committee was also the program
steering committee. Kerala's executive committee included program steering committee
functions, and only Assam had a dedicated program steering committee. Assam, Gujarat, and
Madhya Pradesh established a secretariat within their finance departments to service reform
committees and liaise with ADB. In Madhya Pradesh, the planned technical secretariat to
support public enterprise reform was not established.

32.     In Kerala, the implementation arrangements reflected the program design with two
distinct programs (fiscal reforms and modernizing governance) grafted together, but not
integrated, under one "program." A new government department was established as a
secretariat to coordinate and monitor the modernizing governance component of the program,
with the fiscal reforms managed out of the Finance Department. Establishing a government
department is a complex process, and by adding recurrent budget costs it is working against an
expenditure compression objective. On completion of the ADB loan, and with the state
government's deteriorating fiscal condition, the staff of this department returned to their original
departments. Without widespread support for modernizing governance reforms, the new
department proved unsustainable. Reforms cut across almost all government departments, only
the chief secretary has the power to direct and coordinate department heads. The ability of a
newly created department to give direction and coordinate other departments will be severely
circumscribed by bureaucratic procedures and unlikely to be effective. Appendix 3 summarizes
the implementation arrangements for each program.

                                    III.     EVALUATION FINDINGS

33.     This study draws on the assessment ratings from the three program completion reports
prepared by the South Asia Regional Department, which was responsible for managing the
programs; and four OED reports--two performance evaluations, a validation of the Kerala
program completion report, and an evaluation of selected TA to fiscal management and tax
administration (footnotes 11 and 13). The study focuses on five evaluation criteria--relevance,
efficiency, effectiveness, sustainability, and impact.38 Based on the completion of the first
subprogram of the Assam program cluster loan, some preliminary assessments have been
made. Table 1 summarizes the evaluation ratings for the four programs and central government
TA. Among the three completed programs there is little difference between the regional
department and OED ratings for the Gujarat or Kerala programs, but quite different
assessments are made of the Madhya Pradesh program. Overall, OED rated two of the three
completed programs partly successful, and the ongoing Assam program potentially successful.
The 11 completed advisory TA operations were rated overall successful. The OED study of
selected TA (footnote 13) found that TA in support of program loans was more successful than
stand-alone TA. The ratings for individual TA activities are provided in Appendix 1 (Table A1.2).




38
     A detailed description of the scope, application, and ratings of the evaluation criteria is provided in ADB. 2006.
     Guidelines for Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
12



          Table 1: Evaluation Ratings for the Public Resource Management Programs

Evaluation                                Madhya Pradesh                                     Assam
 Criteria          Gujarat Program             Program                Kerala Program        Program          TA
                    PCR       OED          PCR        OED             PCR        OED          PCR           OED
                   Rating    Rating       Rating     Rating          Rating     Rating       Rating        Rating
Relevance       Relevant     Relevant    Highly      Relevant      Relevant    Relevant    Relevant      Relevant
                                         relevant
Efficiency      Efficient    Efficient   Efficient   Less          Less        Less     Potentially      Efficient
                                                     efficient     efficient   efficientefficient
Effective-      Effective    Effective   Effective   Less          Less        Less     Potentially      Effective
ness                                                 effective     effective   effectiveeffective
Sustain-        Likely       Most        Most        Less          Less        Less     Potentially      Likely
ability         sustain-     likely      likely      likely        likely      likely   likely           sustain-
                able         sustain-    sustain-    sustain-      sustain-    sustain- sustain-         able
                             able        able        able          able        able     able
Impact                       Substan-                Modest        Modest      Modest   Potentially       Substan-
                             tial                                                       substantial       tial
Overall         Success-     Success-    Success-    Partly        Partly      Partly   Potentially      Success-
Program         ful          ful         ful         success-      success-    success- successful       ful
Rating                                               ful           ful         ful
ADB = Asian Development Bank, OED = Operations Evaluation Department, PCR = program completion report.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department assessment.

34.       Overall, the study rated the public resource management program successful (Table 2).

       Table 2: Performance Rating of ADB Operations in Public Resource Management

      Rating Criterion           Maximum Score               Assessment                    Score
      Relevance                           3                      Relevant                    2
      Effectiveness                       6                      Effective                   4
      Efficiency                          3                      Efficient                   2
      Sustainability                      6                       Likely                     4
      Impact                              6                  Substantial                     4
      Overall Assessment                 24                  Successful                     16
      Source: Operations Evaluation Department assessment.



A.        Relevance

35.      Overall, the public resource management program was rated relevant, where relevance
includes assessing each state-level program and TA in terms of government ownership, the
relation to both the government's and ADB's strategic development objectives, and design
ambition. Each program and TA was designed to support the state and central governments'
fiscal reform agenda as it applied at the time. They were also consistent with the ADB
institutional and country strategy. Even though all were rated as relevant, there were differences
in the nature of state government ownership that influenced the overall pace and scope of
                                                                                                                    13


reform. The three-pronged analytical framework was relevant, and although common to all
programs, the specific interventions (paras. 12­28) reflected different state contexts and the
incorporation of lessons from earlier experiences.

36.      The Gujarat program illustrates a positive extreme of government ownership of reforms.
Three years before ADB considered supporting state-level reform, the Gujarat state government
had initiated a commission to advise on addressing its dire fiscal conditions. The reform
program outlined in the commission's report was accepted by all parties in the state
government--a critical issue, given the potential for reform momentum to be held hostage to the
electoral cycle. The Gujarat program was designed and processed in a very short period--9
months--by ADB staff, who were able to base it on the findings of the state government's
commission report. The overall program logic was sound with respect to the three
components--fiscal reform, public enterprise reform, and creation of an enabling environment--
but in common with all programs, the design and monitoring framework was not well
constructed. Again common to all programs, little documentary evidence was available on
alternative fiscal policy options, although this was to change in the case of the Assam program,
particularly on the expenditure side (e.g., addressing subsidies, state pension liabilities, or
instituting expenditure performance measurement and reporting systems). The Gujarat
program's 2-year time frame was overly ambitious, given the scope of the reforms, in particular
the time required to effectively comply with detailed conditions relating to public enterprise
reforms.

37.     Documenting how lessons influence design decisions was not a strong point of any
program. The Gujarat program was the first subnational fiscal reform policy-based loan in the
world. Even though ADB's experience was limited, there was a considerable body of
international experience with structural adjustment and public enterprise reform.39 Despite the
lack of documentary evidence, the public enterprise reforms incorporated some key lessons
such as recognizing the implications of institutional constraints when designing reform
measures, and a small-scale TA40 was approved to enable officials to get international
experience prior to program implementation.

38.     A white paper outlining the Madhya Pradesh government's reform agenda was prepared
at the request of and with technical assistance from ADB, prior to the program's approval. The
government's ownership of reforms, particularly within the executive, was weakened by ADB's
decision to delay loan approval by more than 12 months from the originally agreed upon date,
although the continuance of the reform agenda with minimal changes after an election
suggested that the reforms had broad cross-party support. The program's overall logic was
sound, but the lack of support for local government fiscal reform and social service
interventions, and sufficient TA resources, particularly to support implementation, suggest that
the design was overly ambitious.

39.    Unlike the other three programs, the original plan to focus the Kerala program on fiscal
reforms was overtaken relatively late in the design phase by the strong support from a senior
champion for service delivery reforms in the state government. The fiscal and modernizing
governance reforms were relevant to the governments of Kerala and India and to ADB.

39
   For example, the 1989 issue of World Development 17(5) was entitled Privatization and included eight articles on
   public enterprise reform focusing primarily on issues relating to privatization in the developing world. Although the
   experiences being discussed were for national public enterprises, many of the lessons were equally applicable to
   state public enterprises.
40
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring. Manila. (TA 2530-
   IND, for $100,000, approved on 6 February).
14


However, the ownership of service delivery reforms was not as broad based as perhaps
assumed, and the Kerala government was unable to sustain many of the fiscal reform actions in
the face of public or bureaucratic pressure. The program design was overly ambitious and out of
sequence, as there was insufficient time to put in place the fiscal reforms necessary to support
modernizing governance reforms.

40.      The Assam government outlined its fiscal reform program through a memorandum of
understanding with the central Government in 2003 under the fiscal reforms facility. The
memorandum was a precursor to the state government enshrining the reform agenda in
legislation as a program condition. This state­center agreement and subsequent act established
a joint approach to working toward fiscal consolidation at both levels of government. The
program was relevant to ADB's India country strategy and although the program's outcome was
overly ambitious, it incorporated a broader range of expenditure and accountability reforms and
is rated relevant. Unlike the other three programs, the Assam program followed an already
approved (power) sector loan. The Assam government had been concerned about the impact of
the power sector on its fiscal condition and had initiated reforms to unbundle power generation,
transmission and distribution. With the passing of the national Electricity Act (2003) these
reforms could be rapidly implemented.41 Power sector legislative and regulatory reforms
included in previous public resource management programs, in the absence of national
legislation, were included in the Assam power sector loan.42

B.      Effectiveness

41.     Overall the program is rated effective. The resource management programs shared a
common structure--revenue, expenditure, and service delivery reforms. In the Kerala and
Madhya Pradesh programs, fiscal consolidation was expected to positively impact on poverty
reduction, and in Gujarat on industrialization. Only the Gujarat program contributed to this
impact, with an estimated $5 billion in private investment in the power, ports, and road sectors
being attracted to the state by 2005 as a result of the program's reform measures. However,
policy measures failed to improve social service allocations or the effectiveness of service
delivery in any of the states. The state's own expenditures in the social sectors were protected
from further compression resulting from the fiscal reforms, and central government education,
health, and employment generation programs ensured that total funds for the sectors remained
at least constant.

42.     The effects of the programs on revenue and fiscal deficits, either during or soon after
completion of the Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Kerala programs, were influenced by external
factors such as an earthquake and communal disturbances in Gujarat, bifurcation and floods in
Madhya Pradesh, and national salary award increases. In addition, one-off state-level decisions
to reduce debt levels put pressure on fiscal deficits in the early 2000s. However, in the past 2­3
years there has been a positive downward trend in fiscal and revenue deficits with the long-
delayed introduction of the value-added tax in 2006 expected to further enhance states own


41
   The Electricity Act introduced competition to the power sector, aiming to provide power for all and create an
   enabling framework for the accelerated and more efficient development of the power sector. The provisions
   included the introduction of a National Electricity Policy, extension of rural electrification, open access in
   transmission, phased open access in distribution, mandatory establishment of State Electricity Regulation
   Commissions, license free generation and distribution, power trading, mandatory metering for all consumers and
   stringent anti theft measures.
42
   ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board for the Assam Power Sector Development
   Program. Manila (Loan 2036/2037-IND, for $250 million and TA $1 million, approved 10 December).
                                                                                                                     15


revenue in coming years. When compared with the situation in the mid-1990s, the changes in
both fiscal and revenue deficits are positive.

43.      The institutional reforms to both revenue and expenditure to improve administrative
efficiencies had a positive result. The programs included a range of actions to enhance
institutional capacity across all dimensions. Simplifying regulations and procedures and
automating revenue and expenditure systems and procedures, with particular emphasis on tax
administration, treasury payment, and cash management, were effective. Reorganizing finance
departments led to more efficient management of revenue collection. Interventions at the local
government level in both Kerala and Madhya Pradesh were less effective due to a reluctance to
devolve financial decision-making powers. Overall, the reforms initiated steps to improve
transparency and accountability. In so doing they reduced the opportunities for corruption, which
could be expected to improve the overwhelmingly negative perception of public services.43

44.     The experience in reforming public enterprises was mixed. Full privatization, mergers,
and operational closure of public enterprises were the most effective reform measures.
However, while this reduced the recurring state budget support, the inability to complete
financial closure, in some cases over 5 years after operational closure, meant that the
government was continuing to provide a low level of financial support and was yet to receive
any financial benefit from the sale of assets. Further, as the case of the Madhya Pradesh Police
Housing Corporation illustrates, there are few barriers to reopening an operationally closed
public enterprise. This suggests that such reforms are not embedded until at least financial
closure is attained. Efforts to improve corporate governance practices of public enterprises were
not successful, as, although some encouraging changes were introduced such as signed
performance management agreements, they were poorly supervised with little accountability.
Appendix 4 provides an overview of public enterprise reform in India and the four states, and
presents lessons from international experience.

45.      Across the four programs, service delivery reforms focused on two broad areas--an
enabling legal and institutional environment to encourage private sector investment, and
improved local-level service delivery. The Kerala program's modernizing governance focus
emphasized improving service delivery at the local level through a range of policy and
investment interventions. However, effectiveness was limited by the following: (i) incentives to
motivate service providers to improve delivery were not addressed, (ii) measures to improve the
accountability of service providers were missing, (iii) an effective system to monitor and
evaluate service delivery was not in place, (iv) clear economic and social criteria to prioritize
service delivery projects was missing, and (v) decentralizing power to local governments was
not accompanied by a timely transfer of financial resources and responsibilities. Efforts to
improve local government information systems to assist social service planning in Madhya
Pradesh were not effective. The Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs addressed primarily
legislative and regulatory constraints, focusing on encouraging private investment to improve
public infrastructure. Both programs were effective in reforming the legal, regulatory, and
institutional frameworks in the power and road sectors, and in the port sector in Gujarat. The
public resource management programs were effective in laying the foundations for ADB to
provide sector-specific loans. Appendix 5 provides an overview of the sector TA and loan
support provided in the four states.

43
      For example, the 2005 Transparency International India. India Corruption Study to Improve Governance. New
     Delhi, found that Kerala was by some margin the least corrupt state in the Union, with Gujarat being the third least
     corrupt. Madhya Pradesh and Assam were among the most corrupt. Power sector corruption was perceived to be
     reducing, and the largest bribes were paid to the police, land administration, and income tax departments.
16



46.     In addition, the Madhya Pradesh program framed environment and resettlement policies
that, although consistent with, or in some areas stronger than, similar central government
policies, were not sufficiently robust to match ADB's safeguards in these areas. Consequently
they have not been adopted for ADB-funded sector projects.

C.     Efficiency

47.     Three of the four programs were rated efficient, with only the Madhya Pradesh program
rated less efficient. Overall then, the public resource management program was rated efficient.
Although an individual assessment of efficiency is not conducted for TA, because 6 of the 11
completed advisory TA operations were rated satisfactory or better, the study finds that overall
the TA provided value for money and is rated efficient. Provision of adequate public expenditure
to meet the government's portion of adjustment costs was variable across the four programs. An
independent study found actual adjustment cost expenditure by the Gujarat government was
close to the estimates. In Madhya Pradesh, adjustment costs were revised down to account for
the impact of bifurcation of the state, and some of the expected costs such as the scale of the
voluntary retirement scheme and the cost of social safety net provisions were redundant, as
fewer public enterprises were reformed and the social safety net was not implemented. The
delay by the central Government in introducing the value-added tax affected the first three
programs' tax revenue adjustment calculations. The Kerala government's ability to sustain
expenditure on reforms was affected by its deteriorating fiscal condition. The Assam program
progress reports suggest that the program is likely to be efficient.

D.     Sustainability

48.    Overall, the public resource management program, was rated likely sustainable. Gujarat
stands out among Indian states for its capital market orientation and strong reform attitude.
Cross-party agreement on the broad thrust of reforms has reduced the impact of the electoral
cycle on the reform process, and the central Government has maintained a policy environment
encouraging state fiscal responsibility. The reforms being implemented in 2006, well after ADB's
loan program was closed, can be traced back to the recommendations in the 1994 state finance
commission report to resolve the state's dire fiscal condition. After recovering from the impact of
cyclones, a devastating earthquake, and violent communal disturbances from 2000 to 2002, by
2005 the state's revenue deficit had been phased out and the fiscal deficit was reduced to 3.5%
of gross domestic product as recommended by the state's finance commission. Public
enterprise reforms continue, and the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board has been
instrumental in attracting private capital to support the state's infrastructure gap.

49.     In both the Kerala and Madhya Pradesh programs, translating ownership rhetoric into
sustained action across the complex range of fiscal and governance reforms has had very
mixed results. There is little doubt that ADB's decision to delay approval of the Madhya Pradesh
program by 1 year had a deleterious effect on the commitment to reforms of some politicians as
well as officials. The failure to establish a technical secretariat not only reduced effectiveness, it
also undermined sustainability, with no institutional center to maintain the drive. In Kerala,
where there was apparently cross-party support for modernizing governance reforms, a lack of
serious political commitment to control expenditure and increase revenue undermined fiscal
consolidation and the sustainability of both sets of reforms.
                                                                                                               17


E.      Impact

50.     Overall, the study finds the support to public resource management bordering on
substantial. ADB's decision to support the Gujarat state government's fiscal reform program was
a catalyst for the World Bank and bilateral agencies such as the United Kingdom's Department
for International Development to enter into similar programs with other states. An independent
study of this program was commissioned by ADB at the request of the Government of India.
Experience was drawn on by the central Government in the development of fiscal policy
governing center­state relations in including the introduction of memorandum of understanding
linking state government fiscal performance to central government transfers, followed by the
introduction of fiscal responsibility legislation. Either during or after program completion, the
Gujarat, Kerala, and Madhya Pradesh state governments entered into a compact with the
central Government committing to a legal and administrative fiscal reform framework for at least
5 years. The Assam program was designed to support this already agreed upon framework,
which was confirmed in fiscal legislation during program implementation.

51.     ADB's strategy to reform key legislative, regulatory, and institutional frameworks to
create an enabling environment for private sector investment in key sectors drew in significant
private investment in upgrading infrastructure. This was a key factor in stimulating economic
growth, with the success in Gujarat being the most pronounced.44 ADB followed up with sector
loans totaling over $1.3 billion for power and roads in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. Institutional
development impacts included establishing special purpose offices within the finance
departments to more effectively manage public expenditure; assisting governments to realign
their service delivery role, particularly in the many ineffective and inefficient public enterprises;
drafting policy, legislation, and regulations; and establishing systems and procedures and
associated technical manuals in areas such as tax administration, medium-term fiscal planning,
managing public enterprise reform, and managing infrastructure development. Further, although
not explicitly recognized in the program designs, each program contributed to the state
government's anticorruption efforts through such measures as simplifying the taxation system,
computerizing treasury expenditure and debt accounts, establishing independent utility
regulatory authorities, and reforming public enterprises.

                                      IV.      CONCLUSIONS

A.      Lessons

52.      Effective political economy analysis will improve reform design. It is generally
accepted that reform measures must be politically viable. Powerful interest groups, the public's
low level of understanding of reforms and their rights, and their low perception of governments'
credibility, as well as the effect of increasingly populist decision making impact on political
viability.45 By understanding the political economy context--the political, economic, institutional,
and social characteristics of the policy environment--and the factors that a program can or

44
   The resulting changes in almost all aspects of power sector governance were given a boost by the passing of the
   Electricity Act in 2003. The impact of the selected policy reforms of these resource management programs is
   described in some detail in ADB. 2007. Sector Assistance Performance Evaluation: Energy Sector in India ­
   Building on Success for More Results. Manila; and ADB. 2007. Sector Assistance Performance Evaluation:
   Transport Sector in India ­ Focusing on Results. Manila.
45
   See 2005. Transparency International India. India Corruption Study to Improve Governance. New Delhi; Kumar, S.
   2004. Impact of Economic Reforms on Indian Electorate. Economic and Political Weekly, 39(16): 1621­1630; and
   Keefer, P. and S. Khemani. 2004. Why Do the Poor Receive Poor Services? Economic and Political Weekly, 39(9):
   935­943.
18


cannot influence, the gap between expected and actual results in policy reform programs can be
reduced.46 This raises two design challenges: identifying key political economy factors, and how
to address their impact on a reform program. Prior to designing each program, ADB made
decisions on which states to engage with based on four criteria: (i) demonstrated commitment to
reform; (ii) need in terms of population and infrastructure; (iii) satisfactory record of project and
policy implementation; and (iv) financial capacity, ability, and willingness to accept ordinary
capital resources loan terms and manage foreign exchange risks.47 Government commitment to
reform was an important criterion and was manifest in different ways across the four programs.
Abonyi (footnote 46) points to three aspects of commitment: understanding, intent, and
capability. The Gujarat program illustrates these aspects being present in a reform agenda
formulated by the government well in advance of ADB's potential interest and where the chief
minister's commitment was underpinned by cross-party and broad-based support. The Kerala
program, particularly the modernizing governance component, illustrates the risks where these
aspects are weak: A single senior-level bureaucratic champion is unable to generate a
sufficiently broad base to sustain reforms, and sequencing is inappropriate.

53.      While there are limitations to projecting quantitative impacts of political economy
changes on fiscal reforms, ADB did not employ economic modeling techniques to generate
reform options under different conditions.48 The first three ADB programs in Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, and Kerala treated political economy factors as assumptions or risks. Assumptions,
outside the program's influence included the following: reforms were politically acceptable, the
political and external environment was stable, government policies would remain unchanged,
political or labor resistance would not occur, and capital market conditions would be conducive
to reform. Risks included a negative impact of changes in markets or from central government
policy, ownership and commitment changing after elections, and bureaucratic and public
opposition to reforms. With the exception of the Assam program, risk mitigation measures were
not formulated, or where formulated were either beyond the reach of the program, or not
implemented.

54.     For example, a generic risk was identified in the Madhya Pradesh program that central
government policy decisions could adversely affect economic development. Although bifurcation
of the state had been discussed in political circles for two decades, an analysis of its impact on
possible reform options was not undertaken. Less than a year after the program was approved,
the state was bifurcated and the new state of Chhattisgarh created, with considerable impact on
the Madhya Pradesh's economic development and the adjustment costs and timing of the
reform program. The Kerala program design identified the most significant external risk as
public action against reforms and included a communication strategy as a mitigation measure.
Irrespective of whether this measure was sufficient to mitigate the risk, the strategy was not
implemented, despite the risk coming to fruition and pressure put on the government to wind
back some measures in the reform program.




46
   This theme has been expounded on in a number of OED Evaluation Reports (footnotes 11, 12, and 13), and other
   ADB reports such as, Abonyi, G. 2002. Towards a Political Economy Approach to Policy-Based Lending.
   Economics and Research Department Working Paper Series No. 14. Manila.
47
   In 1994, a mission by staff of the then Programs West 2 Division visited four states--Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu,
   Punjab, and Gujarat--and chose Gujarat. In 1996, ADB selected Madhya Pradesh, although Karnataka was the
   preferred state, but the World Bank had ongoing support there. In 2002, Kerala was chosen, followed by Assam in
   2004.
48
   See, for example, Chapter 5 in World Bank. 2005. State Fiscal Reforms in India: Progress and Prospects.
   Washington D.C.
                                                                                                                  19


55.     Since 2000, ADB has undertaken a number of evaluative and analytical studies on
policy-based lending (e.g., footnotes 12, 46, and 50). The lessons and analytical tools within
these reports, particularly understanding the complex nature of political economy factors and
how they may influence policy reforms, are a valuable resource and should be more effectively
drawn on in designing future resource management programs.

56.     There is no blueprint, but there is a sequence to reforms. The study agrees with the
primary conclusion of ADB's review of 10 public resource management programs (footnote 13),
and with a World Bank review of state fiscal reforms in India (footnote 48), that there is not a
blueprint for designing successful fiscal consolidation reforms. Although the scope and
sequencing of specific policy actions are defined by the state's situation and the political viability
of actions, there is agreement on the focal areas for expenditure and revenue reforms, and the
broad sequencing parameters. It is also clear that where a fiscal crisis is being faced, fiscal
stabilization measures are a priority. While legislative and regulatory measures to attract private
sector investment may be included in early stages of the reform agenda, addressing service
delivery reforms similar to those in the Kerala program should follow once fiscal space
generates the resources necessary to support improved service delivery.

57.    The World Bank review drew extensively from its support to state fiscal reform in India
and its global fiscal reform experience.49 The review optimistically concluded that "state and
central reforms could enable states to eliminate their revenue deficit by 2007/08, while
increasing their capital spending as a percentage of gross state domestic product, and
maintaining their non-wage operations and maintenance spending" (footnote 48. p. xvi). It
confirmed that state governments had generally accepted the need for reform but had voiced
concerns regarding their ability to sustain the commitment to implement difficult, politically
unpopular measures due to pressure from powerful interest groups. As subsidies and wages
account for well over half of government's budget, negotiating the politically viability of technical
expenditure compression measures varies by state and over the election cycle.

58.     The review identified focal areas for expenditure restructuring and revenue generation
that are consistent with those of the Assam program. It also noted that in India's federal system,
although state governments bear primary responsibility for fiscal reform, state- and central-level
fiscal reforms must be a joint endeavor. As the ADB programs illustrate, central government
resource transfers and policy decisions on wages and debt management affect a state's fiscal
reform agenda. Unlike the first three programs, which paid less attention to expenditure
management measures, more attention needs to be paid to budget planning; execution;
monitoring and reporting; integrating expenditure prioritization and resource allocation; and
restructuring salaries, subsidies, pensions, public enterprises, and debt management. While
increased states own revenues will result from regulatory reforms to taxes, duties, royalties, and
user charges, these should be complemented with measures to enhance the efficiency of
revenue administration. Finally, targeting selected legislative and regulatory measures to
encourage private sector investment in infrastructure, public enterprises, and utilities creates

49
     The World Bank's Independent Evaluation Group conducted evaluation of public sector management and public
     financial accountability in India in 2002. World Bank. 2002. India: Evaluating Bank Assistance for Public Sector
     Management. Washington D.C. World Bank. 2002. India: Evaluating Bank Assistance for Financial Accountability
     in the 1990s. Washington D.C. However, the Andhra Pradesh program was ongoing, and the Uttar Pradesh
     program had just been approved at the time of these evaluations. Implementation completion reports have been
     prepared only for the first two Andhra Pradesh Economic Reform Program loans, both of which were rated
     satisfactory. The Andhra Pradesh program was a 5-year multisector program, with fiscal reforms being one
     component. The Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Reform and Public Sector Restructuring loan is more comparable with ADB's
     programs.
20


opportunities for public private partnerships, reduces expenditure, and reinforces government's
regulatory function.

59.     A key consideration in sequencing is that legislative and regulatory reforms require
changes in the capacity of institutions (policy and rules), organizations charged with
implementation, and the competencies of responsible government officers to change their
management practices. This cascade of legislation­institutions­organizations­people provides
a strategic sequence for reforms. However, in practice this is not a linear sequence. Rather,
people (officials and stakeholders) are involved from the outset of the reform process. As policy
reforms are an iterative, negotiated process, attention needs to be given to developing and
maintaining a broad consensus for reform, as this is one of the most difficult and important
challenges in sustaining change management processes.

60.     Coherent application of design tools is needed to achieve development results. In
designing policy-based program loans, three interdependent matrices are formulated to define
the nature and scope of the program: (i) the design and monitoring framework, (ii) the policy
matrix, and (iii) the poverty impact assessment matrix.50 The design and monitoring framework
captures key elements of the other two matrices, providing a complete picture of the program
and forming the basis for its monitoring and evaluation system. The design and monitoring
framework and its predecessor were introduced as project design analytical tools, rather than
stand-alone matrices. None of the four public resource management program loans employed
the design and monitoring framework as a design tool. Rather, this framework was seen as a
mandatory template to be completed as an appendix to a program loan document.

61.     In all cases the policy matrix was the key design tool, prepared independently of the
design and monitoring framework on the apparent assumption that achievement of policy
actions (conditions and covenants) will lead to achievement of program outputs and outcomes.
However, as both the Madhya Pradesh and Kerala programs illustrate, although the policy
conditions were substantially complied with, key program outputs and therefore outcomes were
not achieved. In all programs, at least one matrix was poorly designed, and inconsistencies are
evident among the three matrices, and with the description of the program in the narrative of the
reports and recommendations of the President. Three of the four programs were designed to
achieve unrealistic outcomes. The Assam program outcome that "necessary and sufficient
conditions [are] met for a sustainable reduction in fiscal and revenue deficits" was beyond the
scope of any externally financed program, even though it was based on recommendations from
OED. The Kerala and Madhya Pradesh programs' poverty reduction outcome was equally
unrealistic.

62.    Poor design decisions did not do justice to the intent of those formulating and
implementing these programs. Insufficient time was taken to ensure that the policy conditions
could be managed to produce development results. ADB prepared staff guidelines on applying

50
     The relationship among these matrices is detailed in ADB. 2003. Economic Analysis of Policy-Based Lending: Key
     Dimensions. Manila. In brief, the design and monitoring framework, previously referred to as the logical framework,
     is a four-level results chain with monitoring indicators, information sources, the critical assumptions necessary to
     achieve results, and risks requiring mitigation. The policy matrix lists the policy actions (or measures) to be
     implemented in the reform program. From these policy actions, tranche release conditions and covenants are
     agreed upon in the program's legal agreement. Conditions need to be met to trigger the release of funds, whereas
     covenants also need to be met but are not linked to fund release. Policy actions become activities or output
     indicators in a design and monitoring framework. The poverty impact assessment is a summary of the short- and
     long-term economic impacts of reforms on the poor and other stakeholders, and provides the assumptions and
     risks, including mitigation measures, for the design and monitoring framework.
                                                                                                                21


the logical framework, and later the design and monitoring framework.51 Recent OED evaluation
findings and reviews of draft reports and recommendations of the President confirm that the
design quality continues to be a concern.52 Improvements in design would be expected from
more effective post-training mentoring and supervision of design quality in regional
departments.

63.      Developing "soft" capacities is necessary to sustain reforms. ADB recognizes that
capacity development is a central focus of policy-based reform.53 A total of 982 person-months
of international and national technical experts were provided to the four programs to assist in
preparing policy, legislative, and regulatory frameworks; revising or creating new administrative
systems and procedures; and training staff in the technical skills to implement systems and
procedures. The primary focus of TA was on developing technical solutions to various
institutional constraints and developing technical competence through study tours, preparing
training manuals, conducting seminars and workshops, and providing on-the-job training during
an expert's contract. Although not all experts had a training responsibility in their terms of
reference, for those who did, it was assumed that the consultant was also an effective trainer.
Only 1 of the 11 completed TA operations utilized innovative distance education techniques to
reach out to a larger number of officials, trained trainers, and built the capacity of local training
institutions.

64.    It was not uncommon through the 1990s for capacity development to be seen through a
technical prism, even though it was recognized that the changed management practices
required changes in attitudes and behaviors. Programs did not recognize the need to
systematically develop soft capacities including management, leadership, facilitation,
negotiation, and conflict resolution competencies, nor to empower a broad base of change
agents. It was assumed that government commitment and the persuasive powers of reform
champions would be sufficient to bring people along. Over the past decade there has been an
increased focus on understanding how institutional, organizational, and human capacities are
developed.54

65.     It is clear that institutionalizing change management practices among those charged with
implementing reforms requires upgrading technical and change management competencies.
Enabling government to sustain capacity development programs beyond the life of a program
by, for example, developing the capacity of existing training institutions, or providing training
experts, particularly to develop soft capacities, is necessary.

66.      Reform actions supporting anticorruption efforts should be explicitly identified. In
the mid-1990s, concern with the impact of corruption on the public sector rose. ADB was a
leader in the development community, formulating policy and supporting anticorruption
initiatives. ADB's governance policy (footnote 4) recognized that corruption needed to be

51
   ADB. 1998. Using the Logical Framework. Manila. ADB. 2006. Guidelines for Preparing a Design and Monitoring
   Framework. Manila.
52
   For example, the 2005 Panel Report to Management on the Quality-at-Entry of ADB Projects and Country
   Strategies Approved 2004­2005 [unpublished] found that "the criterion of development objectives, evaluability and
   sustainability was one of the weaker areas with only two-thirds of the projects assessed rated as satisfactory or
   better" (p. 14).
53
    This is reinforced in ADB analytical reports on policy-based lending e.g., footnote 46.
54
   See for example ADB. 2007. Information Paper: Integrating Capacity Development into Country Programs and
   Operations: Medium-Term Framework and Action Plan. Manila. Brinkerhoff, D.W. 2007. Capacity Development in
   Fragile States. (Discussion Paper 58D). ECDPM. Maastricht is an example of the European Center for
   Development Policy Management's project on Capacity, Change and Performance (available:
   http://www.ecdpm.org/). Capacity.org is a gateway to international capacity development work.
22


addressed within a governance framework, and in 1998 a specific Anticorruption Policy was
approved.55 However, only the Assam program, designed in 2003, specifically linked policy
actions with the state government's anticorruption endeavors. In neither the Gujarat nor the
Madhya Pradesh programs, designed in 1996 and 1998-1999, respectively, was corruption
mentioned, and the Kerala program, designed in 2002, mentions corruption only twice: first, in
relation to stamp duty reforms and second, in the context of improving local government office
management systems. The former was partially achieved, the latter, not.

67.     More recently, the effect of public resource management reforms on contributing to
anticorruption efforts has been recognized.56 All programs under this study included measures
to reduce corrupt practice, including (i) simplifying the taxation system and computerizing its
administration; (ii) improving the transparency of budget planning and reporting systems; (iii)
computerizing the revenue, expenditure, treasury, and debt accounts; (iv) reducing and in some
cases eliminating subsidies and their abuse; (v) creating independent power and port sector
regulatory authorities with board members selected from outside government; (vi) automating
government staff inventories; and (vii) closing loss-incurring public enterprises and introducing
performance-based management systems for staff in those enterprises remaining in operation.
Explicit recognition of anticorruption measures increases the profile of the government's efforts
beyond establishment of formal anticorruption bodies or campaigns, and provides an
opportunity to sharpen monitoring tools to gauge the impact of administrative reforms on
corruption.

68.     Clarity in the roles of resident mission and headquarters staff in sustaining policy
dialogue during implementation will improve effectiveness. ADB's role in implementing
policy reform programs is broadly to maintain a high level of policy dialogue with the
government over the progress of reforms, supervise and administer TA, and assist government
to manage TA loans in accordance with ADB procurement guidelines. Policy-based loans
require intensive interaction with a range of in-country stakeholders, drawing on the expertise of
headquarters, and more particularly resident mission staff. Although policy dialogue and support
is a standard resident mission function as ADB's principal representative in the field, this does
not appear to refer to the specific policy dialogue requirements of program implementation.57
Whether programs are delegated to resident missions or not, it is important that different roles
and responsibilities of headquarters and resident mission staff with respect to sustaining policy
dialogue be clearly defined. The implication for resident mission staff and operations resources
is beyond the remit of this study. However, ADB should recognize that the intensity of policy
dialogue associated with policy reform programs requires resident mission staff to be
empowered and recognized for the role they play in sustaining this critical aspect of
implementation.

69.     Mechanisms are required to monitor ADB Board concerns. During the approval of
each program, ADB Board members raised a number of design and implementation issues.
Both the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh program evaluations noted that these issues did not
appear to be specifically followed up in subsequent progress reports to the Board, nor were they
referred to in the minutes of Board meetings discussing these reports and tranche releases.

55
   ADB. 1998. Anticorruption Policy. Manila. However, the tendency since its approval has been to interpret the
   application of this policy as it pertains to ADB funding, rather than how the project's or program's interventions
   reduce the incidence of corruption.
56
   A detailed analysis of combating corruption in the public financial management system can be found in Campos,
   J.E. and S. Pradhan (eds.) 2007. The Many Faces of Corruption: Tracking Vulnerabilities at the Sector Level.
   World Bank. Washington D.C.
57
   ADB. 2000. Resident Mission Policy. Manila. p.14.
                                                                                                23


Robust mechanisms are required to assist the Board to monitor Management's responses, and
to follow up its own concerns when discussing subsequent progress reports.

B.     Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats

70.     A considerable number of lessons have been identified in previous OED evaluations of
policy-based program lending and public resource management programs. This study
recognizes that many of the lessons previously identified apply to ADB's public resource
management programs in India. These are summarized in Appendix 6. OED's most recent
evaluation of policy-based lending provides practical guidance to designing reform programs by
identifying good practices (footnote 12). This study utilizes this approach to analyze strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats from the program loans and TAs under review in India.

71.    Strengths to Build into Design. These are as follows:

       (i)      supporting the government's fiscal legislation;
       (ii)     programs combining policy, legislative, and regulatory framework reforms with
                institutional, organizational, and human resource capacity development to
                sustain change management practices;
       (iii)    the results of ADB country partnership strategy governance risk assessments
                focused on public financial management, procurement, and combating corruption
                provide an opportunity to develop with the government feasible reform options;
       (iv)     linking program budgeting to the government's sector strategies by prioritizing
                sector expenditures in medium-term expenditure frameworks based on a
                medium-term fiscal framework with a realistic resource envelope;
       (v)      strengthening revenue and expenditure administration systems and procedures,
                in particular through automation;
       (vi)     targeting selective legislative and regulatory reforms to create an enabling
                environment for private sector investment and future ADB sector loans,
                particularly in the power and road sectors, to implement sector-specific policy
                reforms and provide investment opportunities;
       (vii)    policy actions that bring early success, which can have a disproportionate impact
                on ownership and commitment to reforms;
       (viii)   explicit inclusion of anticorruption measures;
       (ix)     where the government has not established a fiscal reform program, advisory or
                project preparatory TA to assist the government to review its fiscal condition and
                political economy risks, and in particular the impact of expenditure reform options
                such as improving debt management, reducing subsidies, and controlling
                pension liabilities, should be provided well in advance of loan preparation
                processes;
       (x)      providing TA well before a loan to enable senior officials and political leaders to
                gain exposure to fiscal reform processes in other states and appropriate
                international situations;
       (xi)     approving TA prior to loan approval to ensure that advice is available from the
                outset of the loan;
       (xii)    avoiding special-purpose program implementation arrangements, utilizing the
                state's reform oversight structures, preferably with one cabinet-level and one
                executive oversight committee serviced by an office within the finance
                department; and
       (xiii)   maintaining in-country capacity to sustain intensive policy dialogue.
24


72.    Weaknesses to Avoid. There are

       (i)      setting unrealistic program outcomes;
       (ii)     program outputs that are insufficient to produce the desired outcome;
       (iii)    policy conditions that are insufficient to produce related outputs;
       (iv)     too many tranche conditions and covenants specified in the policy matrix;
       (v)      insufficient time for the reform actions to be achieved and embedded;
       (vi)     not implementing a communication strategy to clearly explain the benefits and
                risk mitigation measures to those affected by the reforms;
       (vii)    providing insufficient TA (loan and/or grant) by value and time to ensure that
                change management is embedded in key organizations;
       (viii)   training programs with a short time frame and focusing on technical competence
                for senior officials to the exclusion of middle-level cadres, thus missing the
                opportunity to establish a base of change agents in the heart of the bureaucracy;
       (ix)     using consultants without proven training expertise;
       (x)      failing to build the government's capacity to sustain and expand training to
                officials at all levels beyond the life of the program;
       (xi)     complicated reform program implementation arrangements including, for
                example, the establishment of a new government department to manage
                reforms; and
       (xii)    insufficient focus on legislative and executive fiscal accountability mechanisms.

73.    Opportunities to Capitalize upon. These are

       (i)      central government policies providing incentives for state government fiscal
                legislation,
       (ii)     widespread political support for fiscal reform, and
       (iii)    mobilizing resources from development partners to support fiscal reform.

74.    Threats and Risks to Manage. These are

       (i)      lack of cabinet-level policy and approval mechanisms;
       (ii)     central government policy changes;
       (iii)    negative changes in the international market;
       (iv)     political risks undermining decisions on necessary reforms; and
       (v)      lack of commitment across political parties to the fiscal reform program,
                increasing the likelihood that changes in government through elections will stall
                or perhaps reverse reforms.

C.     Towards Good Practice Standards

75.     OED will conduct further evaluations of ADB's support to public sector reforms including
public resource management. These, along with this evaluation, will be used to derive good
practice standards. Based on this study, such good practice standards may include the
following:

76.    Sufficient time and resources are required for policy dialogue and
communications campaigns involving all stakeholders in formulating and implementing
long-term fiscal reforms. While it is important to understand the state's financial position and
model the impact of various revenue and expenditure reform options, understanding political
economy factors that the program can influence will assist in assessing the opportunities and
                                                                                               25


threats to fiscal reform and the time and resources required. ADB materials on political economy
analysis should be drawn on in designing future reform programs. A communication strategy is
not sufficient to address resistance to reforms. However, by continually engaging with
stakeholders--outlining the nature and scope of reforms, the benefits, and how the losses
would be mitigated--the government will have a mechanism to encourage inclusiveness as part
of a broader commitment to transparency and accountability.

77.     Program design should be internally coherent, focusing on the key elements of
the government's fiscal reform agenda, and avoiding broader governance reforms until
fiscal consolidation measures are in place. Striving to achieve short-term fiscal targets will
not necessarily lead to long-term fiscal consolidation or to sustaining reforms. Similarly,
implementing policy actions and complying with legal conditions will enable tranches to be
disbursed, but will not automatically translate into achieving development results. Overly
ambitious outcomes, and results chains with missing links, will undermine the achievement of
development results. Embedding changed management practices to achieve and sustain fiscal
consolidation requires time and focused support. The configuration and sequencing of policy
actions across three outputs--improving revenue generation, compressing expenditure, and
enabling private sector participation in service delivery--should be defined by the state's reform
agenda, preferably expressed in fiscal responsibility legislation. As both the Government of
India and ADB are signatories to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, particular emphasis
should be placed on strengthening public financial management and government procurement
systems. After fiscal reforms are showing results, opportunities to reform the government's
delivery of social services may be an appropriate focus for subsequent support.

78.     Sufficient TA resources should be made available over the long term to respond
to the changing nature of reform processes. Reforms require changes in management
practices. The scope and timing of TA to formulate or refine policy, legislative, and regulatory
frameworks, and requisite systems and procedures, are different from those required to
empower change agents to sustain reforms. Particular attention should be given to developing
human resource capacity and enabling governments to sustain capacity development programs
through the use of innovative adult education methods. The scope and timing of TA should be
defined by the requirements of the program, with project preparatory TA completed well in
advance of loan preparation processes. A mix of TA grant and loan funds provides flexibility,
with the latter having the advantage of being managed by the government with complementary
TA grant funds supporting efficient application of ADB procurement guidelines.

79.      Implementation arrangements should be based on existing institutional structures
and provided with adequate resources, including technical advice. Three special-purpose
institutions with the appropriate membership and resources are required to drive the
government's fiscal reform agenda, ensure that resources are prioritized accordingly, and
effectively coordinate implementation: (i) a legislative-level body, chaired by the chief minister
defining the scope and pace of the state government's reform agenda and enforcing key policy
decisions; (ii) an executive body, chaired by the chief secretary, managing and coordinating the
implementation of reforms across participating government agencies; and (iii) a secretariat,
within the Department of Finance, servicing these two bodies, managing the provision of
technical advice and interagency coordination required to implement the reforms. The
implementation arrangements for externally funded programs should support this architecture
and carefully consider the value of additional program-specific bodies.
26      Appendix 1



                                               BASIC DATA

               Table A1.1: ADB Public Resource Management Programs in India

                      Gujarat         Madhya Pradesh                Kerala                     Assam
                      Program            Program                   Program                    Program
Program            Program loan       Program loan          Cluster loan              Cluster loan
Modality
Loan #             1506               1717                  1974                      2141
ADB Approval       18 December        14 December           16 December 2002          16 December 2004
                   1996               1999
Planned            24 months          36 months             Total: 36 months          Total: 5 years
Duration                                                    Subprogram 1:             Subprogram 1:
                                                            24 months                 30 months
                                                            Subprogram 2:             Subprogram 2:
                                                            12 months (proposed)      30 months (proposed)
Actual             48 months          39 months             Subprogram 1:             Ongoing
Duration                                                    36 months
                                                            Subprogram 2: not
                                                            approved
Amount             $250 million       $250 million          Total $300million         Total: $225 million
Approved                                                    Subprogram 1:             Subprogram 1:
                                                            $200 million              $125 million +
                                                                                      $25 million project loan
                                                            Subprogram 2:             Subprogram 2:
                                                            $100 million (not         $100 million
                                                            approved)                 (proposed)
Financing          OCR                OCR                   OCR                       OCR
Source
Tranches           3 Tranches:        3 Tranches:           Subprogram 1:             Subprogram 1:
(Number and        $100 million       $100 million          2 tranches:               3 tranches:
Amount)            $50 million        $75 million           $100 million              $45 million
                   $100 million       $75 million           $100 million              $45 million
                                                                                      $35 million
                                                            Subprogram 2:             Subprogram 2:
                                                            2 tranches                2 tranches (proposed):
                                                            (proposed):               $50 million each
                                                            $50 million each
ADB TA             5 for              3 for                 3 for                     1 for
Provided           $2,650,000         $2,080,000            $1 million                $1 million
GoI Loan           Grant: loan        Grant: loan           Grant: loan               Grant: loan
Transfer           70:30              70:30                 70:30                     90:10
Arrangements
Executing          Finance            Finance               Office Chief Secretary    Finance Department
Agency             Department         Department            and Finance
                                                            Department
ADB = Asian Development Bank, GoI = Government of India, OCR = ordinary capital resources, TA = technical
assistance.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
                                                                                                Appendix 1        27

           Table A1.2: Technical Assistance Assessed in the Special Evaluation Study
TA                                                                        Amount              Approval         Rating
No.                                 Title                               Approved ($)   Type     Date         TCR OED
        Central Government TA
1722    Assessment of National Renewal Fund                                   99,000   SSTA    29 Jun 92
2530    Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring Program             100,000   ADTA     6 Feb 96     GS
2362    Improvement in State Sales Tax Structure and                          99,500   SSTA     14 Jul 95    GS   PS
        Administration
2432    Capacity Building of Income Tax Administration                       550,000   ADTA    26 Oct 95     GS   GS
3856    Value-Added Tax Reform Capacity Building at Post-                    600,000   ADTA    11 Apr 02          PS
        implementation Stage
4263    Capacity Building for Tax Administration                           1,000,000   ADTA    16 Dec 03
3537    Support for India States' Reform Forum 2000                           85,000   SSTA    13 Nov 00
                                                             Subtotal      2,533,500
        Gujarat TA
2530    Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring                     100,000   SSTA     6 Feb 96          GS
2552    Restructuring Program for State-Owned Enterprises in                 600,000   ADTA     2 Apr 96     GS   GS
        Gujarat
2579    Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment                500,000   ADTA    30 May 96     GS   US
        Corporation
2668    Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances                                  600,000   ADTA    23 Oct 96     GS   PS
2716    Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat Infrastructure            850,000   ADTA    18 Dec 96     GS   HS
        Development Board
                                                             Subtotal      2,650,000
        Madhya Pradesh TA
2943    Support for Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance              780,000   ADTA    15 Dec 97     GS   GS
        Reform and Institutional Strengthening
2944    Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh                     700,000   ADTA    15 Dec 97     GS   PS
3338    Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social            600,000   ADTA    14 Dec 99     PS   PS
        Safety Net in Madhya Pradesh
                                                             Subtotal      2,080,000
        Kerala TA
3576    Supporting Fiscal Reforms in Kerala                                1,000,000   ADTA    13 Dec 00     GS   GS
3869    Participative and Pro-Poor Fiscal and Administrative                 150,000   SSTA    24 May 02     GS   GS
        Reforms in Kerala
3870    Strengthening State Government Effectiveness and                     150,000   SSTA    24 May 02     US   US
        Accountability in Kerala
                                                             Subtotal      1,300,000
        Assam TA
4150    Assam Governance and Public Resource Management                      800,000   PPTA     17 Jul 03
        Program
4128    Budget Procedure Reform Computerization, and                       1,000,000   ADTA    17 Jun 03
        Expenditure Management (Assam)
                                                             Subtotal      1,800,000
        Other States TA
4297    Capacity Building for Fiscal Reforms in Sikkim                       600,000   ADTA    18 Dec 03
4370    West Bengal Development Finance                                      800,000   ADTA     6 Aug 04
                                                             Subtotal      1,400,000
                                                               TOTAL      11,763,500
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, GS = generally satisfactory, HS = highly satisfactory, OED = Operations Evaluation
Department, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance, PS = partially satisfactory, SSTA = small-scale technical
assistance, TA = technical assistance, TCR = technical assistance completion report, US = unsatisfactory.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
28        Appendix 2



         SUMMARY OF PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM DESIGN AND
                             EVALUATION FINDINGS

1.      This appendix summarizes the impacts, outcomes, and outputs of each of the four public
resource management programs and their associated technical assistance (TA), and provides
the overall evaluation rating for each of the programs. Program design issues repeated in each
of the four programs include poorly constructed design and monitoring frameworks, poorly
defined linkages between the policy matrix and the design and monitoring framework, and
inconsistencies between the program structure in the narrative description and that of the
design and monitoring framework. Each brief program and TA summary is followed by tables
comparing the Program design as defined in the policy framework, in the design and monitoring
framework, and in the policy matrix also the agreement to illustrate the lack of design quality
control (Table A2.1­A2.2).

A.        Gujarat

2.       The Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program's impact (goal) was
expected to be improved public sector resource mobilization and allocations efficiently used to
promote industrialization for the benefit of the Gujarat population. Four indicators were
identified: (i) reduction in deficit and improved domestic resource mobilization; (ii) reorientation
of public expenditures to high priority productive sectors; (iii) creation of an enabling
environment to promote private investment; and (iv) higher savings and investment, raising the
state domestic product which was projected to grow by more than 6% annually. The impact
would be achieved through three outcomes (objectives): (i) strengthened state finances and
their prudent management, as measured by the state's fiscal deficit being reduced to 2% of
state domestic product by fiscal year 1999, by increasing current revenues by about 0.4% of
state domestic product and proportionately decreasing the current expenditure to state domestic
product ratio annually; (ii) reformed public enterprises contributing to the state economy,
measured by the adoption of the public sector restructuring program including divestment and
restructuring of 23 of Gujarat's 54 public enterprises; and (iii) private sector participation in
infrastructure development in the state, as measured by the introduction of policy, regulatory,
and institutional frameworks for power, ports, and roads.

3.       The fiscal consolidation outcome had three outputs:1 (i) medium-term fiscal policy
framework implemented with strengthened fiscal policy management, (ii) improved revenue
generation, and (iii) prioritized and rationalized expenditure. Outputs to achieve the public
enterprise reform outcome included (i) institutional mechanisms in place to implement the public
sector restructuring program, (ii) selected public enterprises privatized, (iii) selected public
enterprises restructured, (iv) selected public enterprises closed, and (v) affected public
enterprise employees provided with a social safety net. To create an enabling environment for
private sector participation, outputs included (i) an enabling policy and regulatory framework and
institutional mechanisms; and (ii) power, port, and road sector reforms.

4.       The Asian Development Bank (ADB) provided $2.73 million to build institutional capacity
to implement the reforms through four stand-alone TA grants and one TA attached to the loan.
All four stand-alone TA grants were approved in 1996 in relatively quick succession prior to loan

1
    The design and monitoring framework does not mention outputs. Rather it specifies six program components and a
    series of activities. The Operations Evaluation Mission reconstructed these outputs from the Report and
    Recommendation of the President, the design and monitoring framework, and the policy matrix for the purposes of
    this special evaluation study.
                                                                                              Appendix 2        29


approval. After the first small-scale TA, the following three were advisory rather than project
preparatory, providing limited input to the program design.

5.      Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring.2 This small-scale TA was to
develop the capacity of government officials for designing and implementing public enterprise
reforms by exposing policy makers, implementers, and other concerned groups to institutional
frameworks for privatization through attending special purpose international and national
courses. This small-scale TA was rated successful in exposing key officials to issues pertaining
to public enterprise reforms. While most officials were involved in the reform process during the
Program, they have since been transferred or have left government service.

6.      Restructuring of State-Owned Enterprises of Gujarat.3 This TA was to strengthen the
technical secretariat responsible for managing public enterprise reforms. The Operations
Evaluation Department (OED) rated the TA successful overall. It was consistent with the state
government's public sector restructuring program and ADB's India country strategy. A
successful mix of experienced international and national consultants and the use of appropriate
training methods enabled the government to implement public enterprise reforms. Manuals and
training materials prepared under the TA continue to be updated and used in the subsequent
phases of public enterprise reform.

7.      Capacity Enhancement of the Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation.4 The TA
aimed to enhance the Corporation's capacity to develop and finance infrastructure projects in
Gujarat. Although the technical assistance completion report (TCR) rated the TA generally
successful,5 OED rated it unsuccessful. Ensuring that audits of public enterprise's finances were
up-to-date was not systematically done. When the TA was completed, the Corporation was
found to be in dire financial straits. As a consequence, all lending was suspended, staffing was
reduced, and the focus became debt recovery. The TA consultants conducted training, and
prepared manuals and procedures for the Corporation's prior role. However, given the shift in
focus, these were unused. Although the Corporation has been able to reduce its debt burden
over the past 5 years, the government's phase II public enterprise reform task force has
recommended that it be closed.

8.     Support of Gujarat Public Finance Reforms.6 The TA aimed to build the institutional
capacity of the Finance Department; improve budget policy, planning, management, and control
systems; and modernize and computerize the tax and expenditure divisions. The TA, rated
generally successful in the TCR, delivered important inputs to the government's efforts to reform
revenue and expenditure management. The TCR indicates that the TA reports and workshops
provided important inputs to Gujarat's public finance reform process, although they came late
due to implementation delays and lack of government support--the 2.5-year delay in
operationalizing a key fiscal reform committee meant that the TA consultants did not have an
appropriate counterpart to receive feedback on policy recommendations.7 An independent post
2
    ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring. Manila (TA 2530-
    IND, for $100,000, approved on 6 February).
3
    ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Restructuring State-Owned Enterprises of Gujarat. Manila (TA 2552-
    IND, for $600,000, approved on 2 April).
4
    ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment Corporation.
    Manila (TA 2579-IND, for $500,000, approved on 30 May).
5
    This is the equivalent of successful on the current four point scale.
6
    ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Support for Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances. Manila (TA 2668-
    IND, for $600,000, approved on 23 October).
7
    The consultants finished their fieldwork in January 1999 as the State Public Finance Reform Committee held its
    first meeting.
30       Appendix 2



program assessment8 indicated that the TA enhanced the technical capacity of Finance
Department officers to deal with the complexities of budget management; however, ADB
overlooked the large sales tax exemptions given by the government as an incentive to investors
during the program period, the impact of which weakened overall fiscal performance. The OED
TA performance evaluation report9 rated the TA partly successful, recognizing that it delivered a
few good although not particularly innovative outputs, but, as the consultants operated in
isolation from the government, the TA failed to significantly build capacity within the Finance
Department.

9.       Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board.10 This
TA was attached to the loan to build the Board's capacity to play a strategic and nodal agency
role in formulating infrastructure policies and to promote private sector participation in
infrastructure development. OED rated the TA highly successful. The state government
prioritized the establishment of a sound policy and regulatory framework, and administrative
mechanisms to stimulate private sector investment in public infrastructure. The TA was
consistent with ADB's India strategy and in particular the Gujarat Program outcome. The Board
was able to utilize the experience and lessons identified during the TA to put in place a legal
framework for public-private partnerships. Sector policies, procedures, and manuals contributed
to ensuring order, transparency, and equal access in developing such partnerships. A sound
mix of consultant inputs and training methods ensured that outputs were put to good use. The
Board continues to provide quality services leading the infrastructure planning and development
in the state.

10.     The OED program performance evaluation11 overall rating for the Gujarat Program was
successful.12 By closure, the Program's outcomes had by and large been achieved. The
Program provided the stimulus to reform, enabling Gujarat by 2006 to achieve the fiscal deficit
targets set by the twelfth finance commission for 2008, with an expected substantial revenue
surplus from 2006. Public enterprise reforms were beginning to show dividends and private
sector investors were responding positively to opportunities created by legal and regulatory
changes in key infrastructure sectors. The Program's financial and human resources had been
efficiently utilized and many of the reform measures were being sustained. The expectation that
the Program would be replicated in other states was also achieved.13 OED's overall rating
matched that of the program completion report.



8
   ADB. 2002. Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program: An Assessment. Manila. The National Council
   of Applied Economic Research was engaged to conduct the assessment, which is referred to as the postprogram
   assessment elsewhere in this report.
9
   ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance for Fiscal
   Management and Tax Administration in India. Manila.
10
   ADB. 1996. Technical Assistance to India for Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat Infrastructure Development
   Board. Manila (TA 2716-IND, for $930,000, approved on 18 December).
11
   ADB. 2007. Performance Evaluation Report in India: Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program.
   Manila.
12
   Overall performance is based on four criteria, relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
   was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: irrelevant (0), less relevant (1), relevant (2), and highly
   relevant (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with highly successful > 2.7,
   successful 2.7 < S < 1.6, partly successful 1.6 < PS < 0.8, and unsuccessful< 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines for
   Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
13
   As outlined in Appendix 5, the World Bank supported reforms in Uttar Pradesh (2000), Karnataka (2001), and
   Andhra Pradesh (2002). ADB supported programs in Madhya Pradesh (1999), Kerala (2003), and Assam (2004).
   Revisions to the eleventh and twelfth finance commission awards and the Fiscal Responsibility Act drew on Gujarat
   Public Sector Resource Management Program experiences.
          Table A2.1. Gujarat Program Design as Defined in Policy Framework, Design and Monitoring Framework,
                                           Policy Matrix, and Loan Agreement

       Policy Framework                          Design and Monitoring Framework                         Policy Matrix          Loan Agreement
      (RRP Section IV.C.2)                               (RRP Appendix 4)                              (RRP Appendix 3)           (Schedule 5)

                                          Goal/Objectives                  Components
The objective is to assist Gujarat    The goal was to improve
government in augmenting              public sector resource
domestic resource mobilization,       mobilization and
improving allocation and              allocation, and enhance
efficiency of the public sector and   efficiency of its use in
reducing government's role in         order to promote
commercial activities while           industrialization through
promoting market-oriented             three objectives
policies to enhance private sector
participation in the commercial
and infrastructure sectors. This
objective will be achieved by
1. Strengthening the state's          1. Restore and sustain      1. To achieve desired reduction    I. Strengthening the       A. Strengthening of
     public finances and their           fiscal stability, and       in fiscal deficit, agree to        state's public            state public
     prudent management                  improve fiscal              undertake                          finances and their        finances and its
                                         capabilities and            (a) tax reforms at state and       prudent                   prudent
                                         management.                      municipal levels,             management                management
                                                                     (b) enhanced cost recovery,
                                                                          and
                                                                     (c) reoriented public
                                                                          expenditures.
                                                                  2. Develop capabilities for
                                                                     improving fiscal discipline
                                                                     and management:
                                                                     (a) budget formulation and




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
                                                                          implementation,
                                                                     (b) restructuring taxes, and
                                                                     (c) implementation of public
                                                                          expenditure reforms
2. Privatizing or divesting and       2. Reduce the size of       3. Undertake a substantial         II. Launch public          B. Reforms of
   restructuring the public              the public sector in        reform of public enterprises,       sector restructuring     state-owned




                                                                                                                                                      31
   enterprises to reduce the             commercial activities,      with the objective of opening       program to privatize     enterprises
                                                                                                                                                      32
        Policy Framework                            Design and Monitoring Framework                       Policy Matrix            Loan Agreement
       (RRP Section IV.C.2)                                 (RRP Appendix 4)                            (RRP Appendix 3)             (Schedule 5)




                                                                                                                                                      Appendix 2
                                          Goal/Objectives                   Components
     financial burden they impose        and introduce more          these corporations to                 or divest and
     on the budget and economy,          competition and             enhanced competition and              restructure the
     while allowing the private          efficiency in public        improved corporate                    public enterprises
     sector to take the lead in          enterprises.                governance with better                with the objective of
     commercial activities                                           accountability.                       maximizing
                                                                                                           efficiency and
                                                                                                           reducing
                                                                                                           government's role
                                                                                                           in commercial
                                                                                                           activities.
 3. Enabling private sector           3. Create a conducive        4. Focus on development of         III. Evolve an enabling      C. Evolve an
    participation by strengthening       environment to               key infrastructure sectors:          environment for          enabling
    the policy, regulatory, and          augment private              (a) power,                           private sector           environment for
    institutional frameworks in          sector participation in      (b) ports, and                       involvement in           private sector
    critical infrastructure sectors      critical infrastructure      (c) roads.                           infrastructure           involvement in
                                         projects.                                                         sectors.                 infrastructure
                                                                                                                                    sectors.
                                                                   5. Develop regulatory and
                                                                      institutional mechanisms for
                                                                      private sector participation
                                                                   6. Initiate restructuring of two
                                                                      key public utilities, Gujarat
                                                                      Maritime Board and Gujarat
                                                                      Electricity Board, which
                                                                      handle development and
                                                                      provision of port and
                                                                      associated services and
                                                                      power, respectively.
RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
                         Table A2.2: Reconstruction of Gujarat Program Design and Monitoring Framework

                           Impact / Outputs                                                                Activities

Impact is improved economic growth.


Outcome is fiscal reforms that improve resource mobilization and their
efficient allocation.

Output 1. Enhanced resource allocation to social sector, within a            1.1 Medium-term fiscal framework implemented with strengthening
medium-term framework of sustainable public finances and                     fiscal policy management
strengthened fiscal management
                                                                             1.2 Improved revenue generation
                                                                             1.3 Improved efficiency and effectiveness of expenditure

Output 2. Public sector undertakings restructured to efficiently use state   2.1 Institutional mechanisms in place to implement the public sector
resources and contribute to the economy                                      restructuring policy and program
                                                                             2.2 Selected public enterprises privatized
                                                                             2.3 Selected public enterprises restructured
                                                                             2.4 Selected public enterprises closed
                                                                             2.5 Cooperatives sector reform initiated

Output 3. Private sector participating in development of the state           3.1 An enabling policy and regulatory framework in place
                                                                             3.2 Key power, road, and housing sector reforms initiated

Source: Operations Evaluation Department.




                                                                                                                                                    Appendix 2
                                                                                                                                                    33
34        Appendix 2



B.        Madhya Pradesh

11.     The Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program's impact (goal) was
improved social development and sustainable economic growth through improved public
resource management and increased public expenditure in the social sector for the benefit of
the people of the state.1 Key impact indicators include (i) medium-term sustainability of public
finances; (ii) increased revenue; (iii) increased social sector expenditure; (iv) improved financial
performance of public enterprises; (v) private sector investment in key sectors, particularly
power and roads; and (vi) improved environmental sustainability. The Madhya Pradesh Program
was designed to achieve four outcomes (objectives): (i) a well-managed, sustainable, medium-
term public finance framework enabling enhanced resource allocation to social sectors; (ii)
public enterprises restructured to contribute to the economy by efficiently and effectively using
state resources; and (iii) private sector investment developing key sectors of the state economy.
See Tables A2.3 and A2.4.

12.      The fiscal consolidation outcome would be achieved with four outputs: (i) strengthened
financial management institutions, (ii) medium-term fiscal framework for FY1999­2003
implemented, (iii) improved revenue generation, and (iv) improved expenditure efficiency and
effectiveness. The public enterprise outcome would be achieved with five outputs: (i)
institutional mechanisms in place to implement the public enterprise restructuring policy and
program, (ii) selected public enterprises privatized, (iii) selected public enterprises restructured,
(iv) selected public enterprises closed, and (v) cooperative sector reform initiated. Two outputs
would achieve the outcome of increased private sector participation: (i) an enabling policy and
regulatory framework in place; and (ii) key power, road, and housing sector reforms initiated.

13.     A total of $2.08 million was provided in the form of three TA grants to complement
reform and capacity-building initiatives supported by the Program. Two were approved in
December 1997, 2 years prior to the eventual approval of the Loan Agreement. These focused
on strengthening local government information systems, and assisting the state government to
establish fiscal reform and institutional strengthening initiatives. The third, focusing on pu
attached to the Loan Agreement.

14.     Strengthening Local Government.2 The 73rd amendment to the Indian Constitution
introduced local government at the panchayat (village) level, including significant roles in
implementing government projects. Madhya Pradesh was the first state to directly elect village
level gram panchayats (local government). These have become reasonably strong, although it
is reported that they have been captured by local elites.3 To improve governance of district level
local government bodies in Madhya Pradesh, a TA was approved to (i) develop the resource-
raising capabilities of local governments through policy support and training; (ii) improve
information gathering at the district level, to enhance rational decision making at local and state
levels; and (iii) strengthen training facilities of local governments, facilitating dissemination of
best practices throughout local government administration. The TA provided equipment and
capacity building on data collection and processing to various government agencies, with 33
person-months of consulting services provided from June 1998 to December 2000. The

1
    The Operations Evaluation Mission reconstructed the impact, outcomes, and outputs from the Report and
    Recommendation of the President, design and monitoring framework, and policy matrix (Appendix 1) for the
    purposes of this special evaluation study.
2
    ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh. Manila
    (TA 2944-IND, for $700,000, approved on 15 December).
3
    Manor. J. 2001. Madhya Pradesh Experiments with Direct Democracy. Economic and Political Weekly.
    March 3:715­716.
                                                                                                Appendix 2       35


consultant team designed and installed a statistical package for more efficient fiscal data
management in 31 district level directorate of economics and statistics offices, and trained more
than 100 officers. Although the TCR rated the TA successful,4 the key constraint to local
government capacity was, and remains today, the local governments' ability to manage funds--
including maintaining accounts. With one part-time locally engaged administration officer in a
gram panchayat, given little training support but having to deal with many vertical programs, it is
not surprising that local government fiscal reform has not been successful. Although the TA
aimed to build a database on local finances, in 2006 even receipts and expenditures of urban
local bodies at an aggregate level were not readily available. As a result, the state finance
commission had to collect this information on its own, every time it is set up, causing
considerable delay in producing the report. In summary, the TA has not proved sustainable. As
the Madhya Pradesh Program did not complement the TA with policy conditions supporting
improved governance of local governments, it is unclear how the TA was to contribute to the
Program's reform outcomes. OED considered that the TA was at best partly successful.

15.      Fiscal Reform and Institutional Strengthening.5 The TA to support fiscal reform
focused on (i) strengthening the sales tax administration, including staff training to facilitate
transformation of the sales tax system to value added tax; (ii) strengthening the stamp duty and
registration directorate, establishing a state level central valuation cell and district valuation cells
for valuation of assets, and training staff members on the new valuation system; (iii) assessing
the institutional, policy, and regulatory frameworks for improvement of social services,
particularly health and education services; (iv) establishing a budget and financial analysis unit
and training staff members to strengthen the analytical capability for budget planning and
monitoring as well as revenue and expenditure analysis and projections; and (v) training staff
members from the Finance Department and key infrastructure departments on expenditure
prioritization and core investment plan. The Madhya Pradesh government established an
economic reform committee to oversee the TA, with the support of two empowered committees
on public finance reform and public enterprise restructuring. The performance of the
international consulting firm was rated satisfactory, even though the consultant team members
changed, and the interaction between the consultants and the executing agency was reportedly
weak. The consultants' report provided a comprehensive analysis and review of the
government's public finances. Savings from the original budget enabled the engagement of an
international consultant to assist the government to design the proposed value added tax
system. The TCR6 rated the TA successful, as did an OED assessment,7 which found the most
successful interventions were in tax, the budget and financial analysis unit, and computerization
of treasury functions. The outcomes of interventions in key expenditure departments--such as
in health, education, public works, and water resources--were relatively less visible.

16.   Public Enterprise Reform.8 This TA, attached to the Madhya Pradesh Program loan,
aimed to support the Madhya Pradesh government's efforts to develop and implement a
comprehensive and socially sustainable program of public enterprise reform. It had three

4
    ADB. 2001. Technical Assistance Completion Report on Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh.
    Manila.
5
    ADB. 1997. Technical Assistance to India for Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance
    Reform and Institutional Strengthening. Manila (TA 2943-IND, for $780,000, approved on 15 December).
6
    ADB. 2002. Technical Assistance Completion Report on Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public
    Finance Reform and Institutional Strengthening. Manila.
7
    ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance for Fiscal
    Management and Tax Administration in India. Manila.
8
    ADB. 1999. Technical Assistance to India for Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety Net
    in Madhya Pradesh. Manila (TA 3338-IND, for $600,000, approved on 14 December).
36       Appendix 2



objectives: (i) to establish effective institutional mechanisms for restructuring and divestment of
public enterprises, including assistance in designing and implementing social safety nets; (ii)
capacity building for undertaking public enterprise reform; and (iii) improving corporate
governance, including strengthening accounting and information systems of public enterprises.
The TA was rated relevant, as it was consistent with the government's reform agenda and
ADB's India strategy. The TA produced quality reports and advice, but it was rated less effective
as the institution it was planned to support was not created, and the government chose not to
operationalize a social safety net. Its planned 12-month time frame was insufficient to support
the complex public sector undertaking reform agenda in support of a 3-year program loan. It
was rated less efficient and less likely sustainable as, without further exogenous resources to
provide the necessary technical advice to further public enterprise reforms, the government's
reform effort would be limited and the materials prepared under the TA would be of little
practical value. OED's overall rating of partly successful matches that of the TCR.

17.      The OED program performance evaluation9 overall rating was partly successful.10 The
government's political commitment to reform had not been fully translated into action, despite
the influence of external factors on achieving key fiscal consolidation outcomes. The state fiscal
deficit decreased from a high of 6.3% in 2004 to 3% of state domestic product in 2008, as
charted in the Fiscal Responsibility Act (2005). However, this was the same level as the starting
point of the Program (from 3.7% state domestic product in 1999 to 0.7% in 2002). There were
positive signs in revenue generation, with the introduction of the value added tax, but there had
been no significant change in the government's resource allocation to the social sectors, and
public enterprise reforms were stalled. Private investors responded positively, particularly in the
road sector. However, while the approval of a state environment and rehabilitation policy was
positive, with the exception of ADB's energy sector loan,11 ADB has not referred to either policy
when it would have been relevant to follow up on projects. With two of the three TA operations
rated partly successful, and the other "successful," the overall use of these resources was
neither effective nor efficient. The performance of the Borrower was rated satisfactory, and that
of ADB partly satisfactory. OED differed from the program completion report's overall rating of
successful.




9
   ADB. 2007. Performance Evaluation Report India: Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program.
   Manila.
10
   Overall performance is based on four criteria: relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. Each criterion
   was scored on a four-point scale, from 0 to 3, for example: "irrelevant" (0), "less relevant" (1), "relevant" (2), and
   "highly relevant" (3). The weighted scores are then computed for the overall assessment with "highly successful" >
   2.7, "successful" 2.7 < S < 1.6, "partly successful" 1.6 < PS < 0.8, and "unsuccessful" < 0.8. ADB. 2006. Guidelines
   for Preparing Program Performance Evaluation Reports for Public Sector Operations. Manila.
11
   ADB. 2007. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on the Proposed Multitranche
   Financing Facility India: Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program. Manila.
         Table A2.3. Madhya Pradesh Program Design as Defined in the RRP, Policy Framework, Logical Framework,
                                          Policy Matrix, and Loan Agreement

Objectives and Scope        Policy Framework                    Program Framework                         Policy Matrix     Loan Agreement
 (RRP Section V.B)          (RRP Section V.C)                    (RRP Appendix 1)                         (Appendix 3)        (Schedule 5)

                                                        Goal/Objectives             Components
The objective is to                                The goal was to support the
support the                                        government's reform efforts
government's reform                                to foster social
efforts to foster social                           development and
development and                                    sustainable economic
sustainable economic                               growth through improving
growth by addressing                               public resource
prevailing resource                                management and
and implementation                                 enhancing public
constraints in Madhya                              expenditure to social sector
Pradesh, focusing on                               through three objectives:
1. Enhancing resource      1. Capacity building    1. Enhanced resource           1. Foster social      A. Social           A. Social
   allocation to social       and institutional        allocation to the social      development,          development,        development,
   sectors to support         strengthening for        sector, within a              support               institutional       institutional
   human development          improved fiscal          medium-term                   institutional         strengthening,      strengthening,
                              management and           framework of                  strengthening,        and public          and public
                              sustainable public       sustainable public            and improve           finance             finance
                              finances                 finances and                  public finances.
                                                       strengthened fiscal
                                                       management, to foster
                                                       social development and
                                                       satisfy basic human
                                                       needs while mitigating
                                                       the social impact of
                                                       development




                                                                                                                                                Appendix 2
                           2. Reallocation of
                              expenditures to
                              social services




                                                                                                                                                37
                                                                                                                                                 38
Objectives and Scope         Policy Framework                    Program Framework                       Policy Matrix      Loan Agreement
 (RRP Section V.B)           (RRP Section V.C)                    (RRP Appendix 1)                       (Appendix 3)         (Schedule 5)




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
                                                         Goal/Objectives           Components
2. Improving public         3. Public enterprise    2. Improving corporate       2. Undertake          B. Public            B. Public
    finances and fiscal        reform                  governance and               public                enterprise           enterprise
    capabilities and                                   increased efficiency of      enterprise            reform and           reform and
    management, and                                    resource use through         reform and            corporate            corporate
    fostering allocative                               restructuring public         improve               governance           governance
    efficiency through                                 sector undertakings          corporate
    reform of public                                                                governance.
    enterprises including
    corporate
    governance reform


3. Strengthening the        4. Evolving enabling    3. Evolving an enabling      3. Promote            C. Enabling          C. Enabling
   policy, regulatory,         framework               environment for private      enabling policy       environment for      environment for
   and institutional                                   sector participation in      environment for       private sector       private sector
   frameworks for                                      key sectors                  private               involvement          involvement
   private sector                                                                   participation in
   participation in key                                                             key sectors
   sectors
                                                    4. Promoting                 4. Promote
                                                       environmental                sustainable
                                                       sustainability of            development
                                                       economic development
RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
     Table A2.4 Comparison of Madhya Pradesh Program Design and Monitoring Framework and Policy Matrix Structure

                Program Framework (RRP Appendix 1)                                                Policy Matrix (RRP Appendix 3)

   Components                                Outputs                              Objectives                          Policy Areas
1. Foster social       (i) Institutional strengthening                        A. Social             A.1. Institutional strengthening
   development,        (ii) Adoption and implementation of medium-term           development,       A.2. Medium-term fiscal framework
   support                   fiscal framework for FY1999­2003                    institutional
   institutional       (iii) Improved efficiency and effectiveness of            strengthening,     A.7. Rationalization and prioritization of
   strengthening,            resource use through                                and public                expenditure and strengthening of
   and improve               (a) rationalized and prioritized expenditure        finance                   expenditure management
   public finances.          (b) reallocated expenditure to social services                         A.8. Reallocation of expenditure to social services
                             (c) shifted priority from current to capital                                  and strengthening of institutional and legal
                                  expenditure                                                              frameworks for enhanced cost recovery
                       (iv) Mitigated social impact of economic                                     A.9. Mitigate social impact of economic
                             development                                                                   development, including social safety net
                                                                                                           mechanism for public enterprise reform
                       (v) Strengthened resource mobilization through                               A.3. Reform of sales tax system
                           (a) rationalization of sales tax system                                  A.4. Phasing in of value added tax system and
                           (b) phasing-in of VAT system                                                    strengthening of tax administration
                           (c) reform of stamp duty system in line with                             A.5. Reform of stamp duty system and
                               recommendations of the 1996 and 1997                                        strengthening valuation system for
                               state finance minister's committee on                                       assessment of stamp duty and property tax
                               stamp duty                                                           A.6. Improved cost recovery
                           (d) improved cost recovery

2. Undertake public    (i) Develop policy and institutional mechanism for     B. Public             B.1. Develop policy and Institutional mechanism
   enterprise reform         PSU reform.                                         enterprise              for PSU reform.
   and improve         (ii) Improve corporate governance and support             reform and         B.2. Improve corporate governance and
   corporate                 institutional strengthening.                        corporate               strengthen institutions.
   governance,         (iii) Increase operational freedom of public              governance
                             enterprises.




                                                                                                                                                          Appendix 2
                       (iv) Restructure/ divest public enterprises.                                 B.3. Restructure and divest/ privatize public
                                                                                                         enterprises.
                       (v) Close/ merge public enterprises.                                         B.4. Merge and close public enterprises; and
                                                                                                         sell/ lease of properties.
                       (vi) Initiate reform of cooperatives sector.                                 B.5. Initiate reform of cooperatives sector.




                                                                                                                                                          39
                                                                                                                                                 40
                 Program Framework (RRP Appendix 1)                                         Policy Matrix (RRP Appendix 3)

   Components                                 Outputs                      Objectives                          Policy Areas




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
3. Promote enabling     (i) Power sector reform.                       C. Enabling            C.1. Initiate power sector reform.
   policy               (ii) Roads and transport sector reform.           environment for     C.2. Develop policy and regulatory framework for
   environment for                                                        private sector           promoting private sector participation in
   private                                                                involvement              transport and roads sectors; strengthen
   participation in                                                                                capabilities of Public Works Department to
   key sectors                                                                                     process private sector projects; develop
                                                                                                   tariff-setting mechanism
                        (iii) Housing sector reform.                                          C.3. Improve framework for private investment in
                                                                                                   the housing sector.
4. Promote              (i) Strengthened environmental management.                            C.4. Improve environmental sustainability of
   sustainable                                                                                     economic development; strengthen
   development                                                                                     environmental management.
                        (ii) Mitigation of social impact of economic                          C.5. Social impact of economic development.
                             development.
RRP = report and recommendation of the President.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
                                                                                            Appendix 2        41


C.        Kerala

18.    The impact (goal) of the Modernizing Governance and Fiscal Reforms in Kerala Program
was to reduce poverty and meet development targets in the tenth five-year state plan within a
sustainable fiscal framework. Although five indicators were specified in the design and
monitoring framework only one is meaningful--that 5-year fiscal targets with the government
achieved. The program's outcome (purpose) was to support implementation of the modernizing
governance program. Of the seven outcome indicators, only one would provide appropriate
information to assess achievement of part of the outcome--fiscal targets agreed on with the
government for subprogram 1 achieved in the program period. See Tables A2.5 and A2.6.

19.     The outcome was to be achieved through 14 outputs: (i) enabling actions for power
reform in place; (ii) medium-term fiscal framework and associated legislation in place; (iii)
revenue enhancement measures in place; (iv) budget preparation, reporting, and execution
processes reformed; (v) service delivery plans in priority areas completed in accordance with
service delivery policy; (vi) surplus staff redeployed in accordance with policy; (vii) staff transfers
on the basis of civil service rules; (viii) functional review in priority areas completed; (ix) right to
information legislation enacted and brought into force; (x) decentralization of resources and
functions form the Kerala government to local self-governments for subprogram 1 completed;
(xi) local self-governments strengthened; (xii) more effective poverty reduction measures in
place; (xiii) action plan for state-level public enterprise restructuring approved; and (xiv) backlog
on external audit of at least three statutory public boards reduced by at least 2 years.

20.     ADB provided $1.3 million through three TA grants. Two small scale TA operations1 to
assist the formulation of service delivery policy and planning, and to assist the government to
conducting functional reviews in the Secretariat were provided. While the first TA was
successful in formulating policy, the second was closed due to staff opposition to the findings of
the preliminary report. These two TA activities were preceded by a $1 million advisory TA2 to
design measures to improve the state's public finances, and to build the necessary capacity for
effective implementation, through a four-pronged approach: (i) assist the state government to
formulate tax and non tax reform measures to enhance revenue-raising capacity; (ii) upgrade
the Finance Department's institutional capacity to manage and control public spending and
introduce greater accountability and transparency in budget making; (iii) prepare a consensus-
based legal and administrative framework to promote fiscal responsibility to ensure the
sustainability of public finances; and (iv) strengthen the capabilities of local bodies to assume
greater responsibility for social spending and make their functioning more transparent and
accountable.

21.     The TCR rated the TA as successful, highlighting the inclusion of TA recommendations
in the Kerala State Budget for 2002­2003, the Tenth State Plan the Fiscal Responsibility Act,
and the establishment of a modernizing governance program secretariat to support government
reforms from within the public administration. However, the TCR noted that the modernizing
governance initiatives overshadowed achievements in core fiscal management and varying
perceptions of government ownership of the reforms, as illustrated by the fact that the State
Public Finance Reform Committee was never convened to assess/endorse the final TA

1
    ADB. 2002. Small-Scale Technical Assistance to India for Participative and Pro-Poor Fiscal and Administrative
    Reforms in Kerala. Manila (TA 3869-IND, for $150,000, approved on 24 May), and ADB. 2002. Small-Scale
    Technical Assistance to India for Strengthening State Government Effectiveness and Accountability in Kerala.
    Manila (TA 3870-IND, for $150,000, approved on 24 May).
2
    ADB. 2000. Technical Assistance to India for Supporting Fiscal Reforms in Kerala. Manila (TA 3576-IND, for $1
    million, approved on 6 December).
42     Appendix 2



recommendations. Follow-up actions identified in the TA report including restructuring the
Finance Department, restructuring public debt management, and overhauling the state
procurement system were not pursued.

22.     In October 2003, the Netherlands Government provided $6.5 million in bilateral TA
financing to assist the implementation of service delivery projects. This complemented the $25
million Netherlands Government cofinancing provided through the Program, supporting the
implementation of about 150 TA contracts.

23.      The program completion report and OED's validation both rated the Kerala Program
partially successful. The Program was relevant and carried out efficiently. However, although all
but one condition was fully or substantially complied with, the Program did not achieve its
outcome nor did it create fiscal space and enhance fiscal sustainability. Institutions to
strengthen fiscal management were built, but there was limited ownership, commitment, and
effort from the state government to carry out fiscal consolidation and maintain fiscal discipline.
The imbalance between policy objectives and available resources identified at appraisal as
being at the heart of the financial indiscipline continued to persist, undermining the sustainability
of reforms.
       Table A2.5. Kerala Program Design as Defined in the Policy Framework, Design and Monitoring Framework, and
                                                       Policy Matrix


      Policy Framework                                       Program Logical Framework                                       Policy Matrix
   (RRP Section IV.C.1 and 2)                                     (RRP Appendix 5)                                         (RRP Appendix 3)

                                                Goal/Objectives                           Outputs                             Objectives
The objectives of the Program are      The impact (goal) is to reduce
to helpthe Kerala government to        poverty and meet development
(i) Achieve fiscal sustainability,     targets in the tenth five-year state
including initial policy actions for   plan within a sustainable fiscal
power sector reform; (ii) improve      framework
the quality, equity, and value for
money of services provided by the
Kerala government and local            The outcome (purpose) is support
governments; (iii) improve the         implementation of the modernizing
targeting and quality of the poverty   governance program.
reduction programs and social
services, and (iv) strengthen the
functions and structures of state
and local governments in Kerala
to increase accountability,
responsiveness, transparency,
and efficiency.
Thematic Area 1. Achieve fiscal                                                                                     Thematic Area 1. Achieve fiscal
sustainability                                                                                                      sustainability
Component 1. Power sector                                                     · Power: Enabling actions for         Component 1. Power sector
reform prior actions                                                            power reform in place               reform prior actions
Component 2. Reform state level                                               · State level public enterprises:     Component 2. Reform state-level
public enterprises.                                                             Action plan for public enterprise   public enterprises
                                                                                restructuring approved




                                                                                                                                                      AppendiX 2
                                                                              · Backlog on external audit of at
                                                                                least three statutory public
                                                                                boards reduced by at least 2
                                                                                years
Component 3. Medium-term fiscal                                               · Fiscal: Medium-term fiscal          Component 3. Medium -erm fiscal
framework                                                                       framework and associated            framework




                                                                                                                                                      43
                                                                                                                                 44
      Policy Framework                        Program Logical Framework                                   Policy Matrix
   (RRP Section IV.C.1 and 2)                      (RRP Appendix 5)                                     (RRP Appendix 3)




                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
                                    Goal/Objectives                     Outputs                            Objectives
                                                             legislation in place
Thematic Area 2: Improve the
quality, equity, and value for
money of services provided by the
Kerala government and the local
governments.
Component 1. Service                                        · Core functions: Service delivery   Core government functions
development policy                                            plans in priority areas
                                                              completed in accordance with
                                                              service delivery policy
Component 2. Asset renewal
policy.
Component 3. Social audit policy
Component 4. Right to information                           · Right to information legislation
and public disclosure                                         enacted and brought into force
Thematic Area 3: Improve the
targeting and quality of poverty
reduction programs.
Component 1. Poverty monitoring                             · Poverty reduction: More            Poverty reduction and minimum
                                                              effective poverty reduction        needs program
                                                              measures in place
Component 2. Antipoverty subplan

Thematic Area 4: Strengthen the
functions and structures of the
Kerala government and local
governments to increase
accountability, responsiveness,
and transparency.
Component 1. Strengthen policy
making.
Component 2. Surplus staff                                  · Surplus staff redeployed in
redeployment                                                  accordance with policy
Component 3. Closure of long-
      Policy Framework                                  Program Logical Framework                                Policy Matrix
   (RRP Section IV.C.1 and 2)                                (RRP Appendix 5)                                  (RRP Appendix 3)

                                              Goal/Objectives                     Outputs                         Objectives
pending infrastructure projects
Component 4. Integrated payroll
and personnel computerized
system
Component 5. Local self-                                              · Local self-governments(LSGs):   Local self-governments
government                                                              Decentralization of resources
                                                                        and functions form the Kerala
                                                                        government to LSGs for
                                                                        subprogram 1 completed
                                                                      · LSGs strengthened
Component 6. Second state
finance commission
recommendations
Component 7. Capacity building in
financial management
Component 8. Restructuring the                                        · Functional review in priority
secretariat                                                             areas completed
RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.




                                                                                                                                  AppendiX 2
                                                                                                                                  45
          Table A2.6: Comparison of Kerala Program Design and Monitoring Framework and Policy Matrix Structure




                                                                                                                                                   46
   Design and Monitoring Framework (RRP Appendix 5)                                         Policy Matrix (RRP Appendix 3)




                                                                                                                                                   Appendix 2
                            Outputs                                         Objectives                              Policy Areas
1. Fiscal: Medium-term fiscal framework and associated               I. Reform public finances   I.1 Medium-term fiscal framework, revenue
legislation in place                                                 and financial               enhancement, and fiscal responsibility
2. Revenue enhancement measures in place                             management                  I.2 Budgeting and financial management
3. Budget preparation, reporting, and execution processes
reformed
4. Power: Enabling actions for power reform in place                 II. Power sector reforms    II.1 Regulatory measures, and fiscal and
                                                                                                 legislative reform measures
                                                                                                 II.2 Agreements with governments of India, and
                                                                                                 Kerala
5. Core functions: Service delivery plans in priority areas          III. Core government        III.1 Payroll and personnel computerized system
completed in accordance with service delivery policy                 functions                   III.2 Infrastructure projects review
6. Surplus staff redeployed in accordance with policy                                            III.3 Asset management/renewal
7. Staff transfers on the basis of civil service rules
8. Functional review in priority areas completed                                                 III.4. Efficiency enhancing measures, and
9. Right to information legislation enacted and brought into force                               government restructuring/ rationalization of
                                                                                                 decision-making process
                                                                                                 III.5 Service delivery
                                                                                                 III.6 Transparency and right to information
10. Local self-governments: Decentralization of resources and        IV. Local self-             IV. Strengthening of local governments
functions form the Kerala government to local governments for        governments
subprogram 1 completed
11. Local governments strengthened
12. Poverty reduction: More effective poverty reduction              V. Poverty reduction and    V. Anti-poverty measures
measures in place                                                    minimum needs program
13. State level public enterprises: Action plan for public           VI. State-level public      VI. Public sector reforms
enterprise restructuring approved                                    enterprises reform
14. Backlog on external audit of at least three statutory public
boards reduced by at least 2 years
RRP = Report and Recommendations of the President.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
                                                                                  Appendix 2     47


D.     Assam

24.     The Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Program impact (goal) was
to stabilize and consolidate Assam state government finances. Two impact indicators were
specified: (i) level of compliance against the 5-year fiscal targets under the medium-term fiscal
plan as updated, and (ii) level of compliance with fiscal responsibility bill targets. The program's
outcome (purpose) was necessary and sufficient conditions met for a sustainable reduction in
fiscal and revenue deficits. Seven of the 12 indicators refer to achieving medium-term fiscal plan
and financial responsibility bill targets regarding revenue, debt levels, liabilities, reporting,
expenditure, public enterprise subsidies, and salaries. The other five measure institutional
frameworks for fiscal responsibility and public enterprise reform, level of cash balances, local
government fiscal empowerment, and policy matrix milestones. See Table A2.7.

25.      The outcome would be achieved through eight outputs: (i) enhanced fiscal responsibility,
(ii) broadened the tax base and enhanced tax collection, (iii) enhanced non tax revenues, (iv)
restructured state debt, (v) containment of state pension liabilities, (vi) improved state budgeting
and expenditure orientation, (vii) public enterprise reforms and strengthened public-private
partnerships, and (viii) public administration review.

26.     In addition to the $25 million TA project loan included in the Program, a $1 million TA
was provided to improve fiscal management and effective use of public resources by the
government of Assam. Its outcome, to strengthen the Assam government's capacity to
implement its medium-term fiscal reform plan, was to be achieved through five outputs: (i)
establishment of a legislative framework for improving the state's fiscal management and fiscal
reporting; (ii) improvement of the state's planning and budgeting process; (iii) strengthening
expenditure management and control; (iv) improvement of public sector service delivery by
supporting the preparation of a functional assessment of the state administration, and the
development and evaluation of options for its organizational restructuring and rightsizing; and
(v) exploration and piloting of e-governance options to improve staff relations, and procurement
and disbursement processes.
          Table A2.7: Assam Program Design as Defined in the Policy Framework, Design and Monitoring Framework,




                                                                                                                                                 48
                                                    and Policy Matrix

            Policy Framework                                 Design and Monitoring Framework                           Policy Matrix




                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 2
         (RRP Section IV.C.1 and 2)                                  (RRP Appendix 4)                                (RRP Appendix 3)
                                                        Goal/Objectives               Outputs
Subprogram 1 of the program cluster aims to        The impact (goal) is to                                    Component 1. Reform state
enhance growth and ultimately reduce               stabilize and consolidate                                  finances.
poverty by reducing Assam's fiscal and             Assam state government
revenue deficits on a sustainable basis            finances
through fiscal and governance reforms that
(i) stabilize state finances; and (ii) establish
the foundation for effective utilization,
prioritization, and reorientation of public
expenditures.
There are components and related
outcomes.
Component 1. Goal: Reform state finances.          The outcome (purpose) is      1. Enhanced fiscal           Outcome 1. Enhance fiscal
                                                   necessary and sufficient      responsibility               responsibility.
                                                   conditions met for a
                                                   sustainable reduction in
                                                   fiscal and revenue deficits
Outcome 1. Enhance fiscal responsibility.                                        2. Broadened tax base        Outcome 2. Broaden the tax
                                                                                 and enhanced tax             base and enhance tax collection.
                                                                                 collection
Outcome 2. Broaden the tax base and                                              3. Enhanced nontax           Outcome 3. Enhance nontax
enhance tax collection.                                                          revenues                     revenues.

Outcome 3. Enhance nontax revenues.                                              4. Restructured state debt   Outcome 4. Restructure state
                                                                                                              debt.
Outcome 4. Restructure state debt.                                               5. Containment of state      Outcome 5. Contain state
                                                                                 pension liabilities          pension liabilities.
Outcome 5. Contain state pension liabilities.                                                                 Component 2. Fiscal governance
                                                                                                              reforms.
Component 2. Goal: Fiscal governance                                             6. Improved state            Outcome 6. Improve state
reforms                                                                          budgeting and expenditure    budgeting and expenditure
                                                                                 orientation                  orientation.
Outcome 6. Improve state budgeting and                                                                        Outcome 7. Enhance poverty-
expenditure orientation.                                                                                      focused and growth-oriented
                                                                                                              expenditure.
           Policy Framework                            Design and Monitoring Framework                        Policy Matrix
        (RRP Section IV.C.1 and 2)                              (RRP Appendix 4)                            (RRP Appendix 3)
                                                    Goal/Objectives              Outputs
Outcome 7. Enhance poverty focus and                                                                  Component 3. Reorient the role
growth-oriented expenditure.                                                                          of the state.
Component 3. Goal: Reorienting the role of                              7. Public enterprise          Outcome 8. Reform public
the state                                                               reforms and strengthened      enterprises.
                                                                        public-private partnerships
Outcome 8. Reform public enterprises                                                                  Outcome 9. Strengthen public-
                                                                                                      private partnerships.
Outcome 9. Strengthen public private                                    8. Public administration      Outcome 10. Public
partnerships                                                            review                        administration review.
Outcome 10. Public administration review
RRP = Report and Recommendation of the President.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.




                                                                                                                                       Appendix 2
                                                                                                                                       49
50     Appendix 3



     SUMMARY OF KEY ELEMENTS IN PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

1.       In Gujarat, three cabinet level committees chaired by the chief minister were established
to manage the government's reform agenda: (i) an expenditure prioritization committee
reviewed and approved the core investment plan prioritizing social and physical infrastructure;
(ii) a three-person cabinet subcommittee on public enterprise reform reviewed and approved
divestment and restructuring of individual public enterprises; and (iii) a public finance reform
committee provided advice on fiscal reforms, solicited private sector views, and created public
awareness of tax reforms with the assistance of three executive level working groups--on tax
reform, expenditure management and control, and computerization and training. The Gujarat
Infrastructure Development Board, also chaired by the chief minister, was established with
statutory authority to promote privatization in key infrastructure sectors. A technical secretariat
within the Finance Department, which was the executing agency, serviced reform committees
and liaised with the Asian Development Bank (ADB). A program steering committee was not
established.

2.      In Madhya Pradesh, a cabinet-level public resource management committee, chaired by
the chief minister, advised and oversaw implementation of the government's reform program,
and performed the functions of the program steering committee. Two executive-level
committees, on public finance reform and public enterprise restructuring, managed reform
implementation. Both were headed by the chief secretary and reported to the cabinet
committee. A technical secretariat to provide guidance on technical aspects of public enterprise
reform was planned but not established. The Finance Department was the executing agency,
and its institutional Finance office performed secretariat services including liaison with ADB.

3.     In Kerala, a modernizing governance program cabinet subcommittee, chaired by the
chief minister was established to advise and oversee reform implementation. An executive-level
modernizing governance program steering committee, chaired by the chief secretary, was
responsible for overall coordination, implementation, and monitoring of the Program. A
government department, the General Administration Modernizing Governance Program
Department, was created in October 2002 to act as a secretariat to coordinate and monitor this
component of the program. On completion of the Program loan and technical assistance
operations, staff from this department returned to their original departments. The program had
two executing agencies, the Office of the Chief Secretary and the Finance Department.

4.       The Assam program implementation arrangements revolve around three executive-
driven program-specific committees: (i) a program steering committee, chaired by the chief
secretary and reporting to the chief minister, is responsible for overall coordination,
implementation, monitoring, and policy approvals of the Program; (ii) an empowered committee,
chaired by an additional chief secretary, monitors public administration review requirements;
and (iii) a public enterprise reform committee, chaired by an additional Chief Secretary, monitors
the progress of public enterprise reforms. A public-private task force, reporting to the public
sector enterprise committee, develops policy actions for private sector facilitation and alternative
business and employment opportunities in the private sector. Under the guidance of the steering
committee, a finance management unit within the Finance Department, which is the executing
agency, manages the government's fiscal responsibility actions, implementation of the Program,
and coordination with ADB and various stakeholders.
                                                                                                 Appendix 4        51


                     AN OVERVIEW OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISE REFORM IN INDIA

A.        Evolution of Public Enterprises1 in India

1.       When India gained independence in 1947, agriculture was contributing 50% to gross
domestic product, with the manufacturing sector accounting for only 17%. The colonial period
ended with the private sector limited to trading activities and only a handful of large business
houses such as the Tatas and Birlas having significant manufacturing operations and
corresponding access to reasonable amounts of capital. In 1947, there were only five public
enterprises in the country, but just over 50 years later in 2001, there were over 1,200 central-
and state-level public enterprises. To accelerate the economic growth of the country after
independence, the Government of India decided to aggressively pursue growth in industrial
production, while consolidating and building on the gains made in agriculture and allied
activities. Under the socialist model championed by Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime
minister, public enterprises were seen as the engine of India's economic and industrial growth.2

2.      The rationale for establishing public enterprises can be traced to four provisions in the
Government's industrial policy resolutions of 1948, updated in 19563: (i) accelerating the rate of
economic growth through industrialization, with particular emphasis on heavy industries and
machine-making industries; (ii) enabling the private sector to benefit from government
investment in capital goods, infrastructure, and the transport sector; (iii) preventing monopolies
and concentration of economic power in the hands of select individuals; and (iv) ensuring self-
reliance by reducing dependence on imports, and through this process ensuring development of
indigenous capabilities in technology and manufacturing.

3.      The industrial policy also identified the development of specific industries and sectors as
the exclusive responsibility of the state, including (i) defense-related industries; (ii) industries
requiring substantial capital investment and having long gestation periods such as heavy
engineering, shipbuilding, aircraft building, telecommunications and allied equipment; (iii)
strategic sectors including energy, railways, and air transport; and (iv) controlling the nation's
mineral resources. Key public enterprises established during this period included Hindustan
Steel (set up in 1954, later renamed as Steel Authority of India Limited, and currently the largest
steel producer in India), Bharat Heavy Engineering Limited (set up in the 1960s, currently the
largest engineering company in the energy and infrastructure sector), and Indian Refineries
Limited (set up in 1958, later renamed Indian Oil Corporation Limited, currently the largest oil
company in India).

4.      In 1969, all major banks in the country were nationalized, followed in 1972 by insurance
companies, resulting in almost total government control of the financial sector. An external debt
crisis building through the 1970s resulted in the Government promoting trade liberalization and
deregulation in the early 1980s.4 This period also saw implementation of industrial licensing
1
    This special evaluation study uses the term "public enterprises," as states use different terms: Assam uses public
    sector enterprises, Gujarat, state-owned enterprises, Kerala, state-level public enterprises, and Madhya Pradesh,
    public sector undertakings.
2
    A detailed chronology of India's divestment policy and updates on the status of central and state public enterprise
    divestment programs is available at www.divest.nic.in. In 1991, the term "divestment" was used rather than
    "privatize", as the former was not perceived to have the negative implications of job losses associated with
    privatization.
3
    Available at http://web5.laghu-udyog.com/policies/iip.htm#Indus1.
4
    Atul Kohli argues that on her return to power in 1980, "Indira Gandhi herself shifted India's political economy
    around 1980 in the direction of a state and business alliance for economic growth." Kohli. A. 1989. Politics of
    Economic Growth in India, 1980 ­ 2005 Part I: The 1980s. Economic and Political Weekly. 1 April: 1254.
52        Appendix 4



policies and the enactment of legislation including the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and the
Monopoly and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, enabling the Government to control the
development and growth of the private sector in India. A former secretary of the ministry of
industry, reflecting on the changes taking place, commented

          ... the institutional forms or the operating mechanisms have failed to achieve the
          results expected from them. Indeed, the time has come when in order to
          effectively pursue our commitment to the values of democratic socialism, i.e.,
          growth, liberty, and equality, it is urgently necessary to critically review and
          reconsider our traditional emphasis on State ownership or monopoly of
          productive assets, and also the detailed administrative regulation and control
          over a wide range of economic activity.5

5.     Also in the 1980s, the private sector played an increased role in key sectors of the
economy including heavy engineering, textiles, and petrochemicals. At the same time, many of
the large public enterprises were underperforming, with the Government having to allocate
substantial budgetary support to keep these units operational. The industrial policy resolution of
1980 adopted by the Government clearly acknowledged the potential role that the private sector
could play in future industrial growth. Accordingly, this policy statement focused attention on the
need to promote competition in the domestic market. This change in thrust was also evident in
the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1980­1985), with the Government revising its original policy of
maintaining a direct presence in industrial sectors. It also identified reasons for public
enterprises, underperformance, including (i) inadequate productivity, (ii) poor managerial
capacity and limited accountability in the public enterprises, (iii) overstaffing, (iv) lack of
continuous technological improvement, (v) inadequate attention to research and development
and to human resources development, and (vi) increasing competition from the private sector. 6

6.      In response to the severe balance of payments crisis of the early 1990s, the
Government signed a structural adjustment loan with the International Monetary Fund that
required economic reforms supporting moving from a centrally planned to a market-based
economy. Between 1991 and 1993, the Government undertook a number of economic reforms,
including changes in industrial licensing policies allowing foreign investment in
telecommunications, automobile, and power generation sectors; and amendment of the Foreign
Exchange Regulation and the Monopoly and Restrictive Trade Practices Acts. This opened the
door for large global corporations such as Hyundai Motors, General Electric, and Samsung, and
encouraged the rapid expansion of Indian conglomerates, both traditional players and new
entrants such as Reliance, Bharti, and Ranbaxy. The financial sector was also gradually opened
up to private participation, with wide-ranging reforms in the capital markets, including electronic
trading and the adoption of regulations and effective monitoring systems. As a result, private
banks as well as venture capital and private equity companies set up operations.

7.      The Government's statement on industrial policy (1991)7reaffirmed the role of public
enterprises to prevent the concentration of economic power, reduce regional disparities, and
ensure that planned development would serve the common good. However, it also reaffirmed
the reasons earlier identified for underperformance of public enterprises. The statement noted
that the original concept of public sector had been diluted by the growth of public enterprises in

5
    Sharad Marathe quoted in H. Bienen and J. Waterbury. 1989. The Political Economy of Privatization in Developing
    Countries. World Development. 17 (5): 623.
6
    Available: http://siadipp.nic.in/publicat/nip0791.htm.
7
    Available: http://siadipp.nic.in/publicat/nip0791.htm.
                                                                                 Appendix 4      53


the consumer goods and services sectors, and the large number of non-viable units. To address
these problems the statement outlined a new policy to (i) review the portfolio of public
enterprises focusing on strategic, high technology, and essential infrastructure; and provide an
enabling environment for private investors to enter these sectors; (ii) close financially non-viable
public enterprises and establish a social security mechanism to protect affected workers; (iii)
divest part of the government's shareholding to private investors, financial institutions, the
public, and workers; and (iv) institute corporate governance reforms focusing on improving the
professionalism and powers of public enterprise boards, and increasing management autonomy
and accountability through performance-based memoranda of understanding that would be
placed before Parliament (footnote 4).

8.      This policy statement was reaffirmed in the Government's 1992 interim budget wherein it
announced it would divest up to 20% equity in selected public enterprises to private investors
with the objective of broadening the equity base, improving management, enhancing resource
availability for these public enterprises, and generating resources for the exchequer. Almost
every Central Government budget speech since 1992 has contained statements reaffirming the
Government's commitment to policy reform of public enterprises. In 1993, the Government
established a divestment committee, followed by a commission in 1997­1999 whose
recommendations were not acted upon. In 1999, the Ministry of Finance established a
Department of Disinvestment to provide a systematic policy approach to disinvestment and
privatization. A cabinet committee on disinvestment was set up in 2000 headed by the prime
minister. Following the elections in 2004, the incoming Government revised the divestment
policy. The common minimum program adopted by the current Government calls for
privatization or closure only of chronically loss-incurring public enterprises that require
significant resources for a turnaround, but only after the employees have been suitably
compensated, and devolving full managerial and commercial autonomy of profit-making
enterprises. Although the Government undertook stock market reforms to mobilize resources,
by 2006 the Government had sold interests in only 16 public enterprises, with many of the
remaining public enterprises continuing to be loss-incurring.

9.     Currently, the list of industries exclusively reserved for public enterprises has been
reduced to atomic energy, including production of substances specified by the Department of
Atomic Energy. The private sector is able to invest in almost all sectors with industrial licenses
required only for the distillation and brewing of alcohol; tobacco and tobacco substitutes; all
types of electronic, aerospace, and defense equipment; industrial explosives; hazardous
chemicals; and pharmaceutical products.

B.     State-Level Public Enterprises

10.       State governments replicated the Central Government model of using public enterprises
to spur industrial and socioeconomic development by setting up manufacturing enterprises to
increase industrialization in their respective states. State public enterprises were also used to
achieve multiple objectives ranging from employment creation to supply of subsidized services
such as power and transport. In 2006, over 50% of the 1,068 state public enterprises were
engaged in manufacturing activities: 16% in promotional and development activities; 12%
utilities, primarily power utilities and road transport corporations; 8% welfare enterprises
providing economic support to the poor; and 7% financial enterprises. State public enterprises
contributed around 5% of gross domestic product in terms of aggregate revenues, as against
10% by central public enterprises in 2006. The total investment in state public enterprises was
estimated to have been Rs3.6 trillion in 2003. The Andhra Pradesh state government had the
largest investment in public enterprises, accounting for 8% of the country's total investment,
54        Appendix 4



followed by Jammu and Kashmir (7%), and Delhi and Maharashtra (5% each). Kerala had the
largest number of state public enterprises at 109, with 77 enterprises being engaged in
manufacturing. Uttar Pradesh, with 104 public enterprises, had the second largest
concentration, but had the largest number of public enterprises engaged in promotional and
welfare activities. In FY2003, the total revenues earned by all state public enterprises was
Rs862.84 billion, with net losses of Rs69.97 billion. Most state public enterprises continued to
depend on annual budgetary support from their respective state governments.

11.     Given the budgetary constraints being faced by most states, many initiated public
enterprise reforms to reduce the recurring budgetary support required to sustain the public
enterprises and thus enable them to allocate additional resources to infrastructure, health, and
education. Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka were pioneers in state public enterprise
reforms in India. For example, Gujarat's total investments in 54 public enterprises were
estimated at Rs130 billion in FY1994, employing 160,000 persons, around 10% of the state's
workforce in the organized sector. However, Gujarat's underperforming public enterprises
required over Rs19 billion in the form of equity infusion, grants, loans, and subsidies in FY1994
to stay operational.

          1.       Gujarat

12.     The Gujarat government was the first state government to initiate a comprehensive
review of its finances. In October 1992, the Government constituted a state finance commission
to undertake a comprehensive review of state finances, examine alternative and new sources of
revenue, look into the potential for privatization of state public enterprises, analyze government
expenditure trends, and recommend steps to reduce such expenditure. The Government of
India's statement on industrial policy in the 1992 budget speech gave added impetus to
reviewing the status of its public enterprises. The commission's report, released in April 1994,
proposed that the state government substantially reduce the growth of current expenditure with
better planning of executive and investment outlays; rationalization of the tax structure, including
better cost recovery, with particular attention to the Gujarat Electricity Board; delegation of some
government activities to the private sector; and divestment and privatization of public
enterprises on an extensive scale.8

13.     The commission reviewed the status of all 54 public enterprises, recommending abolition
of 11, divesting 21, and maintaining only those that served social, developmental, and strategic
objectives. The commission recommended establishing a high-level committee chaired by the
chief minister to oversee the reforms, to be advised by eminent professionals, and serviced by a
secretariat in the department of finance. The commission argued that the state government
should only provide policy guidance and monitor implementation of divestment rather than being
directly involved. It recommended that Gujarat State Investments Ltd. should implement the
divestment program. It further proposed that proceeds of divestment should be utilized for
investment in infrastructure facilities, not to cover revenue deficits in the budget. For public
enterprises the state government decided to retain needed sound corporate governance
practices, to be introduced based on memoranda of understanding with the public enterprises,
enabling operational autonomy with accountability.

14.    The Gujarat government's fiscal condition constrained its ability to act on many of the
commission's recommendations that were designed to address this fiscal condition. Restrictive
land and labor legislation also constrained public enterprise restructuring. However, in 1996 the

8
    1994. Government of Gujarat. Report of the Gujarat State Finance Commission. Gandhinagar.
                                                                                                 Appendix 4        55


approval of a $250 million loan from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for the Gujarat Public
Sector Resource Management Program provided the necessary financial support to cover the
reform adjustment costs, and the commission's report became the basis for the reforms
supported by the Gujarat Program. The Program did not follow all the recommendations with
regard to public enterprises; rather it identified 23 public enterprises for divestment or
restructuring. Of these, five were to be fully privatized; over 51% of shareholdings were to be
divested in two public enterprises; three were to be partially divested; five were to be merged
and restructured; four were to be closed; and one was to lease its properties. The Program did
implement the organizational structure recommended by the commission, with a cabinet
subcommittee chaired by the chief minister established, assisted by a secretariat in the
department of finance and advisors funded by ADB technical assistance (TA). However, the
secretariat rather than the Gujarat State Investments Ltd. implemented the reforms.

         2.       Madhya Pradesh

15.      In Madhya Pradesh, it was not until the late 1990s, and with the encouragement of ADB
in preparation of a loan to support fiscal reform, that the state government issued a policy for
public sector reform.9 This policy is based on the Central Government's 1991 statement of
industrial policy and the recommendations of the 1993 Rangarajan committee on disinvestment
of shares in public enterprises.10 The policy notes that, in the absence of any guidelines on
establishing public enterprises in the state, there was no governance uniformity among the
many public enterprises, with some having statutory boards under legislative enactments,
others being registered under the Companies Act, and many being registered as cooperative
societies. Substantial state government funds had been invested with little or no return to the
state exchequer, and many public enterprises required continued subsidies from budgetary
resources to meet even their operational expenditures. The Government's policy announced
that in the future public enterprises would be "restricted to areas of continuing relevance, made
financially viable and serve as dynamic instruments of state policy. Public enterprises that are
floundering must be restructured by change in capital structure, merger or creation of
independent entities, downsizing of manpower [sic] and improvement in management systems"
(footnote 9). However, "relevance" covered a broad range including (i) provision of merit goods
and services; (ii) exploitation of natural resources; (iii) small and village industries where
marketing support for artisans and other vulnerable peoples is required; (iv) technology
development, creation of manufacturing capacity and services in strategic areas crucial to long-
term economic development and where private capital is inadequate; (v) financial institutions to
ensure flow of funds to vulnerable groups; and (vi) promotion of investment in infrastructure and
resource mobilization for economic growth.

16.     The policy called for a review of the continuing relevance of the Madhya Pradesh
government's existing public enterprises and cooperatives portfolio including (i) nonstrategic
areas; (ii) inefficient, unproductive, and loss-incurring areas; (iii) areas with low social and public
9
   1998. Government of Madhya Pradesh. Policy for Public Sector Reform and Restructuring in Madhya Pradesh.
   Bhopal.
10
   The Central Government committee on disinvestment of shares in public sector enterprises was chaired by the
   Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Rangarajan. Its recommendations emphasized the need for substantial
   divestment, with the percentage of equity to be divested up to 49% for industries explicitly reserved for the public
   sector and in exceptional cases, such as enterprises which had a dominant market share or where separate
   identity had to be maintained for strategic reasons, up to 74% divestment could take place. In all other cases, it
   recommended 100% divestment of the Government's stake. Holding of 51% or more equity by the Government
   was recommended only for six industries: coal and lignite; mineral oils; arms; ammunition and defence equipment;
   atomic energy; radioactive minerals; and railways. The Government did not take any decision on the committee's
   recommendations.
56       Appendix 4



purpose; and (iv) areas where the private sector had sufficient expertise and resources.
Government control in public enterprises would be retained only where there was a compelling
case; 100% shareholding was not necessary and could be reduced to 51% where control was
necessary, and down to 26% where mere government presence would serve the public interest.
The proceeds of divestment were to be used for investment in infrastructure and social sectors.
The policy outlined the adoption of a voluntary retirement scheme for retrenched employees,
who would also be retrained from a state renewal fund. The policy outlined some corporate
governance measures including performance-based memoranda of understanding reviewed
semi-annually, merit-based appointments, improving accounting procedures, greater autonomy
for selected public enterprises, and drawing boards of directors from a broader base. Public
enterprises under government control would improve their efficiency without special treatment
from the government, and public enterprises with overlapping or similar functions would be
merged and restructured. This policy provided the basis for the reforms supported by the ADB
funded Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program.

         3.       Kerala

17.     It was not until the Kerala government and ADB agreed to process a loan to support
fiscal reform that a committee was established to develop an action plan to restructure and
reform state public enterprises.11 An interdepartmental enterprise reform committee submitted
an approach paper in March 2002 outlining the policies, objectives, and criteria to prioritize
public enterprises for reform. At the time, Kerala had 111 public enterprises, the largest number
in any state, of which 90 were operational and 38 were making a profit. Accumulated losses
reached Rs52 billion as of 31 March 2005, compared with Rs14.4 billion a decade earlier.
Under the Modernizing Governance and Fiscal Reform in Kerala Program the state Government
committed to reform only 14 of the 52 loss-incurring public enterprises. These were
operationally closed during the Program, although financial closure was not achieved. The audit
backlog was addressed with a statutory audit of 55 public enterprises being completed, when
the tranche release condition was for only 3 public enterprises to be audited. The voluntary
retirement scheme and social safety net package provided to over 3,000 employees was well
received, as many had not received salaries for some time.12 Overall, the program completion
report found that, given the magnitude of the problems with systemic reforms needed to make a
significant impact on economic efficiency and fiscal conditions, the public enterprise reforms had
been marginal and were unlikely to be sustained, given the government's unfavorable position
toward privatization or divestment of public enterprises.



11
   The Kerala government constituted three administrative reforms committees since its formation in 1956. The first
   committee was constituted in 1957 and a second in 1965. The third committee, constituted in May 1997, focused
   on recommending measures to overhaul the functioning of the government to make it more responsive and
   efficient. Its 2001 report recommended measures aimed at improving service delivery, deepening decentralization,
   and modernizing government administration. The state government then formulated a modernizing governance
   program as a major initiative in the Tenth Five-Year Plan (2002­2007). However, there was little emphasis on
   public enterprise reform.
12
   The social safety net entailed a financial compensation package and a welfare and economic sustainability
   package. Under the financial compensation package, all eligible permanent employees were entitled to an amount
   equal to 1.5 months emoluments for the completed year or services, or compensation equivalent to the months of
   service left before the normal retirement (whichever is less) plus leave salary, gratuity, notice pay, etc. Under the
   welfare and economic sustainability package, retired employees invest up to 50% of ex gratia compensation
   received in a fund, and received an incentive of 25% of the employee's contribution to the fund from the
   government up to a maximum of Rs225,000. Deposits were offered with interest at the prevailing nationalized bank
   rate, which were used for giving medical and life insurance premiums, and a monthly pension. The voluntary
   retirement scheme was the major mode through which the social safety net was to be implemented.
                                                                                               Appendix 4       57


        4.       Assam

18.      Public enterprises in Assam, like other Indian states, had been poorly performing for
decades, but compared with other states their drain on the Assam government's budget was
comparatively much larger. In 2004, Assam had 47 public enterprises administered by 22
different government departments, of which 6 enterprises were profitable and 2 were able to
provide dividends. Most public enterprises had large negative equity positions, with government
investment in the form of direct equity, loans, grants/subsidies, and indirect support when
standing as guarantor to public enterprise loans from financial institutions. On average public
enterprises submitted their audited financial statements 8 years in arrears. In 2000, an
independent institute13 appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to review the
status of Assam public enterprises recommended reforming 33 of the state's 47 public
enterprises. In 2001, the Assam government's committee on fiscal reform included a review of
public enterprises and made specific recommendations for 45 of the 47 public enterprises
including divestment, restructuring, closure, or merger. The government's department of public
enterprises also conducted a review of public enterprises' performance, reporting in August
2002, and a three-member committee for public enterprises constituted to examine the
feasibility of reviving public enterprises under the management of their employees reported in
July 2003. Against this background, the ADB-supported Assam Governance and Public
Resource Management Sector Development Program included support for the state
government to adopt a public enterprise reform policy, establish an institutional framework to
implement reforms, support closure of seven public enterprises, restructure the state electricity
board, institute sound corporate governance arrangements to restructure selected public
enterprises, and establish a voluntary retirement scheme and social safety net program for
affected employees.

C.      Lessons from International Experience

19.    This section summarizes lessons from public enterprise reform experience in the 1980s,
drawing on the 1989 issue of the journal World Development that was devoted to privatization14
and on the only two ADB Operations Evaluation Department (OED) evaluation reports on the
subject--a special evaluation study in 2001 on lessons from privatization15 and a program
performance evaluation report in 2003 of a corporate governance and enterprise reform
program in the Kyrgyz Republic.16 While neither ADB evaluation report was available for the
design of the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh programs, the lessons from the World Development
issue and its numerous references were.

20.    The considerable experience gained in the 1980s on public enterprise reform in selected
Latin American, African, and Arab countries was the subject of an entire issue of the journal
World Development. A number of authors argued that privatization should be used as an
instrument of competition policy, to be accompanied by liberalization reforms promoting efficient
markets. Governments under tight fiscal constraints tend to focus on apparent short-term gains
from privatization, but the evidence that privatization would have a positive impact on public

13
   The Pune-based Indian Institute of Cost and Management Studies and Research.
14
   The 1989 issue of World Development, Volume 17 (5) was entitled "Privatization" and included eight articles on
   public enterprise reform focusing primarily on issues relating to privatization in the developing world, with one
   article on lessons from the United Kingdom.
15
   ADB. 2001. Special Evaluation Study on the Privatization of Public Sector Enterprises: Lessons for Developing
   Member Countries. Manila.
16
   ADB. 2003. Program Performance Audit Report on the Corporate Governance and Enterprise Reform Program in
   the Kyrgyz Republic. Manila.
58      Appendix 4



finance was ambiguous and should not be the primary rationale for public enterprise reform.
The opportunity costs of preparing public enterprises for privatization are significant, often
requiring outside expertise which may require greater time and resources than alternative fiscal
measures. Further, it cannot be assumed that the private sector will operate public enterprises
in a more efficient manner. Another position was that the ownership of an enterprise is not the
main constraint. Rather it is the multifaceted--productive and social--purposes of many public
enterprises, and consequently the lack of clarity of goals and objectives combined with
inappropriate management, motivation, and reward systems that result in a dysfunctional
organizational culture or conflicting subcultures. Those supporting this view argued that
corporate governance solutions needed to be carefully considered as a reform option at an early
stage.

21.      Reflecting on World Bank experience through the 1980s, Nellis and Kikeri17 identified a
number of lessons including the following: (i) privatization can assist sector rationalization and
efficiency by reducing the number of enterprises supervised by government officials; (ii) reform
programs must be tailored to individual country circumstances; (iii) there is a need to ensure
transparency in the privatization process, ensuring that any case for privileges is open to
scrutiny, and to avoid sacrificing transparency for speed and political tranquility; (iv) change of
ownership must not become the end where privatization takes place at the expense of
liberalization; (v) reform is complex, so sufficient time and resources need to be provided to
strengthen the country's capacity to effectively manage the process, including areas such as
law, finance, accounting, investment banking, privatization techniques, and designing
appropriate institutional arrangements to implement public enterprise reforms; and (vi)
systematic evaluation of the post-sale economic performance of privatized enterprises should
be undertaken.

22.     OED's special evaluation study on privatization (footnote 17) assessed ADB's support
for privatization in all ADB loans and TA since 1984, with the view to determining whether or not
privatization was a direct or indirect objective. ADB support for privatization began around 1984
in response to developing member country development plans, and guided by strategic
considerations reflecting the limited resources of ADB for promoting economic development.
Between 1984 and the early 1990s, most country development plans aimed to stimulate
industrial development through greater private sector investment. Improving the legislative and
regulatory environment to enable the private sector to operate more effectively became an
integral part of ADB's loan and TA support. Under ADB's Medium-Term Strategic Framework
1992­1995, privatization was identified as a desirable strategy for achieving economic growth
objectives, 18 and from 1985 to 1995, 25 loans and 36 TA grants were approved in support of
privatization. There was a notable increase in loans and TAs supporting financial governance
reforms, capital market development, power sector restructuring, and public-private
partnerships. TA typically included studies for (i) capital and stock market development; (ii)
developing and strengthening the regulatory framework; (iii) reform of pension and provident
funds; (iv) corporatization; (v) restructuring financial, monetary, and banking systems; (vi)
strengthening corporate and public governance; and (vii) establishing privatization coordination
units. The study noted that, under ADB's Long-Term Strategic Framework 2001­2015 (para. 3),
ADB's involvement with the private sector was expected to increase substantially along with the



17
   Nellis. J. and S. Kikeri. 1989. Public Enterprise Reform: Privatization and the World Bank. World Development. 17
   (5): 659­672.
18
   ADB. 1992. Medium-Term Strategic Framework 1992­1995. Manila. para. 3.
                                                                                  Appendix 4      59


need to improve governance and the enabling environment for private sector operations and
public-private partnerships.19

23.     Unsustainable budget deficits, high taxation, and burdensome funding were common
factors precipitating the need to privatize. But while fiscal crisis was a prime reason in many
countries, including several in Asia, justification was also driven by ideology and efficiency
grounds. The study found that governments privatized industries to achieve multiple objectives
including (i) raising revenue for the government, (ii) raising investment capital for the industry or
company being privatized, (iii) reducing the government's role in the economy, (iv) promoting
wider share ownership, (v) increasing efficiency, (vi) introducing greater competition, (vii)
exposing firms to market discipline, (viii) decreasing government subsidies, and (ix) capital
market development.

24.     The study identified a number of key points, including (i) a tendency for ADB and
developing member countries to support privatization while ignoring the need for a more
comprehensive approach to carrying out political, legal, institutional, and economic reforms; (ii)
the importance of sequencing in the design of privatization programs; (iii) a preoccupation with
regulation before creating competition; (iv) the counterproductive aspects of excessive
regulation; (v) the merits of rapid privatization; (vi) the ineffectiveness of some forms of public
private partnership as a method of privatizing; and (vii) social barriers and the need for more
comprehensive welfare programs.

25.     The study found that no single institutional framework stands out as the best for
privatization. Rather, for privatization to be successful, it is essential to define the roles and
powers of participants, and to ensure that legal, regulatory, and enforcement mechanisms
precede divestment. In the banking sector, privatization without deregulation seriously disrupts
effectiveness, as does privatizing monopoly enterprises before restructuring (to create
competition) and before introducing regulation. The study noted that the privatization link with
poverty reduction stemmed from the relative ineffectiveness of public ownership to fulfill
economic growth needs. Under private ownership, it was argued that consumer demand from
the poorest members of society would be met sooner, while lower government expenditure on
public enterprises would provide governments an opportunity to increase expenditure on
poverty-reducing social services. The study noted that there was no established framework for
nongovernment organization participation in the planning and implementation of privatization,
and that nongovernment organizations can be most effective in the design and implementation
of social awareness campaigns, retraining, and compensation for displaced employees and
communities.

26.     Overall the study found the experience of privatization to have been positive, but it had
proceeded largely without attention to the sequencing of reforms and the most appropriate
approach to maximize effectiveness. The study noted that the growing political commitment to
privatization in many developing member countries provided scope for repositioning ADB's
country strategies and programs, and it identified the following priority areas for assistance (i)
developing the policy, legal, and regulatory framework; (ii) establishing the institutional
framework for privatizing; (iii) organizing workshops and advisory sessions; (iv) funding
implementation, including support for the separation of noncore activities; and (v) restructuring
and retraining.

27.        The study identified eleven principles underpinning privatization:

19
     ADB. 2001. Long-Term Strategic Framework 2001­2015. Manila. para. 3.
60     Appendix 4



       (i)      Privatization should be viewed as a good governance reform.
       (ii)     There must be commitment by government politically and within line ministries.
       (iii)    Privatization programs must be an integral part of a country's economic policy.
       (iv)     Privatization programs must include a strong institutional and regulatory
                framework.
       (v)      The environment must be competitive, regulated, and transparent.
       (vi)     Deregulation of the financial sector should precede privatization.
       (vii)    Restructuring to create competition and ensure a separation of commercial and
                social functions should precede divestment.
       (viii)   Regulation is required only where restructuring is unable to ensure a fully
                competitive industry.
       (ix)     Rehabilitation prior to privatization should be avoided.
       (x)      Privatization programs should be accompanied by extensive public awareness
                campaigns.
       (xi)     Privatization programs should be complemented by comprehensive social
                welfare programs.

28.     The study identified a large number of lessons drawn from global experience, divided
into four dimensions--politics, framework and institutions, economics and efficiency, and social
welfare. These are provided for reference.

       (i)      Politics
       (a)      In general, governments have privatized industries to achieve one or more
                objectives.
       (b)      In most countries, privatization has been a long-term process of policy changes
                and institution building. A few countries with market-conducive policies, strong
                administrative capacity, and strong private sectors have tried rapid privatization.
                Most countries in the former eastern bloc have also adopted a rapid approach to
                privatization.
       (c)      Privatization has been hardest to achieve in low-income countries, where political
                commitment to it is weak and where the environment is not conducive to market-
                oriented activities.
       (d)      Foreign share ownership--bringing new capital, management, and technology--
                leads to higher performance than pure domestic ownership.

       (ii)     Framework and Institutions
       (a)      Six common techniques are used to privatize public enterprises: share issues,
                trade sales, asset sales, management buy-outs, public-private partnerships, and
                voucher privatization.
       (b)      The lack of complementary institutions to ensure that the environment for
                conducting private transfers is competitive, regulated, and transparent was
                common to the inferior results of rapid mass privatization approaches in the
                Russian Federation and Central and Eastern Europe, in particular no
                enforcement system for contracts, no operative bankruptcy procedures,
                inappropriate accounting systems, no mechanisms by which credible information
                is given to new investors, and poor governance practices in securities markets.
       (c)      Risks and risk sharing between the public and private sectors are critical in
                public-private partnerships projects (e.g., build-operate-transfer models). These
                projects are difficult to design so that the risks are shouldered without unduly
                disadvantaging either the public or investor interests. Projects require careful and
                                                                            Appendix 4      61


        rigorous formulation to ensure that an appropriate balance of private incentives
        with public interest is preserved.
(d)     Deregulation of the banking sector before (rather than after) privatization is found
        to work best. Restructuring an enterprise to create competition and ensure a
        clear separation of commercial and social functions is of prime importance prior
        to privatization.
(e)     Delaying the introduction of competition after privatization or rationing it by tightly
        limiting entry tends to lessen the benefits of privatization.
(f)     Regulation is critical where restructuring cannot ensure a fully competitive
        industry. There should be a clear division of responsibilities between central
        government and local authorities. At the same time, regulation should be
        designed with the flexibility to cope with force majeure circumstances operating
        against the spirit and objectives of regulation.
(g)     Governments play a central role in shaping the legal, institutional, and regulatory
        frameworks by which good governance systems develop. If the framework
        conditions are not in order, the governance regime is unlikely to be either.
(h)     Privatization programs that aim to raise capital through the creation of cross-
        shareholdings with other public enterprises diminish the longer term benefits of
        privatization.
(i)     The interests of the public are best served by a regulator focused on ensuring
        that competition prevails.
(j)     Transparency in the divestment process is critical for the economic and political
        success of privatization.
(k)     The absence of a stock market diminishes the potential effectiveness of
        privatization, but not so much that privatization is a nonviable policy option.

(iii)   Economics and Efficiency
(a)     Privatization works best when it is part of a larger program of reforms promoting
        markets and efficiency. Chiefly, these include reforms for removing subsidies and
        protection, and liberalizing trade, as well as stabilization programs that peg
        inflation and float the exchange rate.
(b)     Countries that have launched large privatization programs through the stock
        market have experienced rapid growth in their national stock market
        capitalization and trading volume. Those that have not, or have emphasized
        trade sales and vouchers over initial public offerings, appear to lag behind in
        market development.
(c)     National benefits from privatization are derived in the form of lower consumer
        prices, increased outputs, higher tax revenues, reduced fiscal deficits, and
        enhanced social benefits.
(d)     The impact of wholly privatized companies seeking to expand in countries freed
        from stringent regulatory requirements has been a positive factor in the global
        momentum toward privatization.
(e)     Private ownership is associated with a higher level of enterprise performance,
        and the higher the private ownership stake, the greater the performance
        improvement.
(f)     Majority ownership by outside investors tends to generate a greater level of
        enterprise performance than any form of insider control.
(g)     Enterprises controlled by non-employee investors make bigger restructuring
        improvements than employee-owned enterprises.
(h)     Privatization with competition benefits consumers and the economy more than
        privatization with limited competition. Prices generally fall, at least in real terms.
62     Appendix 4



               Services improve and, in most cases, exceed the minimum quantity and quality
               standards set at the time of privatization. The range of products available to
               consumers (both industrial and retail) increases, and the economy benefits from
               better maintained infrastructure.
       (i)     Privatization without competition and a weak regulatory environment reduces the
               effectiveness of privatization, and can result in a contraction of benefits to
               consumers and the economy.
       (j)     The banking sector in developing and transition economies is invariably crippled
               with nonperforming loans to insolvent public enterprises. Experience reveals that
               one-off restructuring aimed at quickly dissolving outstanding debt is preferable to
               debt rescheduling, and to applying and adopting more commercial internal
               practices.

       (iv)   Social Welfare
       (a)    The fears of employees and dependent communities over the detrimental impact
              of privatization programs on their personal future have often been a major
              deterrent. In many transition economies, the social cost and disruption have been
              generally overlooked, and/or insufficiently addressed.
       (b)    The most successful privatization programs take account of the historical,
              cultural, religious, and social framework of a country. Accompanying social
              programs are needed to offset the negative employment effects and the loss of
              fringe benefits, pension rights, and displacement costs associated with
              relocation. Negative social impacts on the local community should also be
              addressed.
       (c)    Broad-based ownership helps overcome resistance to privatization. Broad
              information and communication campaigns on the objectives and benefits of
              privatization programs have also been effective for trade sales.

29.    The study included the responses from interested parties, most of whom supported the
importance of sequencing and the need for a more integrated approach. However, concerns
were raised regarding (i) the parallels drawn between developing member country experience
and wider global evidence and lessons; (ii) accepting that privatization leads to improved
enterprise efficiency; (iii) understanding the advantages of rapid privatization; (iv) seeing the
appropriateness of deregulating the banking sector before privatizing public enterprises; (v)
seeing the benefits of privatization for capital market development; (vi) accepting notions
concerning public-private partnerships, regulation, and foreign investment; and (vii) skepticism
about privatization being able to fully meet social requirements.

30.     The second OED evaluation including public enterprise reform lessons is the program
performance audit report of the Corporate Governance and Enterprise Reform Program in the
Kyrgyz Republic (footnote 18). The Program was rated partially successful, however, it was
noted that in light of the Kyrgyz Republic's overall reform, the Kyrgyz Program was considered
"ahead of its time" in terms of sequencing. The audit report noted that widespread corruption
and poor performance in the public and financial sectors undermined achievement of positive
results from improved corporate governance. The audit report considered that the decision to
lend for corporate governance and enterprise reform was not the right strategic choice by ADB,
since a strong justification to deviate from the country strategy to fund this Program was not
provided. Finally, given the high level of risk and unfavorable reform context, the audit report
found that TA, rather than loan funds, would have been more appropriate. If the pace of reform
picked up and risks were reduced, policy-based lending in the target areas might become more
                                                                                     Appendix 4      63


relevant.20 A number of program specific lessons were identified, some of which have broader
relevance.
       (i)     A substantial majority of legacy public enterprises appear to be nonviable in an
               economy based on market principles. Improvements to corporate governance in
               such enterprises are unlikely to contribute to resolving their plight. Bankruptcy
               accompanied by disposal of the assets is probably the only solution.
       (ii)    Closure of public enterprises needs to become a politically feasible solution to
               overcome opposition within the government and the bureaucracy to liquidation as
               a solution for enterprise failure.
       (iii)   It is important to ensure a sufficient set of conditions (to the extent possible) for
               achieving intended results in order to have a greater chance of producing
               positive outcomes.
       (iv)    Reforms need to put greater emphasis on providing incentives for good corporate
               behavior rather than solely attempting to prevent and penalize poor behavior.
               They also need to minimize opportunities for discretionary decision making by
               civil servants, as this also provides the opportunity for corruption and rent
               seeking.
       (v)     More attention needs to be placed on the political economy dimensions of reform
               ex-ante along with much closer monitoring of the likely consequences of shifts in
               political power and direction during program implementation and after. A change
               of government and movement of the champions of reform to less influential
               positions should trigger a comprehensive review of a program loan. Supervision
               of program loans and the associated TA needs to be more constant, more
               focused on purpose achievement, and more cognizant of political economy
               dimensions.
       (vi)    Building policy capability within the government should be a part of every policy-
               based loan where such capacity does not exist or is weak, ensuring that the
               focus is on those departments with influence over the policy agenda.




20
     This was also the conclusion of World Bank. 1998. Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn't, and Why.
     Washington
64         Appendix 5



           ADB ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES OF ASSAM, GUJARAT, KERALA, AND
                                MADHYA PRADESH

80.     The Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program,1 for $250 million approved
in 1996, was the first loan to a state government in India. This was followed 3 years later with a
$250 million loan to Madhya Pradesh government.2 Both loans consisted of (i) reducing the
states' fiscal deficits; (ii) reforming public sector undertakings; and (iii) creating an enabling
environment for private sector participation in infrastructure. These were followed by the
approval of a $200 million subprogram of a proposed $300 million cluster loan to the state
government in Kerala in 2000,3 and a $150 million subprogram of a proposed $225 million
cluster loan to Assam in 20044 (Table A5.1).

                        Table A5.1: Approved Loans for Public Sector Reform

                                                                                                        Amount
    Year                                   Purpose                                     Type            ($ million)
    1996        Gujarat Public Sector Resource Management Program                      OCR                 250.0
    1999        Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program                      OCR                 250.0
    2002        Modernizing Government and Fiscal Reform in Kerala                     OCR                 200.0
                (Subprogram I)
    2004        Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector                 OCR                 125.0
                Development Program (Program Loan)
    2004        Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Sector                 OCR                      25.0
                Development Program (Project Loan)
                Total                                                                                      850.0
OCR = ordinary capital resources.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.

81.    Over $19 million of technical assistance (TA) has been directed in support of both
national and state level public sector reform initiatives since 1995. Of this $5.25 million was
directed to Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. TA has primarily been advisory TA (Table A5.2).

                    Table A5.2: Technical Assistance for Public Sector Reform

                                                                                                   Amount
      Year                                  Purpose                                     Type      ($ million)
      1992     Assessment of National Renewal Fund                                      SSTA          0.099
      1995     Improvement of State Sales Tax Structure and Administration              SSTA          0.100
      1995     Capacity Building of Income Tax Administration                           ADTA          0.550
      1996     Capacity Building of Public Sector Restructuring Program                 SSTA          0.100
      1996     Capacity Building for Public Sector Restructuring (Gujarat)              SSTA          0.100
      1996     Restructuring Program for State-Owned Enterprises in Gujarat             ADTA          0.600
      1996     Gujarat's Reform of Public Finances                                      ADTA          0.600

1
    ADB. 1996. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors for the Gujarat Public Sector
    Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 1506-IND, for $250 million, approved on 18 December).
2
    ADB. 1999. Report and Recommendation of the for the Madhya Pradesh Public Resource Management Program.
    Manila. (Loan 1717-IND, for $250 million, approved on 14 December).
3
    ADB. 2003. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors for the Modernizing
    Government and Fiscal Reforms in Kerala Program. Manila. (Loan 1974-IND, for $200 million, approved 16
    December).
4
    ADB. 2004. Report and Recommendations of the President to the Board of Directors for the Assam Governance
    and Public Resource Management Program. Manila. (Loan 2141-IND, for $125 million, approved on 16
    December).
                                                                                               Appendix 5           65


                                                                                                       Amount
      Year                                  Purpose                                       Type        ($ million)
      1996     Capacity Enhancement of Gujarat Industrial Investment Corp.                ADTA            0.500
      1996     Institutional Strengthening of the Gujarat Infrastructure                  ADTA            0.850
               Development Board
      1997     Support for the Government of Madhya Pradesh Public Finance                ADTA            0.780
               Reform and Institutional Strengthening
      1997     Strengthening Local Government in Madhya Pradesh                           ADTA            0.700
      1999     Capacity Building for Public Enterprise Reform and Social Safety           ADTA            0.600
               Net in Madhya Pradesh
      2000     Support for India States' Reform Forum 2000                                SSTA            0.085
      2000     Supporting Fiscal Reforms in Kerala                                        ADTA            1.000
      2002     Value-Added Tax Reform: Capacity Building Post                             ADTA            0.600
               implementation Stage
      2002     Participative and Pro-Poor Fiscal and Administrative Reforms in            SSTA            0.150
               Kerala
      2002     Strengthening State Government Effectiveness and                           SSTA            0.150
               Accountability in Kerala
      2003     Budget Procedure Reform, Computerization, and Expenditure                  ADTA            1.000
               Management (Assam)
      2003     Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Program                    PPTA            0.700
      2003     Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Program                    PPTA            0.100
               (Supplementary)
      2003     Capacity Building for Tax Administration                                   ADTA            1.000
      2003     Capacity Building for Fiscal Reforms in Sikkim                             ADTA            0.600
      2004     West Bengal Development Finance                                            ADTA            0.800
               Total                                                                                     11.763
      ADTA = advisory technical assistance,           PPTA    =   project   preparatory   technical   assistance,
      SSTA = small scale technical assistance.
      Source: Operations Evaluation Department.

82.      The Asian Development Bank's (ADB) broader strategy was to initially support public
sector reforms to address serious fiscal imbalances including utilities tariff reform and create the
institutional and regulatory environment for increasing involvement of the private sector in
infrastructure development and management including utilities. Infrastructure support following
the public sector reforms has focused on power and roads.

83.     Power sector. The critical constraint was insolvent state electricity boards and ADB
decided to focus primarily at the state level on commercializing state electricity boards,
rationalizing tariffs, creating independent regulators, power sector planning and improving
capacity for public private partnerships. Both resource management programs addressed
regulatory aspects of the state electricity board. They were followed up by a range of TA (Table
A5.3). A recently completed evaluation of ADB's support to the energy sector in India provides
an in depth analysis.5




5
    ADB. 2007. Sector Assistance Performance Evaluation: Energy Sector in India ­ Building on Success for More
    Results. Manila.
66         Appendix 5



            Table A5.3: Power Sector Technical Assistance to Assam, Gujarat, Kerala,
                                      and Madhya Pradesh

                                                                                                        Amount
    Year                                      Purpose                                       Type         ($ m)
    1996        Preparation of a Power System Master Plan for the State of                  ADTA           0.600
                Gujarat
    1996        Development of a Framework for Electricity Tariffs in Gujarat               ADTA             0.300
    1996        Review of Electricity Legislation and Regulations in Gujarat                ADTA             0.235
    1998        Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development                                     ADTA             1.000
    2000        Reorganization Plan for Gujarat Electricity Board                           ADTA             0.600
    2000        Support to Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission                        ADTA             0.450
    2001        Kerala Power Sector Development Program                                     PPTA             0.800
    2002        Development of a Transfer Scheme for Madhya Pradesh Power                   ADTA             0.400
                Sector Reform
    2002        Legal Support for Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform                        ADTA             0.150
    2002        Strengthening Consumer and Stakeholder Communication for                    ADTA             0.150
                Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Reform
    2002        Assam Power Sector Development Program                                      PPTA             0.800
    2003        Reorganization of Assam State Electricity Board                             ADTA             1.000
                Total                                                                                        3.285
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department

84.     These led to power sector loans being approved in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. In a
strategic shift, the power sector loan in Assam preceded the public resource management loan
(Table A5.4).

            Table A5.4: Power Sector Loans to Assam, Gujarat, and Madhya Pradesh

                                                                                                         Amount
    Year        Purpose                                                                      Type       ($ million)
    2000        Gujarat Power Sector Development - Program Loan                              OCR             150.0
    2000        Gujarat Power Sector Development - Project Loan                              OCR             200.0
    2001        Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program (Program)                    OCR             150.0
    2001        Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Development Program (Project)                    OCR             200.0
    2003        Assam Power Sector Development Program (Program Loan)                        OCR             150.0
    2003        Assam Power Sector Development Program (Project Loan)                        OCR             100.0
    2007        Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program (Subproject 1)                OCR             106.0
    2007        Madhya Pradesh Power Sector Investment Program (Subproject 2)                OCR               45.0
                Total                                                                                      1,101.0
OCR = ordinary capital resources.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department

85.     Roads. Road sector infrastructure gaps were seen as a constraint to economic growth.
Resource management programs including policy reforms to promote private sector
participation in road transport infrastructure particularly through build and maintain own and
operate modalities. However, it was only in Madhya Pradesh and the bifurcated Chhattisgarh
states that TA was provided to formulate road sector loans (Tables A5.5 and A5.6). A recently
completed evaluation of ADB's support to the road sector in India provides an in depth
analysis.6

6
    ADB. 2007. Sector Assistance Performance Evaluation: Transport Sector in India ­ Focusing on Results. Manila.
                                                                                            Appendix 5           67


 Table A5.5: Road Sector Technical Assistance to Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh

                                                                                                  Amount
 Year                                 Purpose                                            Type    ($ million)
 2001    Madhya Pradesh State Road Sector Development                                    PPTA        0.600
 2002    Madhya Pradesh State Road Development                                           PPTA        1.000
 2002    Chhattisgarh State Roads Sector Development                                     PPTA        0.800
 2002    Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Madhya                    ADTA        1.500
         Pradesh State Road Sector
 2005    Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Madhya                    ADTA            0.600
         Pradesh State Road Sector (Supplementary)
         Total                                                                                           4.500
ADTA = advisory technical assistance, PPTA = project preparatory technical assistance.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.

    Table A5.6: Loans for Road Sector Loans to Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh

                                                                                                   Amount
Year        Purpose                                                                       Type    ($ million)
2002        Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program                         OCR           30.0
            (Program Loan)
2002        Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Development Program                         OCR            150.0
            (Project Loan)
2003        Chhattisgarh State Roads Development Sector                                   OCR            180.0
2007        Madhya Pradesh State Roads Sector Project II                                  OCR            320.0
            Total                                                                                        680.0
OCR = ordinary capital resources.
Source: Operations Evaluation Department.
68        Appendix 6



    SUMMARY OF LESSONS FROM EVALUATIONS OF ADB PROGRAMS IN SUPPORT OF
                          PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM

1.     Program lending has been the Asian Development Bank's (ADB) main instrument to
support policy reforms in developing member countries (DMC). It was also used extensively in
responding to the Asian financial crisis. Between November 1987, when ADB approved a new
approach to program lending, and the end of 2000, 70 programs and 16 sector development
programs were approved totaling $14.5 billion, 22% of ADB's total during that period.

          A.      Study of Program Lending

2.      In 2001, the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) conducted a special evaluation
study on program lending1 to assess its effectiveness over a 13-year period in promoting policy
reforms in DMCs and to identify generic measures that could further enhance its effectiveness.
The study found that the three programs rated generally successful shared three characteristics:
(i) the Government took the major role in designing the program measures and in implementing
them; (ii) the programs were developed at a specific "macroeconomic moment," when
macroeconomic vulnerability created not just a need for borrowing but an understanding of the
need for reform; and (iii) delays in meeting specific conditions reflected a more realistic time
frame for program implementation, but did not detract from the direction of reform. A major
lesson from an unsuccessful program was that programs designed around formal rules and
conditionalities also need to take account of informal policy reform mechanisms and of the
necessary incentives for those expected to implement the reforms.

3.      Evaluation. Improvements were required in the way in which programs were evaluated
in order to provide insights into program design and implementation. It was recommended that
OED (i) undertake reevaluation studies of three selected programs to better assess the
sustainability of program reforms; (ii) formulate guidelines for the evaluation of programs,
including the evaluation of impacts in light of current strategic concerns; and (iii) undertake
evaluation of selected programs during implementation.

4.        Tranches. The study found that since 1987 nearly all program loans were designed with
two tranches and delay in second tranche release was the norm rather than the exception. Of
second tranches for closed programs, 72% were delayed and 11% were cancelled altogether.
The two-tranche design focused attention on meeting specific conditions in a program. Greater
flexibility in meeting program objectives would be afforded by the use of program loans with
different designs, including multiple tranches, floating tranches associated with key events, and
single tranche loans.

5.      Conditions. Although programs were ambitious in the policy changes they have sought
to effect, containing a large number of conditions within a tight time frame, most program
conditions had been met. On average, each program had 38 conditions. The average number of
conditions not met or waived was only about one per program. The ambitious and complex
nature of policy changes was reflected in delays in tranche releases and program completion
rather than the proportion of program conditions not finally met.

6.      Loan Size. Adjustment costs played a dominant role in determining loan size, though
there was no precise means of estimating adjustment costs that would include the cost of
establishing new agencies, retraining and relocating people, revenue losses, funding existing

1
    ADB. 2001. Special Evaluation Study on Program Lending. Manila.
                                                                                 Appendix 6      69


debts, etc. Possible revenues from program reforms such as privatization proceeds, and a
government share of the costs of reform, needed to be considered when determining the
program loan size. On the other hand, adjustment costs also fell on nongovernment and private
commercial agencies that may have needed temporary assistance in meeting them.

7.     Technical assistance. Programs were more difficult to implement than projects. A
weakness of program lending was insufficient resources for institutional capacity building during
implementation of policy reforms. The effectiveness of technical assistance (TA) associated with
program lending varied. Given the short period for policy changes provided in program design,
TA outputs sometimes came at too late a stage of implementation. Stronger capacity building
was required, especially in policy analysis during program formulation and in the coordination of
implementation. Assistance in these areas needed to be sustained over more than the relatively
short period of one program. An overriding issue related to the ability to make reform popular,
for example, through consultations with stakeholders, including those in the private sector, and
the participation of civil society. Commitment to reform may depend not just on an appropriate
"macroeconomic moment," but on timing in relation to government tenure (i.e., in terms of the
electoral cycle) and on the need to maintain social cohesion.

8.        Flexibility. The program framework and policy matrix used in program preparation
provided a logical connection between policy changes, outcomes, and inputs. However, it was
difficult to build flexibility into the program framework. Often there were many conditions with no
prioritization, and the policy framework was not conducive to the consideration of alternatives,
either for program elements or for timing. The incentive system within program lending may
have favored central agencies over line agencies and other stakeholders. The program
evaluation studies showed that programs were subject to greater risks than projects. These
risks fell on some groups within developing member counstries but not on others. A greater
country focus would have facilitated better understanding of borrower constraints, particularly if
backed up by high-level policy dialogue. Program loans are labor intensive and demanding of
specialized skills, which needed to be further developed in ADB. A change in focus of economic
and sector work from outputs to results would assist in program formulation and implementation.

9.     In summary, the study's main recommendations were that mission leaders need to
consider

       (i)     The extensive time required for consensus-building dialogue and ownership of
               policy-based program lending, not only from the executing agency, but also
               across different line departments and levels of government and government
               officials;
       (ii)    designing a reform program that carefully integrates governance and public
               finance reforms in manageable proportions focused on end results;
       (iii)   the specific linkage between power sector reforms and public resource
               management reforms in terms of fiscal impact;
       (iv)    ensuring transparent flexibility in numerical targets for revenue and fiscal deficit,
               given the sensitivity to changes in the external environment including changes in
               Central Government policies and natural calamities;
       (v)     emphasizing not merely policy reforms but also institutional capacity building
               through a project loan under a sector development program modality that would
               modernize public finance and management systems; would provide training,
               consulting services, and information technology systems to help state
               governments ensure assessment, identification, and timely achievement of
               desired policy reforms;
70        Appendix 6



          (vi)    public awareness program to explain the rationale of the reforms and its benefits
                  to all stakeholders, including the general public, government officials, and
                  taxpayers, and user-charge payers; and
          (vii)   incorporating institutional mechanisms and capacity building for government
                  officials aimed at intensive and rigorous monitoring.

          B.      Studies of Advisory Technical Assistance

10.    In 2000, OED conducted a special evaluation study on the effectiveness and impact of
advisory TA for public expenditure management reform in four selected DMCs.2 Seven lessons
were identified:

          (i)     Building capacities takes long-term commitment on the part of governments and
                  ADB, rather than the short-term horizon of a TA, which is suitable to solve well-
                  defined elements of a capacity-building process.
          (ii)    Capacity mapping should be undertaken by experts with considerable
                  understanding of the existing local capacity, gaps, and constraints to ensure that
                  TA is designed in context rather than addressing issues in a separate and
                  ineffective manner.
          (iii)   Capacity mapping or any other systematic analysis requires an up-front
                  investment of time and resources to ensure that strategic choices are made.
          (iv)    Capacity mapping provides the strategic framework, while the cluster TA is an
                  ideal instrument for implementing the capacity-building action plan regularly
                  reviewed as TA finishes.
          (v)     Public expenditure capacity building requires capacity mapping to be combined
                  with ADB's governance indicators to channel limited resources toward identified
                  governance improvements.
          (vi)    Capacity mapping can help identify those groups that fear losing the most, as
                  well as other forces that are likely to impede a reform process.
          (vii)   While indigenous capacity for managing public resources is essential, in
                  countries with small administrations clarity is required on which functions the
                  government should perform and which activities are better outsourced to
                  consultants with the help of external assistance.

11.  In 2004, OED conducted an evaluation of selected technical assistance for fiscal
management and tax administration in India.3 Seven lessons were identified:

           (i)    Successful fiscal management is only partly related to improvements in capacity
                  building or the institution of legal and procedural instruments. Many factors, such
                  as political will and the absence of calamities, are beyond the control of the TAs
                  or ADB. TAs will do best when capacity building is embedded in larger fiscal
                  programs of the Government, which carry top priority.
           (ii)   ADB's capacity building TAs for programs often are designed with short
                  durations, so the advice or capacity built up can feed into these programs before
                  their intended start dates. In addition, these TAs often have a wide scope and
                  large numbers of consultancy assignments to be conducted within a short period
2
    ADB. 2000. Special Evaluation Study of Effectiveness and Impact of Asian Development Bank Assistance to the
    Reform of Public Expenditure Management in Bhutan, India, Kiribati, and Lao People's Democratic Republic.
    Manila.
3
    ADB. 2004. Technical Assistance Performance Audit Report on Selected Technical Assistance for Fiscal
    Management and Tax Administration in India. Manila.
                                                                                           Appendix 6       71


                   of time. Since the purpose is not loan preparation but capacity building, longer TA
                   durations that straddle the period before and after the approval of program loans
                   are appropriate. Given that the capacity building needs are very large in this area,
                   flexibility in the employment of TA resources is important to allow all resources to
                   be used.
           (iii)   Short duration, wide scope fiscal TAs also run the risk of duplicating work of TA
                   funded by other external agencies. This is particularly true in agencies other than
                   the finance departments, such as health, education, and local government
                   agencies. Such TA needs to be carefully coordinated during implementation.
           (iv)    TA that combines capacity building in revenue generation, budget preparation,
                   and expenditure and debt management should only be undertaken in the context
                   of fiscal management-oriented public resource management programs. These
                   programs can build upon the TA's outputs. Stand-alone TAs in fiscal
                   management confined to one of these components would do better. Generally,
                   ADB needs to have clear fiscal management strategies in countries receiving
                   fiscal assistance.
           (v)     To make the case for necessary reforms that finance and revenue departments
                   wish to implement, the strategic use of TA outputs in fiscal management is
                   usually important to win the endorsement by governments. TAs in fiscal
                   management preferably should include advice from (i) international experts, as
                   they often are perceived to be more objective; (ii) national research institutes; or
                   (iii) domestic consultants with a national standing, who command respect across
                   party lines. Direct advice by ADB can also play this role, and more direct
                   assistance from ADB staff for administering TA is essential. For practical as well
                   as strategic reasons, conducting advisory work through high level committees
                   and frequently meeting with working groups is very important, as the experience
                   with some TA has shown.
           (vi)    Study tours and foreign training of senior government staff as part of TAs are
                   often not effective for building long-term capacity, because of the frequent
                   transfers of senior officers in India. Such instruments might be useful for
                   objectives that can be achieved within a very short period, or in cases where
                   decisions need to be made based on the study of systems in foreign countries.
           (vii)   Advisory work in several states through TA, and followed up by program loan
                   policy matrixes, has proven to be capable of piloting new practices and systems
                   (e.g., VAT preparation, medium-term fiscal frameworks, fiscal responsibility acts,
                   computerization of treasuries, etc.). Thus, they provide examples for other states
                   to follow. At the same time, pilot activities in states that need nationwide
                   decisions can lead to wasted effort if not well prepared at the central level.

          C.       Study of Sustainability of Reforms

12.      A special evaluation study in 2001 of the sustainability of policy reforms through the use
of advisory technical assistance (ADTA)4 focused on second generation policy reforms in power
and water sectors by selecting 30 broadly compatible ADTA activities in five countries--
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Indonesia, Philippines, and Sri Lanka--over a 10-year period. The study
identified four key issues regarding the sustainability of policy reforms:



4
    ADB. 2001. Special Evaluation Study on Sustainability of Policy Reforms Through Selected Advisory Technical
    Assistance. Manila.
72        Appendix 6



          (i)     Policy reforms are a dynamic, iterative process in the context of a given sector,
                  requiring a path to be charted from the present to the future, not a one-off policy
                  change or a set of fixed institutional changes.
          (ii)    Ownership of the reform process and therefore of TA is critical, with analytical
                  tools being available to assess ownership.
          (iii)   ADTA effectiveness depends largely on ADB's ability to allocate the required
                  resources, and ADB staff allocation and skills mix were grossly inadequate to
                  generate a commensurate return from an annual investment of $100 million in
                  ADTA.
          (iv)    Greater accountability for results in ADTA needs to be addressed at multiple
                  levels: (a) training and sensitizing staff to new approaches to institutional
                  development, (b) building multidisciplinary teams for reforms, (c) securing better
                  performance of consultants, and (d) strengthening the quality control
                  mechanisms for ADTA that plans to assist DMCs with computer-based systems.

13.       The study made four recommendations:

          (i)     Long-term sustainability requires a programmatic approach to the sector reform
                  process that is integrated with economic and sector work and with overall country
                  programming. ADB needs to change its focus from the individual ADTA to a
                  program of reform at the sector level.
          (ii)    Adequate resources to address capacity building and institutional development in
                  DMCs are required.
          (iii)   ADTA with an agenda for policy reforms needs to procure knowledge and
                  change management services. This requires a different orientation with much
                  greater flexibility for operational staff than what was needed for TA as a project
                  financier.
          (iv)    All these called for an internal review of ADB's policies, procedures, and overall
                  resource allocations to its ADTA program.

The study also proposed that ADB set up an internal working group to review its policies,
procedures, and staff resource allocation to ADTA that aims to address policy reforms, and
declared that ADTA planning needs to place emphasis on processes, with OED preparing a
simple tool kit to operationalize the recommendations of the report to contribute to this process.

          D.      Program Performance Evaluation Reports

14.      A program performance evaluation report5 was prepared for the $12 million loan from the
Asian Development Fund for the Public Sector Reform Program in the Marshall Islands to
initiate a long-term reform program to avert a looming financial and economic crisis, and to set
the economy on a more sustainable path of growth. Its four main elements were (i) fiscal
stabilization and sound fiscal policies, (ii) privatization of public enterprises, (iii) public service
reform, and (iv) measures to stimulate private sector development. Three outputs were
specified: (i) short-term stabilization of the Government's finances; (ii) long-term structural
stability of the Government's finances; and (iii) creation of an improved environment for the
private sector. The evaluation rated the Program partly successful and identified a key lesson
that two elements are essential for successful reform--an identified "champion" (or champions)
and widespread community support. The Program lost its main advocate just before ADB

5
    ADB. 2003. Program Performance Audit Report on the Public Sector Reform Program in the Marshall Islands.
    Manila.
                                                                                          Appendix 6       73


approved the loan, and there was little public consultation during loan design or implementation.
Other major lessons include:

          (i)     The need to match the depth, scope, and timing of the reform program with the
                  government's capacity to implement reforms;
          (ii)    The importance of selecting policy advisory or advocacy consultants based
                  equally on diplomatic skills and technical competency;
          (iii)   The need to temper overly optimistic assumptions of the private sector's ability to
                  replace the government as the engine of economic growth, in an environment
                  where its size and structure are limited to production of nontraded goods to
                  support a large public sector; and
          (iv)    If program reforms are designed to affect or incorporate fiscal adjustments, then
                  monitoring mechanisms must be in place, or developed, to evaluate overall fiscal
                  performance.

15.     In the Federated States of Micronesia, an $18 million loan from the Asian Development
Fund was provided to a public sector reform program aiming at transforming and developing a
more efficient economy through (i) reforming and reducing the size of the public sector to adjust
to declining external resource transfers, and (ii) shifting the balance of economic activity away
from the public to the private sector. Five outputs were specified: (i) reduced size and operating
cost of the civil service; (ii) increased domestic revenue generation; (iii) restructured government
operations and public enterprises, with the divestiture of some of the latter; (iv) successful
mitigation of the negative social and economic impacts of the adjustment in public expenditure;
and (v) improved conditions for private sector development. The evaluation rated the Program
successful with the following lessons:6

          (i)     It is not desirable to design a major public sector downsizing based on voluntary
                  redundancies, as it is essential to maintain an acceptable standard and quality of
                  service delivery. Managers need to control who is eligible for redundancy to
                  ensure that the core competencies of their organizations are maintained.
          (ii)    The provision of transition services to public servants made redundant cannot be
                  left to existing institutions. This task requires a specialized, albeit temporary,
                  agency with appropriately qualified staff and adequate resources to provide the
                  range of counseling, outplacement advice, and retraining services required.
          (iii)   Furthermore, the chances of out-placed public servants becoming successful
                  entrepreneurs can be strongly influenced by the nature of the business
                  environment within which they are expected to work. The private sector has a
                  better chance of developing in the absence of discretionary regulations and
                  government interventions and of unequal competition from government
                  businesses that receive subsidies, do not pay taxes, and do not pay for the cost
                  of their borrowing or capital by paying interest or dividends to the government.
                  Another set of lessons relates to the manner in which the reform program is
                  designed and implemented.
          (iv)    Time-consuming efforts at consensus building prior to the reforms being
                  implemented provided the essential foundation for the broad adoption of the
                  reforms and contributed to their ultimate success.
          (v)     The economic policy analysis and advice that informed the debates were
                  important to success.

6
    ADB. 2003. Program Performance Audit Report on the Public Sector Reform Program in the Federated States of
    Micronesia. Manila.
74        Appendix 6



          (vi)     The process of reform and structural adjustment in the Federated States of
                   Micronesia will take a long time and requires a core of champions capable of
                   understanding the rationale for the reforms and who can maintain a clear
                   strategic direction. The considerable effort invested in building the policy
                   capabilities of a core group of officials was already paying dividends but needed
                   to be maintained.
          (vii)    The less successful projected outcomes of the public sector reform program
                   were not predicted, because there was insufficient social analysis of historical,
                   structural, socioeconomic, and cultural conditions during preparation. Such
                   analysis should have taken greater account of the 30 years of welfare-driven
                   public policies. A deeper analysis might have suggested less optimistic
                   predictions concerning private sector growth, indicated the more likely outcome
                   of increased emigration, and paid more attention to education and human
                   resource development as a mitigating strategy.
          (viii)   The effort to reform and divest public enterprises was not successful. In such a
                   small, low-income country with a weak private sector and where there are few
                   people with the capital and/or business experience to bid for or successfully
                   manage such enterprises, public enterprise reform requires a more creative
                   approach to involving the private sector in the management of public assets, e.g.,
                   through greater resort to facilities management contracts to help provide a more
                   gradual pathway to the accumulation of both experience and capital.
          (ix)     Concrete human resource development results take time, and it is important that
                   ADB not set unrealistic objectives for capacity-building TA that involves
                   significant human resource development from a low base.
          (x)      Restructuring an economy calls for short-term sacrifice for long-term gain, which
                   is inherently difficult to manage within a 3- or 4-year election cycle. Program
                   design should take more account of the practical consequences of this for
                   politicians (and for their appetite for reform) by showing some early positive
                   results, which will both reward the champions of reform and strengthen their
                   ability to pursue further reform.

          E.       Evaluation of Policy-Based Lending

16.     OED has recently completed an evaluation of ADB's policy-based lending operations.7
Based on the body of evaluation evidence and analysis undertaken in the report, recommended
practices based on lessons learned, methods research, and internal and external reviews were
summarized. The summary used the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
approach, highlighting key factors that can be built into designs or need to be considered during
implementation through good practice.

          1.       Strengths to Build into Design

17.   The following identified practices can be built into operational designs and
implementation management:

          (i)      Developing a deep understanding of the sector before formulating a policy reform
                   package strengthens understanding of the reform context, identification of
                   relevant policy change areas, and desired outcomes from reforms.

7
    ADB. 2007. Policy-Based Lending: Emerging Practices in Supporting Reforms in Developing Member Countries.
    Manila.
                                                                                                Appendix 6       75


          (ii)     Sector analysis and dialogue should cover economic, social, and institutional
                   dimensions as well as stakeholder, vested interest, and political economy
                   dimensions.
          (iii)    Assess feedback effects from sector policy change on the macroeconomy.8
          (iv)     Use sector analysis results to develop a clear rationale, whether for balance-of-
                   payments support, public finance needs, or short-term costs of adjustment
                   arising from the reform process.9
          (v)      Program designers will be better informed about how to target reforms, the
                   relevance and likely effectiveness of specific reform outputs, and the nature and
                   extent of costs when they understand the stage that a reform has already
                   reached within a country, who stands to gain or lose in furthering the reform, and
                   the political economy of decision making.
          (vi)     Insights from the analysis must be reflected in a design (policy actions and steps)
                   that can be implemented and is agreed to be relevant and feasible by the
                   government, institutions, and key stakeholders.
          (vii)    A sound sector analysis helps designers to identify influences that can and
                   cannot be internalized into an operation's design.
          (viii)   Program designers need to be resourced adequately in terms of time needed to
                   understand issues and to access country and sector understanding through
                   consultants with knowledge of the region and sector.
          (ix)     Access to key agencies and domestic networks improves early dialogue, and
                   aids mutual understanding and agreement on needs and the circumstances of a
                   reform.
          (x)      Sector analysis helps to identify relevant monitoring and evaluation indicators.
                   Use of outcome- and impact-level indicators that are collected routinely and used
                   by relevant government agencies and in-country research institutions, or that are
                   compiled regularly by other aid agencies, helps to lower the cost of monitoring to
                   ADB and the borrower.
          (xi)     To raise the prospects for design outputs that are as efficient as possible and
                   lead to relevant and effective outcomes and impacts, a clear explanation of
                   cause and effect in the results chain is needed. This should be based on
                   practical and appropriate modeling and counterfactual analysis. Indicators for the
                   design and monitoring framework are derived from this analysis.

          2.       Weaknesses to Avoid

18.    The following design weaknesses and risks can be avoided by adopting risk mitigating
and associated practices during the design and implementation stages:

          (i)      Uninformed designs, misunderstood solutions, changed circumstances, or low
                   and wavering commitment will risk reducing output relevance, effectiveness, and
                   efficiency. Further, these jeopardize stakeholder response, outcomes, and
                   impacts.
          (ii)     Pursuing a weak rationale and flawed design to meet conditions and tranche
                   releases undermines the credibility of ADB and reformers. A phased, flexible



8
    See, for example, ADB. 2003. Economic Analysis of Policy Based Lending: Key Dimensions. Manila.
9
    For further good practices, see ADB. 2006. Second Governance and Anticorruption Action Plan. Manila. The plan
    includes public financial management practices, procurement and corruption risk assessments at the country level,
    and governance institutional and corruption risk assessments at the sector level.
76     Appendix 6



               design with a clear rationale is more likely to see design weaknesses addressed
               during implementation.
       (iii)   Where a government and stakeholders are not familiar with needed or proposed
               reforms, monitoring the effects of reforms and a well-managed awareness-
               building exercise can improve design and results for ongoing or follow-on
               designs.
       (iv)    Too much focus on conditions might not be an effective way to influence
               outcomes, and can undermine or delay a reform when poorly designed and used.
               Conditions, best phrased as policy measures and triggers, should reflect clear
               reform steps and output targets for implementing reform measures. Judiciously
               used, policy triggers can help reformers manage the process.
       (v)     Limited or no specific provision for change management in the reform process
               can cause difficulties. Understanding the political economy of the policy reform
               process is a basis for planning and managing the change process.

       3.      Opportunities to Capitalize Upon

19.   The following are opportunities that often present themselves and should be explored
and capitalized upon in designs and implementation management:

       (i)     A design that is driven by government and reflected in early actions provides a
               strong platform for effective and efficient implementation.
       (ii)    Backing an influential reform champion helps to design and implement reforms
               and manage opposition or reluctant stakeholders.
       (iii)   Severe economic crisis can provide an opportunity for initiating reforms, but this
               should be handled in a way that considers possible political volatility during such
               processes.
       (iv)    Reform is a dynamic process. Timing and sequencing operations to follow
               needed prior reforms, such as removal of a constraint in a key sector, will help
               target subsequent reforms to deepen ongoing changes.
       (v)     Use of country performance assessments and collaboration between ADB and
               the World Bank in generating analyses, such as public expenditure reviews and
               fiduciary and risk assessments, provides a common basis for assessments and
               monitoring and evaluation of program loans. It also promotes harmonization of
               objectives.
       (vi)    Participation in multi-aid agency-funded, policy-based lending to support
               structural reforms to improve the enabling environment and to support country-
               driven poverty reduction programs can be cost effective and results effective.

       4.      Threats to Manage

20.    The following are threats and risks that are largely exogenous to a program's design but
can be managed as the implementation proceeds through good practice:

       (i)     The higher in the results chain a program seeks to have an effect, especially at
               the impact level, the greater the range of external factors, threats, and risks to an
               operation.
       (ii)    Even if the need for reforms is understood and accepted by stakeholders up
               front, the relevance and effectiveness of areas where reforms are implemented
               will influence the response of stakeholders as well as the relevance and
                                                                       Appendix 6     77


        effectiveness of outcomes. Where the response is unknown, monitoring is
        needed to strengthen ongoing or follow-on designs.
(iii)   Reforms that are at an early stage in the policy change process, and are
        unavoidably complex, are likely to be influenced by a wide range of exogenous
        factors. A medium-term, flexible approach is more likely to be effective than an
        inflexible, conditions-driven approach.
(iv)    Too many external factors, combined with overly complex and poorly targeted
        designs, increase the range of influences that cannot be managed by reform
        implementers and place the operation at greater risk. Prioritizing immediate
        policy changes and focusing on key measures and steps in a design with realistic
        outputs, and using a phased, longer term approach where necessary, will likely
        reduce risks or make them more manageable.
(v)     Where a focus on a sector or a narrow set of reform issues is not practical, such
        as a response to a major economic crisis, then the policy change needs to focus
        on the fundamental cause while providing sufficient space for flexibility in
        measures and steps in the design. This should be complemented with progress
        monitoring to identify and justify course changes as needed rather than avoiding
        such changes as the reform progresses.
       MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO THE SPECIAL EVALUATION STUDY ON
         ADB SUPPORT TO PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN INDIA



         On 12 October 2007, the Director General, Operations Evaluation Department, received
the following response from the Managing Director General on behalf of Management:


       1.     We appreciate OED's Special Evaluation Study (SES) on ADB's Support
       to Public Resource Management in India. It provides the first consolidated
       evaluation of public resource management program of states in India including
       Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Kerala. We note that SES is timely and will
       provide a useful input into the preparation of our Country Partnership Strategy
       (CPS) for India.

       2.      We note the SES finding that the public resource management programs
       in India were successful overall. We are encouraged to note the SES findings
       that ADB's operations in the public resource management in India was relevant,
       effective and likely sustainable and that the impact of the operations was
       substantial.

       3.       The SES provides several lessons. We agree that there is no single
       blueprint for designing successful public resource management reforms; rather
       there is a sequence of measures to improve reforms built around effective
       measures to support fiscal consolidation. We also agree that program design
       should be internally consistent with the design and monitoring framework. In
       particular, broader governance reforms should follow and not precede measures
       to ensure effective fiscal consolidation. The consequence of not keeping to this
       sequencing of reforms was most clearly manifested in the Kerala public resource
       management program. We also appreciate the SES's reference to the
       importance of ensuring adequate resources in policy dialogue, communication
       and perhaps, in our view, not emphasized sufficiently, in program
       implementation. Last but not the least, the SES brought out the importance of
       political economic analysis before designing the key components of a program.
       We believe that a fiscal consolidation program with tough reform measures can
       not be effective unless the political economy considerations are assessed
       adequately.

       4.      Moreover, with respect to the lesson on the resident mission, we agree
       that the role of resident mission and headquarters staff during implementation
       would need to be clarified to improve effectiveness. Policy based loans require
       intensive interaction with various in-country stakeholders which is best achieved
       by drawing on the expertise of headquarters as well as resident mission staff.

       4.       The SES also proposes that consideration should be given in the design
       of future public resource management programs to the good practice standards.
       We agree on the importance of adopting good practice standards which includes
       (i) policy dialogue and communication campaigns; (ii) focusing on key elements
       of the reform agenda and avoiding broader governance reforms until critical fiscal
       reforms are in place; (iii) capacity development and institutional strengthening
       over the long term; and (iv) designing implementation arrangements based on
       existing institutional structures with adequate resources.
5.      We are pleased to note that most of the recommendations emanating
from the SES will help enhance the quality of outcomes of future loan processing
in this sector. Indeed, many of these lessons and good practice standards
coincide with our own internal assessment. These lessons and good practice
standards are already being put into practice in the design of the second phase
of the Assam Governance and Public Resource Management Program which is
scheduled to be processed during 2007-2008.
                        DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS COMMITTEE


           Chair's Summary of the Committee Discussions on 24 October 2007 of the:

   (i)       Country Assistance Program Evaluation for India

   (ii)      Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for the Transport Sector in India ­
             Focusing on Results

   (iii)     Sector Assistance Program Evaluation for the Energy Sector in India ­
             Building on Success for More Results

   (iv)      Special Evaluation Study on ADB Support to Public Resource Management in
             India


Background

1.      In introducing the topic, OED stated that this Country Assistance Program Evaluation
(CAPE) is the first for India and covers the last 20 years (1986 to 2006), although most of the
analysis focused on the last ten years. The main purpose of the study was to provide input to
the preparation of Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India. India is both a major
shareholder and a borrowing member country with substantial influence on ADB's portfolio.
ADB's assistance to India in the last 20 years has been about $17 billion in public sector
lending, $147 million in TA assistance, and $756 million in ADB's private sector operations.
There are three other Sector Assistance Program Evaluation (SAPE) reports supporting this
CAPE: one each on transport sector, energy, and public resource management. This CAPE
takes into account the findings and recommendations of these three studies. Conforming to the
requirements of DEC, this CAPE has also incorporated the views of the Government of India on
its partnership with ADB. Management agrees with the CAPE's overall rating of "successful",
and concurs with the overall conclusions and key recommendations.

Project processing consumes more staff resources than project administration

2.      To a query by a DEC member, OED confirmed that in the case of India, project
processing consumes more staff resources than project administration in terms of mission
travel. Director General (DG) of the South Asia Department (SARD), indicated that more
resources for portfolio management have been allocated in recent years with improved
performance.

Quality of assistance program has improved over time

3.      One DEC member noted the report's finding that the quality of the assistance program
during the latter 10 years of the evaluation period has improved in comparison to the earlier 10
year period. He added that the report observes that ADB has and could continue to scale up its
assistance to India in the coming years.




                                                                                              1
Assistance to Rural Development

4.       Observing that there was a recent focus by ADB in rural development in India, one DEC
member asked how this would fit into the core of the evolving Long-Term Strategic Framework
(LTSF) plan of ADB. He pointed out that the agriculture sector, perhaps with the exception of
irrigation infrastructure, was not playing a dominant role in the evolving LTSF. Another DEC
member observed that rural and agricultural developments are important to India, and to China,
and asked how ordinary capital resources (OCR) funding could be provided to these sectors in
a viable way. Another member, observing that while the agriculture sector is important for
poverty alleviation and while core priorities under Medium Term Strategy (MTS II) of ADB have
already been chosen, asked OED to elaborate their views on this issue. OED responded that
MTS II does include irrigation infrastructure as a priority 1 sector. OED added that evaluation
results show that agriculture is a challenging sector and if ADB were to continue to be involved
in this sector, then it should know how to manage the risks. In addition, quite often, the solution
to poverty does not lie in the rural areas, but elsewhere where jobs are being created and thus
causing migration. OED further noted that if ADB were to get involved in a sector, it should be
there for a long term and there should be strong country commitment. DG, SARD responded
that ADB is supporting India's rural development program to make the growth process more
inclusive. In 2006, it provided a $1 billion program loan for strengthening rural cooperatives and
improving availability of credit in rural areas. Further, ADB will be providing assistance for
strengthening agribusiness and irrigation infrastructure, and improving water resources
management in selected states over the 2008-2010 period.

Safeguard Policies

5.       One DEC member noted that the report observes that ADB's safeguard policies have
created the perverse effect of the client deliberately avoiding ADB projects that have sensitive
environmental or re-settlement issues. He further added that the report appeals to India to
become more open to dialogue with ADB and the Resident Mission (RM), and to update the
Indian safeguard policies. Another DEC member noted that report was pointing out that ADB's
safeguard policies were adding to the transaction costs of borrowing from ADB, and stated that
if a country is trying to develop its own safeguard policies, how can ADB insist on its own
system and not use the country's system of safeguards. Is ADB going to continue to insist on
using its own safeguard policies or move towards using the country system, he asked. One
DEC member asked OED to clarify what it means by its statement in the report, "in the mean
time ADB should harmonize its approach to common safeguard concerns in India." OED
responded that three major evaluations completed by early this year had fed into the ongoing
safeguard review. The safeguard systems in some countries are strong, while in others they are
weak. In China, and in some states of India, these systems are strong. In other countries, it will
be a very long time before ADB can use these countries' systems. OED would recommend
strengthening these systems progressively in a move towards using them. While many DMCs
would encourage ADB using their safeguard system, many NGOs would oppose such a move.
DG, SARD added that while this is an ADB-wide issue, SARD is making all efforts to find ways
of harmonizing among systems of donors and aligning with the safeguard systems of the
institutions whose projects ADB is supporting.

Resident Mission

6.     Noting that the report appeals to strengthen the India Resident Mission (INRM) and
observing that ADB's largest private sector operation is in India, a DEC member asked if OED


                                                                                                 2
had a specific recommendation to strengthen the private sector activities by the RM. Another
DEC member stated that for a country like India with a large pool of highly qualified economists
and management specialists, there is no reason why the RM could not be strengthened with
more and qualified staff. That would help to improve the dialogue with the Central and State
governments. Another member pointed out that without delegation of appropriate level of
authority to the RM, it would not be able to function effectively. Yet another DEC member said
that as the Management had noted in its response, it is a bank-wide issue and consequently
should be addressed in that context and not in isolation. Another DEC member noted that the
government has specifically emphasized the need for further decentralization to the INRM with
adequate staffing and use of country systems, and changes in business processes for
streamlining ADB's operation in India. He added that decisions on these issues should be
finalized before the CPS is finalized. OED responded that it has consistently advocated
strengthening of resident missions and Management has insisted that it is an ADB-wide issue.
OED has found from its studies that when the resident missions are strengthened, the client, its
executing agencies, and NGOs all get better service. He added that this strategy would require
developing an accountability framework, delegating more authority, and allocating more staff. It
would necessitate in ADB changing its business model. This would have major implication for
ADB, and thus he cautioned that this should be preceded by a major feasibility study. DG,
SARD, while acknowledging that this is an ADB-wide issue, said that in the case of India, they
could not wait for the outcome of ADB-wide review of RM policy. He added that SARD has
found ways to provide additional support to INRM by delegating more responsibilities by
requesting Private Sector Operations Department and the Office of General Counsel to redeploy
a professional staff position each to the INRM. The large operation in India makes it possible to
justify one of each of these specialized staff to be redeployed. In addition, one position from one
of the divisions in SARD also has been reassigned to INRM. Further, the number of National
Officers positions has been increased from 11 to 19.

Number and quality of ADB staff for India operation

7.      A DEC member, noting that the report points out the need for strengthening the quality
and number of staff involved in the India operation, said that both the donor and borrowing
countries should form an alliance to push ADB for necessary reform steps. Noting that the
report points out that ADB had not fully exploited its potential to assist India, another DEC
member asked OED to elaborate more on why this was the case. He asked OED if one of the
reasons why perhaps ADB could not give timely support to India was because of lack of
adequately qualified experts in ADB. He wanted to know if there were other reasons for not fully
exploiting ADB's potential in India. Another DEC member, pointing out that the report makes it
clear that there is a need for specialized expertise in economic and sector work to develop new
funding methodology for public-private partnership etc., asked if ADB would be able to deliver in
this respect. He further asked how long it would take ADB to deliver if it is not already in a ready
state to deliver such services. Another DEC member noted that the government expects ADB's
operations in India to expand to $4 billion per year and asked if ADB would be able to allocate
the necessary staff, technical assistance (TA) funds and other resources to rise up to
expectation. DG, SARD responded that it is crucial to help the Government improve the
capacity to promote public-private partnership (PPP), and so, ADB has provided large scale
technical assistance to set up PPP cells in 14 states. These cells are in charge of identifying
and carrying out preliminary assessment of PPP projects. ADB's support to PPP is expected to
be scaled up.




                                                                                                  3
Coordination between Public and Private Sector Operations of ADB

8.      Noting the report's observation that there is potential for improving the coordination
between ADB's public and private sector operations, and pointing out that there is an ADB
proposal to merge the private sector operations within the public sector operations, a DEC
member asked what OED thought of the plan. Another DEC member pointed out that the report
states that there should be synergy between ADB's public and private sector operations, and
asked what ADB is doing about it. Another DEC member, while agreeing with this view,
observed that the coordination between ADB's public and private sector operations has
significantly improved over the last couple of years. OED responded that it had done an
evaluation report on this issue which was discussed by DEC in June. That study proposed two
or three modes for consideration. Responding to the specific question about merging PSOD
with Public Sector Departments, DG, OED said that the implications for such a change would
have to be considered. He noted that since staff in the public sector are used to designing
projects that are backed by government guarantee, they may not be able to fully appreciate the
risks associated with private sector lending. DG, SARD responded that SARD is actively
pursuing projects in which both the public and private sector work together to achieve project
goals and to bring synergy on development impact through their partnership.

Access to Asian Development Fund (ADF)

9.      Pointing out that the report has classified ADB's assistance program to be successful,
but on the low side, one DEC member asked if the low side rating may have been the result of
India's lack of access to ADF. If India had access to ADF, it could have helped India to eradicate
poverty a little more. He asked what OED thought of this lack of access of ADF to India. He
further noted that there are limits on ADB's assistance to any country and that for major
countries like India, and China, ADB's assistance may be even less than one percent of the
amount needed for development, and asked if ADB could have provided more assistance then
that would have made a difference.

More field office resources for improving project implementation

10.    A DEC member commended OED for recommending that more field office resources
should be added to improve project implementation. He added that ADB should also provide
more support for executing agencies (EA) and other local entities in charge of project
implementation.

Knowledge Services

11.     Observing that demand for knowledge services from middle-income countries like India
and China are likely to increase, a DEC member asked if ADB is ready to meet such demands.
OED responded that clearly knowledge management is an area where ADB could do more but
has not been able to. ADB is not as successful as it would like to be. The main reason is the
skills of the staff. ADB tries to outsource through TAs and consultants; these efforts are
sometimes successful and at other times not so.

Regional Cooperation

12.  Noting that India has been active in promoting South Asia Regional Cooperation, a DEC
member asked why the report did not deal extensively with the issue and/or its recommendation


                                                                                                4
for ADB's assistance to India to participate in regional projects to integrate with the regional
economies. OED responded that there has not been much investment projects in the region.
There has been much policy dialogue that ADB supported. Now there are a few projects, but
they are not completed yet. It would be a good topic for the next CAPE to cover. DG, SARD
added that the first investment project in regional cooperation is soon coming to the Board for its
consideration. It is a project in information communication technology. It is small, but there is an
understanding among the four countries about the benefit to be mutually shared.

World Bank versus ADB

13.     A DEC member asked OED what they thought of the relative performance of the World
Bank (WB) vis-à-vis ADB in providing assistance to their members. OED responded that WB
has three times as many staff in their resident mission in India as ADB has in its resident
mission in India. ADB resident mission staff is under stress. The portfolio of WB in India is
similar to that of ADB. Consequently, with a larger staff, WB can generally do things better than
ADB. They do better in knowledge management, macro-economics etc. They certainly do better
on safeguard policies. It is a difficult comparison, but in terms of resources, WB has much larger
resources than ADB in every country across the region. An OED staff added that in general,
ADB fares better in project management and does poorly in knowledge services and policy
dialogue and that perhaps reflect the quality of ADB's staff resources and its reliance on TAs
and consultants.

Financial Sector Operations

14.      Noting that there were many cancellations in financial sector operation due to lack of
demand and other problems, a DEC member asked why this happened and what could be done
to prevent such a thing from happening in the future. OED responded that due to unaddressed
structural impediments, there were not enough private sector infrastructure projects that would
have met the criteria set by ADB for its credit lines that supported infrastructure projects. In the
housing market, there were enough alternative financing resources available locally at better
rates. Initially, ADB's line of credit looked competitive in terms of pricing. But as domestic
interest rate, exchange rate, and guarantee fees of the government changed ADB funds
became unattractive. INRM staff added that one of the reasons for the low demand for the
loans was that ADB was imposing its safeguards, particularly those relating to re-settlement, on
the sub-borrowers. As these would affect profitability, the private sector borrowers were
reluctant to accept these conditions and borrow. Another reason was that there was surplus of
liquidity in the economy, and the interest rates were not favorable.

Viability of Transport Sector Projects

15.     Recollecting that DG, OED had earlier stated in a previous DEC meeting that internal
rate of return (IRR) calculations of transport sector projects are based on overly optimistic
assumptions, and that these projects on average are delayed by a year and a half, thus
rendering these IRR calculations meaningless, DEC member asked when ADB was going to
learn the appropriate lessons and take action to address these issues.

Anchor Expansion and Lending Volume

16.    The report's recommendation 1(iii) asks ADB to "anchor expansion in lending volumes
and the addition of new sectors and states to a country strategy business plan which ensures



                                                                                                  5
that aspirations are matched by adequate resources". A DEC member noted that the
Management has sidestepped the issue of developing a business plan as part of CPS.

Economic and Thematic Sector Work

17.     A DEC member noted that the economic and thematic sector work as a component of
work program should be agreed with the Government of India as part of CPS rather than being
decided on an ad-hoc basis. He invited DEC to take a position on this issue. He further pointed
out that Management appears to be sidestepping the related recommendation on this issue by
OED.

Headroom for Private Sector Lending

18.     Noting the Management view that use of currency swaps will increase headroom for
private sector lending, one DEC member asked how the currency swaps would increase the
headroom. INRM staff responded that exchange risk is often too much for a private sector
borrower to bear and currency swap is one of the mechanism ADB has by which it eliminates
the foreign exchange risk for the borrower.

Procurement from Non-member countries

19.      Noting that the Government of India has specifically suggested relaxing procurement
restriction from non-member countries for the PPP projects as the Government of India system
is based entirely on competition, one DEC member asked SARD and COSO to respond to this
suggestion. Country Director, India, stated that the first stage of implementation of a PPP
project is to select a partner to undertake the PPP. Under the model concession agreement, the
partner will have to establish a company under the Indian Companies Act. Thus, the nationality
of the company that will do the project will be Indian. Consequently, there is a difference
between the traditional way of procuring civil works and supplies. The Government of India is
requesting ADB to reconsider the way it applies the procurement guidelines. Principal Director,
COSO, responded that procurement from non-member country is a restriction imposed by the
ADB Charter. He added that COSO is looking at this issue in a creative way. It is an important
issue, particularly given the magnitude of the investment needs. He agreed with the analysis of
Country Director, INRM and added that this is a financial engineering in a grand way and that it
is not a procurement of civil works for a simple project. He further added that COSO is
consulting with ADB's legal department and he was optimistic about a good outcome.

Is ADB Operating in too many states for it to be effective?

20.    While acknowledging that it is important to be present in states where there is poverty, a
member asked if ADB is involved in too many states for its operation to be effective. Is the span
of control optimal? Country Director, INRM responded that until 2003, ADB operation was
focused on selective states. In most cases, these states were considered to be reform minded.
As a consequence of ADB's success in these states, several of them are performing better. He
cited several examples to support his argument. This has allowed ADB to expand its
geographical coverage, which is also the wish of the government.




                                                                                               6
Conclusions

21.   DEC Chair drew the following conclusions from the discussion:

      (i)      DEC noted the rating of successful on the low side. Some members emphasized
               that the report should give prominence to the recent period within the 20 year
               period the evaluation covered.

      (ii)     For better performance, what is important is knowledge, quantity and quality of
               resources.

      (iii)    DEC endorsed the policy of infrastructure led poverty reduction, but wanted
               Management to carefully analyze the consistency between LTSF and MTSII on
               the one hand, and emphasis on rural development and agriculture on the other.

      (iv)     Safeguards are important, but there is need to harmonize safeguard standards.

      (v)      Some members also encouraged the authorities to consider environmentally
               challenging projects.

      (vi)     The problem of coordination between ADB's public and private sector operations
               was emphasized, so was capacity development.

      (vii)    The need for accelerating regional cooperation in South Asia was emphasized.

      (viii)   The question of strengthening the Resident Mission as well as providing
               adequate financial resources was necessary to be resolved before drawing up
               the forthcoming country partnership strategy.




                                                         ASHOK K. LAHIRI
                                           Chair, Development Effectiveness Committee




                                                                                               7
