Validation Report




Reference Number: XVR 2013-31
Project Number: 42902
Investment Number: 7277
December 2013




India: Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing
Facility




This is a redacted version of the document that excludes information that is subject to
exceptions to disclosure set forth in ADB's Public Communication Policy 2011.




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

                    ADB       ­   Asian Development Bank
                    CO2       ­   carbon dioxide
                    CER       ­   certified emission reduction
                    CIPL      ­   CLP India Private Limited
                    CLP       ­   China Light and Power Group
                    EIRR      ­   economic internal rate of return
                    FIRR      ­   financial internal rate of return
                    GPEC      ­   Gujarat Paguthan Energy
                    IED       ­   Independent Evaluation Department
                    MW        ­   megawatt
                    PPA       ­   power purchase agreement
                    PSOD      ­   Private Sector Operations Department
                    RRP       ­   report and recommendation of the President
                    WACC      ­   weighted average cost of capital
                    XARR      ­   extended annual review report


                                             NOTES

                 i) The fiscal year (FY) of the government ends on 31 March.
                     FY before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends,
                     e.g., FY2000 ends on 31 March 2000.
                 (i) In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.




                                            Key Words

adb, asian development bank, economic evaluation, extended annual review report, independent
evaluation department, india gujarat, karnataka, paguthan, private sector operation, renewable
energy, wind power, xarr


The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the IED does not intend to make any judgments
as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                             PROJECT BASIC DATA

Project Number:    42902                     XARR Circulation Date:                     Nov 2012
Investment Number: 7277                      XARR Validation Date:                      Dec 2013
Project Name:      Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility
Country:           India                                                                  Approved          Actual
                                                                                          ($ million)     ($ million)
Sector:                   Energy
Cofinanciers:             Local lenders                  ADB Financing:
                                                         GPEC Loan                             45.0            45.0
                                                         CWFPL                                 60.0            40.0
Approval Date:            17 Apr 2008                    First Disbursement:
Signing Date of           GPEC 23 Oct 2008               GPEC                           10 Jun 2009
Facility Agreement:       CWFPL 2 Jul 2009               CWFPL                          15 Jan 2010
Project Officer:          Name                           Location                           From               To
                          S. Chakraborty                 ADB headquarters                   2008             2010
                          A. Patil                       ADB headquarters                   2011            Present
Validators:               B. C. Smith, Consultant        Peer Reviewer:                 K. Hewitt, Evaluation
                                                                                          Specialist, IED2
Quality Reviewer:         H. Feig, Lead Evaluation       Director:                      H. Hettige, Officer-in-
                            Specialist                                                    Charge, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; CWFPL = CLP Wind Farms; GPEC = Gujarat Paguthan Energy; IED2 = Independent
Evaluation Department, Division 2; XARR = extended annual review report.


                                        I.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION

  A.        Project Background

  1.      In April 2008, the Board of Directors of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved
  the Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility, a rupee-denominated loan of up to
  Rs4.45 billion to Gujarat Paguthan Energy (GPEC), which is a wholly owned subsidiary of the
  China Light and Power (CLP) Group. The loan supported the construction of two wind power
  projects in India--the 100.8 megawatts (MW) Samana Wind Power Project in the state of
  Gujarat in the Western region of India and the 82.4 MW Saundatti Wind Power Project in the
  state of Karnataka in the Southern region of India.

  2.      Subsequent to approval, ADB consented to the conversion of the rupee facility into an
  equivalent US dollar facility of $105 million1 and the division of the facility into two loans. One
  loan of $45 million2 was designated for lending to GPEC, while the remaining $60 million3 was
  lent directly to CLP Wind Farms, a wholly owned subsidiary of GPEC. In February 2012, the
  name GPEC was changed to CLP India (CIPL).
  1
      ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Gujarat
      Paguthan Energy Corporation Private Limited for the Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility (Investment
      7277-IND). Manila.
  2
      ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Gujarat
      Paguthan Energy Corporation Private Limited for the Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility (Loan
      2417-IND). Manila.
  3
      ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Gujarat
      Paguthan Energy Corporation Private Limited for the Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility (Loan
      2434-IND). Manila.
2



3.     The Samana project was divided into two subprojects: Samana 1 and Samana 2. The
Samana 1 subproject was developed by GPEC/CIPL; and CLP Wind Farms developed the
Samana 2 subproject and the Saundatti project. Because of land acquisition problems, the
Saundatti project was reduced from 82.4 MW to 72.0 MW; consequently, the CLP Wind Farms
loan was reduced from $60 million to $40 million. The GPEC/CIPL loan of $45 million was fully
disbursed.

4.      The project was regarded as meriting ADB support because it would (i) help India's
economic growth and energy diversification in an environmentally sustainable manner, (ii)
enhance private sector participation in electricity generation, (iii) be in line with ADB's country
and energy strategies, (iv) promote renewable energy development and contribute to reduction
of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, (v) reduce dependence on fossil fuels and assist distributors
to comply with state regulators' requirements to procure renewable energy, and (vi) enhance the
project's financial feasibility by providing long-term fixed-rate, rupee-denominated funding.4

B.        Project Features

5.      The beneficial owner of the projects is the China Light and Power Group (CLP) of Hong
Kong, China. The group is a public listed and vertically integrated electricity supplier holding
several energy investments in various Asian countries. Construction and operation of the
projects was outsourced to Enercon (India), since renamed Wind World (India). Enercon (India)
was responsible for design, development, construction, commissioning, land procurement, and
regulatory and statutory approvals, and was awarded a 10-year contract for operation and
maintenance of both projects.

6.     The Samana Wind Power Project is located in the state of Gujarat in northwest India. All
of the Samana project's electricity output is sold to the state-owned electricity utility, Gujarat
Urja Vikas Nigam, under a 20-year power purchase agreement (PPA). The Saundatti Wind
Power Project is located in the state of Karnataka in southwest India and sells all its output to
Karnataka's state-owned electricity utility, the Bangalore Electricity Supply, under a 20-year
PPA. Key terms of the projects' PPAs comply with requirements of the relevant state electricity
regulatory commissions and include "must run" provisions that ensure all output is sold.

C.        Progress Highlights

7.     The Samana 1 and Samana 2 subprojects were commissioned in March 2009 and
January 2011 respectively, and were 18 months (Samana 1) and 2 years (Samana 2) behind
schedule. The Saundatti project reached its ultimate operating capacity (72 MW) in December
2010. The primary problems were delays in approval of permits from the forestry department
and protracted negotiation of lease agreements with private landowners.

8.     The actual outputs of electricity from the wind farms have been lower than estimated at
appraisal.
9.     The actual results are reportedly indicative but inconclusive guides to projected
performance given the limited operating history and year-to-year variations in the wind energy
resource. CIPL in June 2011 engaged Entura, a specialist wind resource assessment company,
to reassess the projected plant capacity factors. The Entura assessments were used in the

4
    ADB. 2008. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Gujarat
    Paguthan Energy Corporation Private Limited for the Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility. Manila.
                                                                                                               3


XARR for the Samana 1 and 2 subprojects. As the operating history of the Saundatti wind farm
was too short to accurately reestimate the plant capacity factor, the XARR used a 5% reduction
in projected plant capacity factor (to 26.2%) for the financial and economic analyses. Given the
actual plant capacity, factors for Saundatti (22.9%) suggest 26.2% is optimistic; the actual plant
capacity factor for FY2012 of 22.9% was used to calculate the validation economic internal rate
of return (EIRR).

10.     In August 2011, CLP Wind Farms voluntarily prepaid the outstanding loan balance of
$34.78 million that had helped fund the Samana 2 and Saundatti projects. The residual balance
of the loan for the Samana 1 project is still outstanding.

                                      II.     PROJECT EVALUATION

A.        Development Outcomes and Impacts

          1.      Private Sector Development

11.     The XARR rated the private sector development impact of the project excellent.5 The
project has shown that foreign private investment in India's wind power generation industry is
supported by the international community. The project has also helped demonstrate that wind
power provides viable and profitable development opportunities for the private sector. The
subsequent wind power investments by CIPL and other private investors are however due to a
combination of factors, rather than just the demonstration effect and specific features of this
project. This validation therefore rates the private sector development impact satisfactory.

          2.      Business Success

12.     The RRP and XARR reports both presented their respective FIRR results in nominal
terms, the appraisal and XARR estimates of FIRR have been converted to "real" terms. Use of
"real" FIRR and WACC is the accepted ADB practice. If used consistently, it facilitates
comparisons between FIRR and WACC estimates and avoids confusion.

13.    The following points explain the differences between the projections and actual
outcomes as well as the reasons for the differences between the various FIRR and WACC
estimates:
       (i)   The high FIRR at appraisal was due in part to an allowance for revenues from
             the sale of certified emission reductions (CERs), which were omitted at the
             XARR and validation reevaluations--although the omission is not explained in
             the XARR, the likely reason is the collapse of the CER market. The other
             significant reason for the reduction in FIRR at XARR and validation is the
             reduced plant capacity factor. These reductions have been partly offset by
             savings in the "real" unit capacity costs (rupees per kW) of the wind farms.
       (ii)  There have been significant benefits from deferral of tax payments, which were
             the result of the government's 80% accelerated depreciation incentive for wind
             power investment that was in effect when the projects started operation. This
             benefit had been recognized in the appraisal FIRR by delaying tax payments until
             after 10 years of operation by treating the project as a stand-alone entity that
             carried forward its tax losses. At XARR and validation, the deferred tax benefits
             were omitted.
5
    ADB. 2012. Extended Annual Review Report: Loan to Gujarat Paguthan Energy Corporation Private Limited for the
    Gujarat Paguthan Wind Energy Financing Facility. Manila.
4


           (iii)    The WACC at appraisal was calculated on the understanding with the borrower
                    that the ADB loan facility would be denominated in local currency--this
                    assumption was maintained at XARR. The validation WACC takes into account
                    the post-loan approval conversion of the ADB facility from local to foreign
                    currency.

14.     The FIRR at validation and the FIRR at XARR are identical and exceed the WACC
calculated by IED at validation. The validation review therefore concurs with the XARR in
assessing the project business success satisfactory.

           3.       Contribution to Economic Development

15.    The XARR estimated the EIRRs for the Samana subproject and the Saundatti
subproject, This validation review accepts the XARR assessment that the project's contribution
to economic development is satisfactory given that the validation estimates from the available
data of economic returns for the Samana projects and the Saundatti project exceed the
minimum hurdle rate for private sector projects of 10%.6

           4.       Environment, Social, Health, and Safety Performance

16.     This validation agrees with the XARR assessment of satisfactory. The project reportedly
does not impinge to a measureable extent on the surrounding environment, involuntary
resettlement and indigenous people safeguards were not applicable, and there have been no
serious accidents. The social safeguards and public engagement activities mentioned in the
XARR that address a variety of maternal, child health, and informal education programs are
commendable.

           5.       Overall Development Impacts and Outcomes Rating

17.     All the components that contribute to the overall impacts and outcomes assessment are
satisfactory. This validation therefore agrees with the XARR rating of satisfactory for the overall
development impacts and outcomes.

B.         ADB Investment Profitability

18.     The XARR concluded that ADB investment profitability is satisfactory given the regularity
of payments by the client and the voluntary prepayment of the CIPL loan balance. Given that
the margin is within the accepted normal range of spreads for nonsovereign loans to borrowers
with similar risk profiles, the validation accepts the XARR conclusion that ADB's investment
profitability is satisfactory.




6
    In the absence of an ADB standard approach to valuing economic benefits associated with GHG emission
     reductions, the XVR assumed a level of $14.5 per ton of CO2, which is similar to project appraisal estimates, but
     much lower than the level of $56 assumed in the XARR for the social costs of carbon. ADB does not have a
     standard agreed-upon methodology for determining environmental benefits of clean energy projects and is
     reviewing how to determine social costs of carbon. The EIRR will be subject to recalculation in line with any new
     approach formally adopted by ADB. IED notes that in this particular case, the rating of satisfactory is unlikely to
     change as a result.
                                                                                                                      5


C.        ADB Operational Effectiveness (Work Quality)

          1.       Screening, Appraisal, and Structuring

19.     The XARR rated ADB's screening, appraisal, and structuring satisfactory arguing that
the project has substantially contributed to achieving development, financial, and economic
outcomes. This validation acknowledges that the project is generally satisfactory, but notes
shortcomings in ADB's screening and appraisal work that warrant a less than satisfactory rating
for screening, appraisal, and structuring. The issues include:

          (i)      Economic evaluation. Least-cost assessments of power projects are an ADB
                   requirement for evaluation of power projects, including by the Private Sector
                   Operations Department (PSOD). The economic analysis at appraisal (and
                   XARR) did not include a least-cost evaluation. The economic analysis also did
                   not define a counterfactual "without project" scenario on which to base the cost­
                   benefit analysis or take into account the potential cost imposed by the project(s)
                   on the operations of the power supply system--these costs are often significant
                   and can have a material impact on the results of the EIRR analysis. These
                   omissions and shortcomings are not unique to this project and reflect common
                   PSOD practices.

          (ii)     Technical due diligence. The XARR notes that Entura in its reassessment of
                   the wind energy resource advised that there were deficiencies in the original
                   assessment of wind energy resources such as lack of data at the appropriate
                   mast height, and the importance of adapting the data to the proposed layout,
                   among others. The lower-than-forecast wind energy resources at the project sites
                   is indicative of cursory due diligence during screening and appraisal.

          (iii)    Financial analysis. The RRP states that "the financial internal rate of return is
                   based on the following assumption: all costs and revenues are in constant 2007
                   prices." The tables in the RRP show that on the contrary, the cash flows used to
                   calculate the FIRR are in current/nominal prices as is the FIRR. The FIRR in the
                   RRP is literally an inflated figure and has been compared with an estimated
                   WACC in real terms. While no harm has been caused by the disconnection
                   between the statements and the FIRR results, the consequence was a
                   misrepresentation in the RRP of the project's financial performance potential 7
                   that at the very least raises concerns with the quality and adeptness of ADB's
                   project analysis.

          2.       Monitoring and Supervision

20.    The validation concurs with the XARR assessment that ADB's monitoring and
supervision was satisfactory given ADB's proactive approach and regular contacts with the
borrower. As noted elsewhere in the validation review, the issues that did arise had their roots in
the screening and appraisal stage, rather than as a result of notable deficiencies in monitoring
and supervision.


7
    ADB. July 2005. Financial Management and Analysis of Projects, S3.5. FIRRs are calculated on an after-tax basis
    in real terms (i.e., nominal financial cash flow is converted to real terms by removing the impacts of inflation and
    potential currency fluctuation).
6


       3.      Role and Contribution

21.     ADB has fulfilled its role as a development agency that supports renewable energy
investment as a matter of policy. In this instance, ADB helped a foreign investor with existing
interests in India's power sector to finance a wind power generation project. ADB's participation
was well justified by these circumstances, but its contribution was otherwise routine and
straightforward. Whereas the XARR rated the role and contribution of ADB excellent, the
validation rates the role and contribution of ADB satisfactory.

D.     Overall Work Quality

22.     The quality of work at appraisal is considered to be below expectation, even given that
many of the shortcomings in the economic analysis are not unique to this project. These
shortcomings include: (i) the absence of information on the project's merits as a least-cost
addition to India's generation capacity, (ii) the oversimplified methodology used by PSOD for the
economic cost­benefit analysis, (iii) the deficiencies in the original assessment of the available
wind resources, and (iv) the presentation in the RRP of inflated nominal FIRR, which were
stated to have been calculated in "real" terms. This validation therefore disagrees with the
XARR rating of satisfactory and rates ADB's overall work quality less than satisfactory.

E.     ADB Additionality

23.   This validation agrees with the XARR in rating ADB's additionality satisfactory given that
many commercial lenders have subsequently funded wind power on a project-financing basis.

F.     Overall Assessment

24.     Unfavorable elements affected the overall assessment: (i) the economic analysis
undertaken at appraisal was oversimplified and incomplete, and (ii) misrepresentation in the
presentation of the financial analysis undermined confidence in the adeptness and quality of
ADB's work. Notwithstanding these shortcomings, the project is a satisfactory development in all
respects. The validation's overall assessment is therefore successful. Table 1 summarizes the
individual ratings.
                                                                                                                             7


                                                Table 1: Overall Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for Disagreement and/or
                Criteria                         XARR             IED Review
                                                                                                Comments
Development Outcomes and
Impacts
    1. Private sector development              Excellent          Satisfactory      Various measures besides this
                                                                                    initiative underpin the private sector
                                                                                    development effort.
    2. Business success                       Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    3. Economic development                   Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    4. ESHS performance                       Satisfactory        Satisfactory
Overall Development Outcomes                  Satisfactory        Satisfactory
and Impacts Rating
ADB's Investment                              Satisfactory        Satisfactory
ADB's Work Quality
    1. Screening, appraisal, and              Satisfactory         Less than        Due diligence, economic evaluation,
       structuring                                                satisfactory      and financial presentation issues
    2.    Monitoring and supervision          Satisfactory        Satisfactory
    3. ADB's role and contribution             Excellent          Satisfactory      Routine rather than exceptional
Overall ADB Work Quality                      Satisfactory         Less than        Incomplete economic evaluation and
                                                                  satisfactory      ineffective due diligence assessment
                                                                                    of the wind energy resource
ADB's Additionality                           Satisfactory        Satisfactory
Overall Assessment                            Successful          Successful
Quality of XARR                                                    Less than        Adds simple mistakes and
                                                                  satisfactory      inconsistencies to the same type of
                                                                                    shortcomings seen in the RRP
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ESHS = environment, social, health, and safety; IED = Independent Evaluation
Department; XARR = extended annual review report.
Note: From May 2012, the Independent Evaluation Department has replaced categories for evaluation rating and criteria
labeled "partly" or "less" by "less than" (e.g., "partly satisfactory" to "less than satisfactory," and "less successful" to "less
than successful") to improve clarity of this third category within a four-point scale.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

                           III.     ISSUES, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

  G.        Issues and Lessons

  23.      The basic errors and omissions in the economic and financial evaluations raise issues of
  analytical failings and shortcomings in ADB's quality control processes. Many issues are within
  spreadsheets and are not necessarily obvious: (i) the absence of information on the project's
  merits as a least-cost addition to India's generation capacity, (ii) the oversimplified methodology
  used by PSOD for the economic cost­benefit analysis (no baseline "without project" scenario);
  (iii) the presentation in the RRP of inflated nominal FIRR, which was stated to have been
  calculated in "real" terms; and (iv) simple errors in transposition of figures into spreadsheets.
  They bring ADB's analytical work and quality control into question and undermine confidence in
  the results.
8


24.     Economic evaluation issues are not unique to this project. The shortcomings of the
PSOD's efforts to simplify economic analysis of power projects are most evident in wind power
projects, particularly in situations such as in India where the volumes and value of output are
influenced by the monsoon season and vary markedly throughout the year.

H.        Recommendations

25.      ADB should critically review the economic evaluation practices used by PSOD and
clarify the requirements for screening and evaluating private sector renewable energy projects.

26.    Specialist support by experienced power sector economists should be provided to
supplement the PSOD's efforts, and the model worked examples must be provided to illustrate
the application of improved methodologies.

                           IV.     OTHER ASSESSMENTS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.        Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

27.       Follow the recommendations in Section III.

B.        Other Aspects

28.       None.

C.        Data Sources for Validation

29.     Aside from the RRP and the XARR, the validation reviewed (i) the concept clearance
paper with interdepartmental comments; (ii) Excel spreadsheet files of both the financial and
economic cost­benefit evaluations; (iii) Guidelines for the Financial Governance and
Management of Investment Projects Financed by ADB 2002; (iv) ADB Economics staff paper
no. 49; (v) Economic Analysis of Investment in Power Systems by Ifzal Ali, 1991; (vi) Guidelines
for The Economic Analysis of Projects; and (v) external reports including the Gujarat Electricity
Regulatory Commission Order No. 1. 20108 and various mainstream media articles on current
events in the wind power industry of India.

D.        Comments on XARR Quality

30.     The XARR repeats the mistakes made in the RRP; the financial information and results
are contradictory and misleading, and the economic evaluation is incomplete. There are
mistakes in the calculations of the WACC (impact of foreign currency and tax-shield effects
omitted), errors in assigning capital expenditure to the correct years in the Saundatti economic
analysis,9 and unreconciled differences between information in the project cost table and the
capital expenditure data (para. 31) in the financial and economic analyses. In addition, a
plausible assessment of the wind energy resource for the Saundatti project was still outstanding
at XARR. The XARR is therefore rated less than satisfactory (Table 2).

31.    A presentational issue concerns the format of project cost information in the XARR.
Section 3.4.3.3 of ADB guidelines for Financial Management and Analysis of Projects
8
    http://www.gercin.org/renewablepdf/en_1303211765.pdf
9
    The XARR EIRR calculation (Table A6.2) misplaces "capex" in 2008 and 2009, rather than in 2010 and 2011.
                                                                                                                   9


recommends that the format of project cost tables present the following separately: physical
contingencies, price escalation allowances, financial charges during construction, and physical
costs in constant currency. This layout gives a consistent and common base for the financial
and economic analyses and facilitates the review of budgeted and actual project costs.
Compilation in this format can take time and effort, but it is useful for completeness and clarity
and in itself is an indicator of the quality of the XARR.

                          Table 2: Extended Annual Review Report Quality
                                                                                 Less than
                                               Excellent      Satisfactory                        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                satisfactory
Quality and completeness of
  evidence and analysis to                                                             X
  substantiate ratings
Consistency with XARR guidelines
  (Project Administration Instructions                                                 X
  6.07b)
Plausibility of assumptions underlying
  economic and financial analyses,
  including calculations of EIRRs,                                                     X
  FIRRs, and assumptions on project
  sustainability
Quality of lessons identification and
  recommendations                                                    X
Clarity and internal consistency of the
                                                                                       X
  XARR
Overall Assessment                                                                     X
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, XARR = extended annual review
report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

E.       Recommendations for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

32.      None.
