Validation Report




Reference Number: XVR 2013-28
Project Number: 39921
Investment Number: 7245
December 2013




India: Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal
Expansion Project




This is a redacted version of the document that excludes information that is subject to
exceptions to disclosure set forth in ADB's Public Communication Policy 2011.




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

               ADB        ­        Asian Development Bank
               BPCL       ­        Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
               EIA        ­        Environmental impact assessment
               EIRR       ­        economic internal rate of return
               EPC        ­        engineering, procurement, and construction contract
               ESHS       ­        environment, social, health, and safety
               FIRR       ­        financial internal rate of return
               GAIL       ­        GAIL (India) Limited
               IOCL       ­        Indial Oil Corporation Limited
               KFW        ­        KFW Bankengruppe
               LNG        ­        liquefied natural gas
               MMTPA      ­        metric tons per annum
               PLL        ­        Petronet LNG Limited
               SIEE       ­        summary initial environmental examination
               TCA        ­        time charter agreement
               XARR       ­        extended annual review report


                                               NOTE

                              In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.
                                   "Rs" refers to Indian Rupees.



                                           Key Words

adb, emissions, environmental impact assessment, evaluation, ied, india, libor, liquefied natural
gas, lng, vlaidaiton, energy


The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department on avoiding conflict
of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the Independent Evaluation Department does not
intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                            PROJECT BASIC DATA

    Project Number:          39921                    XARR Circulation              Nov 2012
                                                      Date:
    Investment Number: 7245                                           Dec 2013
                                                      XARR Validation Date:
    Project Name:      Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal Expansion Project

    Country:                 India                                                    Approved           Actual
                                                                                      ($ million)      ($ million)
    Sector:                  Energy                   Total Project Cost:                  336.0            296.9
    Cofinanciers:            Indian lenders           ADB Financing:
                                                      Loan                                 150.0            150.0


    Approval Date:           30 Aug 2006              First Disbursement:           11 Jul 2008
                                                      Final Disbursement:           17 Feb 2009
    Signing Date of          27 July 2007             Commercial                    15 Jul 2009
    Facility Agreement:                               Operations Date:
    Project Officers:       Name                      Location                          From:           To:
                            K. Fukuya                 ADB headquarters                  2006           2007
                            S. Chakraborty            ADB headquarters                  2008           2010
                            S. Gupta                  ADB headquarters                  2010           2012
                            S. Shah                   INRM                              2012           2013
    Validator:              B. Harrison,              Peer Reviewer:                L. Hauck, Senior Evaluation
                             Consultant                                              Specialist, IED2
    Quality Reviewer:       H. Feig, Lead             Director:                     H. Hettige, IED2
                             Evaluation
                             Specialist, IED2
    ADB = Asian Development Bank; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2; XARR = extended
    annual review report.

                                       I.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Project Background

1.      Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) owns and operates a liquefied natural gas (LNG) import and
regasification terminal at Dahej, Gujarat, India. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) invested
Rs6.52 billion for a 5.2% equity to build the first phase of this terminal.1

2.     The terminal is based on a build­operate­transfer structure under a 30-year concession
ending 30 December 2035 when the port will be transferred to Gujarat Maritime Board. PLL will
own the regasification facility for 90 years. The terminal started its commercial operation in 2004
and reached its production capacity in 2005.

3.       In August 2006, the Board of Directors of ADB approved a direct loan of Rs6.75 billion
for the Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Expansion Project to expand the terminal's capacity from
5.0 million metric tons per annum (MMTPA) to 7.5 MMTPA and later to 10.0 MMTPA.2

1
    ADB. 2004. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Equity Investment
    and Partial Credit Guarantee to Petronet LNG Limited for the Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Project in India. Manila.
2
    ADB. 2006. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to Petronet
    LNG Limited for the Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal Expansion Project in India. Manila.
2


4.        The ADB loan is supported by a partial credit guarantee from KFW Bankengruppe.

5.     PLL is a publicly listed company in India. Current shareholders are GAIL (India) Limited
(GAIL) (12.5%), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (12.5%), India Oil Corporation Limited
(IOCL) (12.5%), Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) (12.5%), Gas de France Suez
(10%), ADB (5.2%), and the public (34.8%).3

6.     The project aligns with the ADB energy strategy of promoting clean fuels, the creation of
energy infrastructure for sustainable growth, and promoting private sector investment in the
energy sector.

B.        Project Features

7.      The project is a successful public­private partnership operating under a 30-year build­
operate­transfer concession agreement with the Gujarat Maritime Board and the expansion is a
demonstration of the success of the financial and legal elements of that structure that support
projects of this nature. The terminal's original design facilitated the expansion from 5 MMPTA to
10 MMPTA LNG. Additional facilities in the expansion include third and fourth LNG storage
tanks, additional compressor for boil-off gas recovery, additional send-out facilities, and two
additional gas turbines.

8.     Construction. The expansion project was implemented under fixed price turnkey
engineering, procurement, and construction contracts (EPC). The EPC for the third tank was
awarded to Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industry Co., Ltd (IHHICL) and for the fourth tank to a
consortium of IHHICL, Toyo Engineering India, Toyo Engineering Corporation, Itochu
Corporation, and Mitsui and Company.

9.      Gas supply. PLL is obligated to purchase 7.5 MMPTA LNG under a 25-year sales and
purchase agreement with Ras Laffan Liquefied Natural Gas Company (II) in Qatar. The
purchase price was fixed at $2.53 per 1 million BTU (British Thermal Unit) for the first 5 years
and, thereafter, the LNG price fluctuates with the Japan-oil cocktail price of crude oils with a cap
and a floor based on the average price over the immediately preceding 60 months. PLL also
has a 20­year gas sale and purchase agreement with Mobil Australia Resources Company Pty
for a further 1.44 MMTPA LNG.4

10.    Transportation. Transportation is carried out under long-term time charter agreements
(TCAs) to transport the LNG from Rasgas, Qatar, to Dahej. The original project had two tankers
(Disha and Raahi) dedicated to its transport and signed one TCA for each tanker. For the
expansion, following an international competitive bid, a third TCA was signed to add a third
dedicated tanker (Aseem). The vessels are managed, operated, and maintained by Shipping
Corporation of India, which also has a 29.1% shareholding in the consortia that own Disha and
Raahi. PLL has a 3% stake in Aseem.

11.    Off-take. PLL has a 25­year sale agreement with GAIL (60%), IOCL (30%), and BPCL
(10%) for the supply of LNG. The off-takers are obliged to purchase at a pass-through price on
a take-or-pay basis.


3
    See PLL website 9/16/13 at http:www.petronetlng.com/
4
    PSOD. Monitoring Report (Annual): For Loan and Guarantee Transactions­Corporate Risk Rated NSO, 1­9
    December 2012.
                                                                                           3


C.     Progress Highlights

12.   The expansion project at Dahej achieved early completion in March 2009 and began
commercial operation in July 2009 with nameplate capacity of 10 MMTPA at a total project cost
of Rs15.70 billion (within the projected cost of Rs15.80 billion and ahead of the original
September 2009 target date).

13.     The expansion was completed without interfering with the productive capacity of the
existing facility and with minimum shutdown time to tie in the new facilities.

14.     With the expansion, PLL operations at Dahej increased rapidly to exceed the 10.0
MMTPA in 2012. In addition, PLL was developing a second terminal at Kochi, Kerala in parallel
with the works being done in Dahej. The Kochi terminal was funded through a consortium of
Indian lenders, the International Finance Corporation, and Proparco. In May 2007, the ADB loan
was restructured from all limited sources financing for the Dahej expansion into a corporate loan
with the Dahej and Kochi lenders to rank pari passu in the combined cashflow waterfall and
security package.

15.    PLL continues to expand operations at Dahej with the award of two EPC contracts for
the construction of a second LNG jetty to mitigate associated risks of increasing port operations
and to increase the capacity beyond 10.0 MMTPA at the terminal. Completion is expected in
late 2013.

                               II.     PROJECT EVALUATION

A.     Development Outcomes and Impacts

       1.     Private Sector Development

16.     The extended annual review report's (XARR) rating for private sector development was
excellent. The XARR stated that industry statistics show India as one of the world's largest
consumers of gas, having a significant supply­demand gap with domestic supply falling well
short of demand, and a need to import gas either as LNG or piped to meet demand. PLL was
set up to address the supply­demand gap and was the first private company in India to import
LNG and the expansion from 5.0 MMTPA to 10.0 MMTPA at Dahej contributed to reducing the
supply­demand gap. Significant deregulation has occurred in the energy sector since the
original project inception. Further development of LNG plants in India has followed.

17.    The XARR stated that PLL has been a leader in setting benchmarks at international
standards in the development, management, operation, and expansion of its LNG facilities.
There has been significant transfer of know-how and skills through the technical and
management assistance provided by GDF International Limited at the outset, which has
continued through the expansion under a technical assistance agreement between GDFI and
PLL. During the 3­year construction stage for the Dahej expansion, an average of 800
construction personnel worked at the site, reaching a peak of 2,070 workers during June­July
2008. At corporate level, PLL increased its staff by 30% to reach 313 employees in March 2012.

18.    The XARR also recognized the demonstration effect of the project with two other LNG
terminals developed in India by Shell--one at Hazira, Gujarat and another at Ratnagiri,
Maharashtra.
4


19.    The validation agrees with the XARR rating of excellent for private sector development.
The expansion project (as well as the additional terminal at Kochi and now the additional jetty at
Dahej to optimize capacity) is a clear demonstration of the success of the private sector
development that PLL has brought not only to the industry but also in the form of job creation
and the introduction of private sector best management practices. The additional LNG terminals
developed by another sponsor in India also show the wider impact of the project.

       2.      Business Success

20.     The XARR rated business success excellent noting that the expansion has been a
significant contributor to the overall performance of PLL and that its performance for fiscal year
(FY) 2009­2012 exceeded appraisal forecasts. Sales of natural gas were 28% higher than
estimated and net income increased by 268% during the period. There were no material supply,
operation, or off-take issues during the period. PLL has minimized supply risk with the long-term
Rasgas supply contract and minimized market risk with the long-term off-take agreements with
GAIL, IOCL, and BPCL. There has been a steady increase in LNG deliveries during FY2009­
2012 period with the terminal exceeding nameplate capacity of 10 MMTPA in FY2012. Annual
terminal sales increased over the same period with 548 trillion British terminal units sold in
FY2012.

21.     The XARR noted that PLL was compliant with both its historic and projected debt service
ratio covenants, and are above the 1.1 times covenanted. The debt-to-equity ratio is less than
2.33:1 The XARR calculated the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of the project and
compared it to the weighted average cost of capital.

22.    This validation agrees with the XARR presentation of financial results and to the FIRR
and weighted average cost of capital calculations and concurs with XARR rating of excellent for
business success. The FIRR exceeds the weighted average cost of capital by a larger margin
than the minimum threshold required for an excellent rating.

       3.      Contribution to Economic Development

23.     The XARR rated the project's contribution to economic development excellent based on
its estimation of an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) which is greater than the 20.0%
EIRR required for an excellent rating. The estimation is said to be conservative and exclusive
and excludes some nonquantifiable benefits, such as the positive environmental benefits of
using clean and efficient fuel sources. The XARR did not contain a downside sensitivity analysis.
For a consistent approach with the report and recommendation of the President this should
have been included. This validation concurs with the EIRR calculation and, therefore, concurs
with the rating of excellent for contribution to economic development.

       4.      Environment, Social, Health, and Safety Performance

24.     The XARR rated the environmental, social, health, and safety (ESHS) performance
satisfactory. The expansion project was Category B for environment and Category C for
involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples. The XARR stated that the initial terminal
project was rated Category A for environment and environmental and social impacts were
largely addressed at the time of initial project. A summary initial environmental examination
(SIEE) was prepared for the expansion project based on an existing environmental impact
assessment (EIA) and two updated EIAs. The project was implemented within the boundaries of
the existing site and no land acquisition was required and the project is not within areas
                                                                                                              5


inhabited by indigenous peoples. The project had no significant impacts during construction.
The emission of nitrogen dioxide from the additional gas turbines was the only cumulative
environmental impact identified in the SIEE. However, it was recognized that a clear-burning
technology adopted by the project minimize emissions by the additional gas turbine generators
to levels acceptable under international standards.

25.    The XARR also discussed the well-defined corporate social responsibility program of
PLL. The company undertakes socioeconomic development programs to supplement efforts to
meet the needs of the community with the objective of community self-reliance in areas
generally around its Dahej and Kochi work centers. These programs are mostly in the areas of
education, civil infrastructure, health care, sports and culture, as well as community
entrepreneurship. It operates a risk assessment framework and comprehensive health and
safety regime. The XARR also noted the strong management teams, strong corporate
governance practices in line with regulatory requirements, and the high standard of public
disclosure and transparency.5

26.     This validation agrees with the satisfactory rating for environmental, health, social, and
safety performance of the project. All ADB environmental and social policy requirements appear
to have been met through the SIEE and EIAs that were prepared and the PLL management's
commentary on environmental and social matters in its 2012­2013 Annual Report supports this
conclusion.6

          5.       Overall Development Impacts and Outcomes Rating

27.     The overall development impacts and outcomes rating of excellent is agreed by this
validation. There are four subcriteria supporting this development impact rating: (i) private sector
development (rated excellent), (ii) business success (rated excellent), (iii) economic
development (rated excellent), and (IV) environment, social, health, and safety performance
(rated satisfactory).

B.        ADB Investment Profitability

28.     The XARR rated investment profitability satisfactory. The XARR stated that the direct
loan of Rs6.7 billion has an 11.5­year tenor, inclusive of a 3.5­year grace period. The loan has
a partial credit guarantee from KFW. No payment defaults have occurred.

29.     The ADB investment profitability rating of satisfactory is agreed. The criterion for a
satisfactory rating in investment profitability is that the loan margin should be 0.9 times that of
comparator margins. With the benefit of the KFW partial credit guarantee and the aggressive
prevailing pricing in the Indian market at the time of transaction the loan meets the criteria for
satisfactory rating. The XARR also noted the value appreciation of the ADB equity stake in PLL,
but this could not be considered for the investment profitability evaluation of the loan for the
expansion. These investments are required to be evaluated separately.




5
    See PLL 15th Annual Report, 2012­2013.
6
    While environmental safeguard requirements were generally followed, the potential costs associated with economic
    impacts arising from any tanker collision or grounding on surrounding fishing communities were not quantified in
    the EIA.
6


C.     ADB Work Quality

       1.      Screening, Appraisal, and Structuring

30.     The XARR rating for screening, appraisal, and structuring was excellent. The XARR
stated that the project met the ADB strategies relating to country, energy sector, private sector
development, sustainable infrastructure, and environmental protection. The project also directly
builds on the work done by ADB with the government on policy supporting private sector entry
into the LNG sector. The success of PLL is a leading example of successful implementation of
private­public partnership in infrastructure development. The expansion has performed well and
builds on the earlier work done by ADB. The rating of excellent for screening, appraisal, and
structuring is agreed by this validation.

       2.      Monitoring and Supervision

31.     The XARR rating for monitoring and supervision was satisfactory. The XARR did not
directly discuss the details of the monitoring mission or the covenant compliance checks, but did
note that site visits were made and the loan was in compliance.

32.    This validation notes that annual monitoring reports were prepared in December 2010,
February 2011, and December 2012 and these were reviewed in order to consider the
monitoring and supervision rating. Also noted is the fact that there is an officer of the Private
Sector Operations Department in the India Resident Mission who facilitates monitoring when
needed. The satisfactory rating for monitoring and supervision for the expansion project is
agreed.

       3.      Role and Contribution

33.     The role and contribution of ADB was rated satisfactory. The XARR again noted that the
project supports the ADB energy sector strategy of promoting a shift to cleaner fuels. It also
supports the promotion of private sector participation in the energy and infrastructure sectors.

34.     This validation also notes the long-term commitment to the LNG sector made by ADB
through the policy dialogue that preceded the original project plus the expansion project. The
involvement of ADB in the project also brought KFW into the project and provided comfort to
subsequent lenders on further projects undertaken by PLL. The rating of satisfactory is agreed
by this validation.

       4.      Overall Work Quality

35.     Based on the above, the XARR has rated overall work quality satisfactory. This
validation agrees with rating.

D.     ADB Additionality

36.      The XARR rated ADB additionally excellent. This validation agrees with the excellent
rating for ADB additionality for the expansion project. The XARR stated that ADB provided long-
term fixed rate local currency financing at a time that this was not available in the Indian market.
Its participation in the loan introduced KFW to the financing by way of a partial credit guarantee.
The XARR also noted that the management of PLL advised the XARR mission that the role of
ADB was catalytic in attracting international financiers to the other projects it has undertaken.
                                                                                                                       7


  The XARR made an additional point about ADB role on the board of PLL, but this is considered
  to be outside the direct activity of the loan for the expansion project and does not factor the
  validation's concurrence with the excellent rating.

  E.        Overall Assessment

  37.    This validation agrees with the XARR overall project rating of highly successful with
  development outcome and ADB additionality being rated as excellent.

                                              Table 1: Overall Ratings

                                                                                     Reason for Disagreement and/or
Criteria                                        XARR             IED Review
                                                                                               Comments
Development outcomes and
impacts
    1. Private sector development Excellent                    Excellent
    2. Business success                     Excellent          Excellent
    3. Economic development                 Excellent          Excellent
    4. ESHS performance                     Satisfactory       Satisfactory
Overall Development outcomes                Excellent          Excellent
and impacts Rating
ADB Investment profitability                Satisfactory       Satisfactory
ADB Work quality
    1. Screening, appraisal, and            Excellent          Excellent
       structuring
    2.     Monitoring and supervision Satisfactory             Satisfactory
    3. ADB role and contribution            Satisfactory       Satisfactory
Overall ADB Work Quality                    Satisfactory       Satisfactory
ADB Additionality                           Excellent          Excellent
Overall Assessment                          Highly             Highly
                                            successful         successful
Quality of XARR                                                Satisfactory
ADB = Asian Development Bank; ESHS = environmental, social, health, and safety; IED = Independent Evaluation
Department; XARR = extended annual review report.
Note: From May 2012, the Independent Evaluation Department has replaced categories for evaluation rating and criteria
labeled "partly" or "less" by "less than" (e.g., "partly satisfactory" to "less than satisfactory," and "less successful" to "less
than successful") to improve clarity of this third category within a four-point scale.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

                          III.      ISSUES, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

  A.        Issues and Lessons

  38.   This validation concurs with the lessons identified in the XARR from this highly
  successful project.
8


B.    Recommendations

39.   No further addition to the recommendations given in the XARR.

                     IV.     OTHER ASSESSMENTS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.    Monitoring and Evaluation Design, Implementation, and Utilization

40.   This validation has no additional data to present.

B.    Other Aspects

41.   None was identified.

C.    Data Sources for Validation

42.   Data sources for this validation include the following documents:

      (i)      XARR, Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas Terminal Expansion Project, 14 November
               2012;
      (ii)     Monitoring Report (Annual): For Loan and Guarantee Transactions­Corporate
               Risk Rated NSO, 1­9 December 2012;
      (iii)    A Summary Initial Environmental Examination, Proposed Dahej Liquefied Natural
               Gas Terminal Expansion Project (India), 1 August 2006;
      (iv)     Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors:
               Proposed Loan to Petronet LNG Limited: India Dahej Liquefied Natural Gas
               Terminal Expansion Project, August 2006;
      (v)      Memorandum: Private Sector Operations Department, 19 May 2006;
      (vi)     PLL 15th Annual Report, 2012­2013;
      (vii)    PLL website: http:///www.petronetlng.com/announcement.aspx
      (viii)   India Energy website https:www.indianenergysector.com/oil-gas/lng-liquefied-
               natural-gas-terminals-in-India
      (ix)     Monitoring Report (Annual): Dahej LNG Terminal Expansion Project, December
               2010; and
      (x)      Memorandum: Office of Risk Management: Annual Monitoring Report, 10
               February 2011.

D.    Comments on XARR Quality

43.     The XARR was well written and logical in approach. It was internally consistent and
provided sufficient information to support the assessments and ratings made. Overall, the
quality of the XARR was satisfactory.
                                                                                                          9


                         Table 2: Extended Annual Review Report Quality

                                                                              Less than
                                             Excellent     Satisfactory                      Unsatisfactory
                                                                             Satisfactory
 Quality and completeness of
   evidence and analysis to
                                                                 X
   substantiate ratings
 Consistency with XARR Guidelines
   (Project Administration Instructions
                                                                 X
   6.07b)
 Plausibility of assumptions underlying
   economic and financial analyses,
   including calculations of EIRRs,              X
   FIRRs, and assumptions on project
   sustainability
 Quality of lessons identified and
   recommendations                                               X
 Clarity and internal consistency of the
   XARR                                          X
Overall Assessment                                               X
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, XARR = extended annual review
report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

E.      Recommendations for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

44.     None.
