Validation Report




Reference Number: XVR-14
Project Number: 28708
Investment Number: 7105
December 2012




India: South Asia Regional Apex Fund




Independent Evaluation Department
                                         ABBREVIATIONS

              ADB          ­    Asian Development Bank
              CVF          ­    Creditcapital Venture Fund
              ESHS         ­    environment, social, health, and safety
              EIRR         ­    economic internal rate return
              FIRR         ­    financial internal rate of return
              IPO          ­    initial public offering
              IRR          ­    internal rate of return
              IVCL         ­    IL&FS Venture Corporation
              PAI          ­    project administration instruction
              RRP          ­    report and recommendation of the President
              SME          ­    small and medium-sized enterprise
              SVCF         ­    state venture capital fund
              VCF          ­    venture capital fund
              WACC         ­    weighted average cost of capital
              XARR         ­    extended annual review report



                                                NOTE

                               In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                            Key Words

   adb, extended annual review report, fund, ied, private sector, validation, venture capital




In accordance with ADB's Public Communications Policy (2011), this report excludes
information referred to in paragraph 97 of the PCP 2011.

The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the IED does not intend to make any judgments
as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                         PROJECT BASIC DATA

Project Number: 28708                              XARR Circulation Date:
                                                                     Apr 2010
Investment Number: 7105                            XARR Validation Date:
                                                                     Dec 2012
                                                                     Approved          Actual
Project Name: South Asia Regional Apex Fund
                                                                      ($ million)    ($ million)
Country:              India                 Fund Size: :                   32.12        26.16
Sector:               Finance               ADB Equity Contribution:          4.82        3.57
Other Fund            CVF, IDBI, IFC,       Other Fund                     27.30        22.59
Contributors:         NIFMS, OECF,          Contributions:
                      PHL, PSB, SIDBI
Approval Date:        20 Sep 1994           First Disbursement:                    22 Apr 1996
Signing Date of       15 Nov 1995           Final Disbursement:                    31 Jan 2001
Equity Agreement:
Project Officers:                           Location:
                      V. Velasco                                     ADB headquarters
                      T. Kho                                         ADB headquarters
                      P. Marro                                       ADB headquarters
                      C. Kim                                         ADB headquarters
                      J. Klein                                       ADB headquarters
Validator:            N. Gamo, Senior       Peer Reviewer:           R. Subramaniam, Senior
                        Evaluation Officer,                            Evaluation Specialist,
                        IED2                                           IED2
Quality Reviewer:     C. Kim, Principal     Director:                H. Hettige, IED2
                        Evaluation
                        Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank, CVF = Creditcapital Venture Fund (India), IDBI = Industrial Development Bank of
India, IED2=Independent Evaluation Department (Division 2), IFC = International Finance Corporation, NIFMS = NIF
Management Singapore, OECF = Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, PHL = Parameswara Holdings, PSB =
Punjab and Sind Bank, SIDBI = Small Industries Development Bank of India, XARR = extended annual review report.


                                    I.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.      Project Background

1.     In early 1993, the idea of setting up venture capital funds (VCFs) in several states in
India was initially discussed with the Asian Development Bank (ADB). During subsequent
discussions, it was suggested that the state-level funds be structured under an apex fund so
that money to be raised from institutional investors could be efficiently channeled to the state
funds.

2.      In 1994, ADB approved the investment of Rs150 million ($4.82 million) in the equity of
the South Asia Regional Apex Fund. The Fund was envisaged as an apex fund for Rs1.0 billion
($32.12 million) to seed state venture capital funds (SVCFs) in ten selected states in India. The
SVCFs would in turn provide risk capital to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in their
respective states. Aside from ADB, whose investment represented 15% of the committed
capital, the other original investors in the Fund included the following: International Finance
Corporation (25%), Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund (25%), Industrial Development Bank
of India (11%), Creditcapital Venture Fund (CVF) (11%), Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (10%),
and NIF Management Singapore (3%).
2


B.        Project Features

3.      Fund Structure. The Fund was formed in 1995 as a closed-end fund with a committed
capital of Rs1.0 billion and a life of 15 years. The plan was for the Fund to provide 50% of the
SVCFs' funding while the remaining 50% would be filled by the private sector (40%) and the
concerned state industrial development corporation (10%). The Fund initially invested in two
SVCFs--Uttar Pradesh Venture Capital Fund with a committed capital of Rs200 million and
Orissa Venture Capital Fund with a committed capital of Rs100 million. However, the fund
manager did not find any viable investments in the state of Uttar Pradesh and only two
investments in Orissa. In 1998, it was decided that the Fund would make investments directly
and that no additional SVCFs would be formed. The two SVCFs that the Fund had invested in
were subsequently terminated and the capital was returned to investors, including the Fund.
The main purpose for the consolidation of the fund was to achieve operational efficiencies and
reduce costs.

4.      Management. The Fund's original fund manager was CVF. In September 1996, the
Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services (IL&FS) took over CVF and renamed it IL&FS
Venture Corporation (IVCL). In 1997, implementation arrangements were revised, including the
following: (i) reduction of structuring fees; (ii) revision of success fees; and (iii) increase in group
exposure limits.

5.      Investment Approach. The Fund's investments were targeted at SMEs. These included
innovative projects at the start-up stage as well as companies already in operation that need
venture capital financing before going public. The projects may involve technological innovation,
modernization, expansion or diversification, or may be export-oriented or companies needing
turnaround financing. The portfolio also aimed to be diversified across industries and by type of
project.

C.        Progress Highlights

6.     Total contributions to the Fund increased from Rs1.0 billion to Rs1.1 billion. There were
also some changes in the ownership structure of the Fund with the exit of the Abu Dhabi
Investment Authority and the entry of several Indian financial institutions. There were four
drawdowns of the committed capital from 1996 to 2001.

7.      The Fund invested in 39 companies and had exited from 26 of these at the time of
extended annual review report (XARR) preparation. The Fund has since fully exited from six
other companies leaving seven remaining investments as of 31 March 2012. Total investments
in the 39 companies amounted to Rs1.8billion.1

8.     The Fund invested in companies of different sizes in diverse industries such as
telecommunications, software services, shipbuilding, power, information technology, education,
and textiles. Most of the investments were early stage investments but there were also some
growth stage investments and initial public offering (IPO) investments. The Fund was likewise
expected to invest mostly in SMEs but 8 to 10 investee companies are deemed large
companies.


1
    Although the Fund was capitalized at Rs1.1 billion, total investments in the 39 companies reached Rs1.8 billion
    because profits from divestments were distributed to investors but the principal was reinvested within the
    investment period.
                                                                                                       3


                                     II. PROJECT EVALUATION

A.       Development Outcomes and Impacts

         1. Contribution to Private Sector Development

9.      The XARR rated the Project's contribution to private sector development satisfactory.
The XARR stated that the Fund was one of the pioneers in the private equity industry in India
and was successful in attracting capital for its investee companies, assisting some of them with
the IPO process, and introducing now-standard structures and instruments. Other assistance to
investee companies included developing strategies for the business, attracting strategic
partners, and establishing systems and processes. The project also contributed to knowledge
transfer and competition as several investment professionals from the Fund eventually left the
Fund to join other funds as senior investment professionals or fund managers.

10.     This validation generally agrees with the assessment of the XARR and confirms the
satisfactory rating of the project. However, the XARR could have provided more evidence that
the Fund was indeed one of the pioneers of the private equity industry in India. For instance, it
could have included a brief discussion of when the first VCFs were established and how many
were operating at the time the Fund was established. As for the Fund introducing new structures
and financial instruments, the XARR could have provided examples of these to give more
credence to the statement.

         2. Business Success

11.     Given the negative net IRR of the Fund, the XARR rated the business success of the
project unsatisfactory.

12.     Based on financial statements and the fund manager's reports, this validation also
calculated the real net IRR to be negative. Therefore, this validation maintains the unsatisfactory
rating for business success.

         3. Contribution to Economic Development

13.    The XARR rated the Project's contribution to economic development satisfactory citing
increased payments of taxes by some investee companies, increased employment, successful
IPOs, successful trade sales, and raising additional capital for investee companies.

14.     Project Administration Instruction (PAI) 6.07B 2 requires the calculation of economic
internal rate return (EIRR) since this will be the basis for rating the project's contribution to
economic development. The XARR did not calculate the EIRR for the Project. In accordance
with PAI 6.07B, this validation used the gross financial internal rate of return (FIRR) derived
from the portfolio investments of the Fund as the proxy EIRR. The calculation would have
involved adding back in the cash flows all income taxes paid by the Fund but since it was
treated as a pass through entity, no income taxes were paid and no adjustments were made in
the calculation. The calculated real EIRR was unsatisfactory so the project's contribution to
economic development is rated unsatisfactory.


2
    ADB. 2008. Project Administration Instructions 6.07B: Extended Annual Review Reports for Nonsovereign
    Operations. Manila.
4


       4. Environment, Social, Health, and Safety Performance

15.    The XARR rated the Project's environment, social, health, and safety (ESHS)
performance unsatisfactory. ADB's investment in the Fund predated approval of ADB's
safeguard policies but the XARR believed that the Fund invested in a number of companies
(those involved in shipbuilding, textiles, mining, thermal power, and steel) that may have
warranted environmental assessments but there is no information whether these were done or
not.

16.     An unsatisfactory rating is given if a project does not materially comply with either the
statutory laws and regulations or ADB's requirements at approval. There were no ADB
requirements at approval so the project cannot be faulted for this. There is also no evidence that
the project or the investee companies of the Fund failed to comply with the host country's ESHS
laws and regulations, caused substantial damage to the environment, or exposed workers and
the community to excessive health risks or worsened socioeconomic conditions. The XARR also
reported that the IVCL conducted environmental and social audits when it took over
management of the Fund. This is believable considering that IL&FS, IVCL's parent company,
developed its environmental and social report as early as 1995. A satisfactory rating is therefore
more appropriate in this case.

       5. Overall Development Impacts and Outcomes Rating

17.     The XARR rated the overall development impacts and outcomes of the project
satisfactory. This validation downgrades the overall rating to less than satisfactory because the
project's contribution to private sector development was only satisfactory and not strong enough
to compensate for the unsatisfactory ratings for business success and contribution to economic
development.

B.     ADB's Investment Profitability

18.    The XARR rated ADB's investment profitability unsatisfactory because it significantly
underperformed in relation to the target return in the report and recommendation of the
President (RRP) of 14.9%.

19.     The basis for the investment profitability rating should be the FIRR based on actual cash
flows plus the fair market value of ADB's share in the unrealized investments and not the FIRR
based on the pure cash flows. Nonetheless, this validation maintains the rating of unsatisfactory
for ADB's investment profitability because the recalculated FIRR as of 31 March 2012, which
although higher than that calculated in the XARR, was still much lower than the target return.

C.     ADB's Operational Effectiveness (Work Quality)

       1. Screening, Appraisal, and Structuring

20.     The XARR stated that ADB helped screen, appraise, and structure the fund at its
inception. However, the XARR also pointed out the weaknesses of the project design,
specifically the original structure as an apex fund and the timing of the capital calls and
drawdowns, which eventually led to inferior returns. Accordingly, the XARR rated ADB's
performance in screening, appraisal, and structuring partly satisfactory.
                                                                                               5


21.      This validation agrees with the XARR's assessment, which was detailed and insightful,
and maintains the less than satisfactory rating. Indeed, more upfront work could have been
done to help ensure (i) the availability of matching funds from state agencies, financial
institutions, and private companies for the state level funds, and (ii) a pipeline of possible
investments.

       2. Monitoring and Supervision

22.     The XARR rated ADB's performance in monitoring and supervision satisfactory. ADB
was represented in the Board of the Fund and was highly involved during the Fund's
restructuring during its early life. Subsequently, ADB involvement was less intensive but
consistent.

23.     This validation partly agrees with the assessment. ADB was represented and
participated in the Fund's Board. Records also showed that regular reports, including investor
reports and financial statements, were regularly and consistently submitted to ADB. However,
ADB could have improved project supervision to ensure that the original objectives of the Fund
were achieved. For instance, the original intent of the Fund was to invest in ventures, nurture
them, and then take them to the stock market for IPO. It was noted, however, that 11 of the
Fund's 39 investments (28%) were IPO investments, which while generally profitable, was not in
line with the Fund's objectives because investee companies were already set and no longer
needed venture capital and nurturing. In fact, some of the IPO investments were disposed of
within a couple of months from their investment. The Fund was likewise supposed to focus its
investments in SMEs but many of its investments were in larger companies. In view of the
foregoing, this validation downgrades ADB's performance in monitoring and supervision to less
than satisfactory.

       3. Role and Contribution

24.    The XARR rated ADB's role and contribution satisfactory because it was in line with ADB
operating strategies, policies, and standards as they existed at the time of investment.

25.     This validation concurs with the assessment and maintains the satisfactory rating for
this category. The project was aligned with ADB's overall private sector development strategy
and ADB's financial sector development strategy in India.

       4. Overall Work Quality

26.     The XARR rated ADB's overall work quality satisfactory based on partly satisfactory
ratings in screening, appraisal and structuring, and satisfactory ratings in monitoring and
supervision and in role and contribution. This validation downgrades the overall ADB work
quality rating to less than satisfactory in view of the downgrade in the rating of monitoring and
supervision.

D.     ADB's Additionality

27.     The XARR rated ADB's additionality satisfactory. It noted that ADB was a co-promoter of
CVF, which was the original manager of the Fund, and that ADB provided assistance in
conceptualizing and developing the project. The XARR also stated that ADB was instrumental in
getting other financiers to participate as an equity investor in the Fund.
6


28.      This validation concurs with the XARR's assessment and confirms the satisfactory rating
for ADB's additionality. There is sufficient evidence that ADB finance was a necessary condition
in the timely implementation of the project.

E.      Overall Assessment

29.    The XARR rated the Project partly satisfactory overall in view of the satisfactory ratings
in development impacts and outcomes, ADB work quality, and ADB additionality, and the
unsatisfactory rating in ADB investment profitability.

30.   This validation agrees with the overall rating but changes the final rating to less than
successful as this is the appropriate term per IED guidelines. There are also changes in the
component ratings as earlier discussed and as shown in Table 1.

                                         Table 1: Overall Ratings

                                                                           Reason for Disagreement and/or
         Criteria                  XARR              IED Review                      Comments
Development Outcomes         Satisfactory          Less than           The satisfactory rating cannot be justified
and Impacts                                        satisfactory        because the contribution to private sector
                                                                       development was only satisfactory and not
                                                                       strong enough to compensate for the
                                                                       unsatisfactory ratings in business success
                                                                       and contribution to economic development
                                                                       (paras. 9­14).
1. Contribution to private   Satisfactory          Satisfactory
   sector development
2. Business success          Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
3. Contribution to           Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory      This validation downgraded the rating to
   Economic development                                                unsatisfactory on the basis of EIRR
                                                                       calculation results (para. 14).
4. ESHS performance          Unsatisfactory        Satisfactory        There were no ADB requirements or
                                                                       safeguard policies at approval and there were
                                                                       no known violations of ESHS regulations
                                                                       (para. 16).
ADB's Investment             Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Profitability
ADB's Work Quality           Satisfactory          Less than           Overall work quality rating is downgraded due
                                                   satisfactory        to the downgrade in monitoring and
                                                                       supervision rating (para. 23).
1. Screening, appraisal,     Partly satisfactory   Less than
   and structuring                                 satisfactory
2. Monitoring and            Satisfactory          Less than           ADB should have ensured that the fund
   supervision                                     satisfactory        manager adhered to the fund's objectives
                                                                       (para. 23).
3. ADB's role and            Satisfactory          Satisfactory
   contribution
ADB's Additionality             Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Overall Assessment              Partly                Less than
                                satisfactory          successful
ADB = Asian Development Bank, EIRR = economic internal rate of return, ESHS = environment, social, health, and
safety, IED = Independent Evaluation Department, XARR = extended annual review report.
Note: From May 2012, IED views the XARR's rating terminology of "partly" or "less" as equivalent to "less than" and
uses this terminology for its own rating categories to improve clarity.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.
                                                                                                 7


                   III.         ISSUES, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

31.     The XARR combined the issues, lessons, and recommendations. The main points
discussed were the following: (i) the idea of creating an apex fund to seed 10 state-level funds
was not successful and this could have been subjected to greater scrutiny during appraisal; (ii)
the fund manager should have been given the flexibility to draw down the capital of the fund in
accordance with its investment needs rather than at four pre-determined capital calls as this
resulted in misallocation of resources; and (iii) the fund's investment in smaller companies did
not perform well and this underscores the necessity of having rigorous due diligence processes
in place for any fund.

32.     This validation agrees with the issues, lessons, and recommendations identified by the
XARR. In addition, it was noted that the fund manager strayed from the original intent of the
Fund to focus its investments in SMEs and to invest in ventures with a view to taking the
investee companies to the stock market. It is therefore recommended that ADB be more vigilant
in monitoring and supervising fund managers of private equity funds to ensure that they adhere
to the intended purposes and objectives of the Fund.

                          IV.    OTHER ASSESSMENTS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design

33.     The XARR did not discuss the monitoring and evaluation design for the project. Although
regular valuation reports and financial statements were submitted by the fund manager to ADB,
ADB should have required the submission of cash flow statements since this is necessary for
the calculation of the project's business success per guidelines.

B.     Other Aspects

34.    Safeguard issues were already discussed in the ESHS performance of the project.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

35.     Aside from the RRP and XARR, the validation also reviewed other project documents
including the minutes of the staff review committee meeting, the Contribution Agreement,
valuation reports, investor reports, and audited financial statements.

D.     Comments on XARR Quality

36.     In general, the XARR provided sufficient evidence to support its assessments and
ratings, particularly in the discussion of the Project's contribution to private sector development
(Table 2). The appendixes containing the review of the Fund and the review of the Fund's sub-
investments were likewise very good as they provided ample details about the Fund and its
investments. The XARR was internally consistent and clear for the most part.

37.     The quality of the XARR could have been better had it (i) provided more evidence that
the Fund was indeed one of the pioneers of the venture capital industry in India and that it
introduced new financial structures and instruments; (ii) independently verified the IRR
calculation for business success; (iii) calculated the EIRR as required under existing guidelines;
and (iv) included a definition of SMEs in the project country and identified which Fund
investments were SMEs and which were not.
8



                             Table 2: Extended Annual Review Report Quality

                                                                                    Less than
                                                   Excellent     Satisfactory      satisfactory      Unsatisfactory
(i)     Quality and completeness of evidence
                                                                       X
        and analysis to substantiate ratings
(ii)    Consistency with XARR guidelines
                                                                                         X
        (PAI 6.07b)
(iii)   Plausibility of assumptions underlying
        economic and financial analyses,
        including calculations of EIRRs, FIRRs,                        X
        and assumptions on project
        sustainability
(iv)    Quality of lessons identification and
        recommendations                                                X
(v)     Clarity and internal consistency of the
                                                                       X
        XARR
                                                     Highly                            Less than
                                                  satisfactory     Satisfactory       satisfactory     Unsatisfactory
 Overall Assessment                                                      X
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PAI = project administration
instruction, XARR = extended annual review report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

E.         Recommendations for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

38.        None.
