Validation Report




Reference Number: XVR-22
Project Numbers: 31901 and 38926
Investment Numbers: 7138 and 7211
December 2013




India: Equity Investment in and Loan to
Infrastructure Development Finance Company




This is a redacted version of the document that excludes information that is subject to
exceptions to disclosure set forth in ADB's Public Communication Policy 2011.




Independent Evaluation Department
                                        ABBREVIATIONS

               ADB       ­   Asian Development Bank
               EMSP      ­   environmental management system and procedure
               EROIC     ­   economic return on invested capital
               IDFC      ­   Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation
               IFC       ­   International Finance Corporation
               IPO       ­   initial public offering
               RRP       ­   report and recommendation of the President
               ROIC      ­   return on invested capital
               WACC      ­   weighted average cost of capital
               XARR      ­   extended annual review report



                                             NOTES

             (i) The fiscal year (FY) of the government, which is followed in the financial
                  reporting of IFDC ends on 31 March. FY before
                  a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends,
                  e.g., FY2011 ends on 31 March 2012.
             (ii) In this report, "$" refers to US dollars.


                                           Key Words

   adb, equity investment, extended annual review report, fund, ied, india, infrastructure
   development finance company, private sector, sme, term loan facility, validation




The guidelines formally adopted by the Independent Evaluation Department (IED) on avoiding
conflict of interest in its independent evaluations were observed in the preparation of this report.

In preparing any evaluation report, or by making any designation of or reference to a particular
territory or geographic area in this document, the IED does not intend to make any judgments
as to the legal or other status of any territory or area.
                                            PROJECT BASIC DATA

Project Number: 31901                            XARR Circulation Date: Dec 2011
Investment Number: 7138                          XARR Validation Date:    Dec 2013
Project Name: Equity Investment in and Loan to Infrastructure Development Approved                         Actual
Finance Company                                                            ($ million)                   ($ million)
Country:             India                       Total Project Cost:          274.0                         274.0
Sector:              Finance                     ADB Equity Investment:        30.0                          15.5
Other Equity         Government of India, RBI, Other Investors'               244.0                         258.5
Investors:           IDBI, SBI, IFCI, HDFC,      Capital:
                     ICICI, UTI, GSIC, CDC,
                     international insurance
                     companies, and
                     international banks
Approval Date:       14 Oct 1997                 First Disbursement:      30 Mar 1998
Signing Date of          1998                            Final Disbursement:           30 Mar 1998
Equity Agreement:
Project Officers:        Name                            Location                         From           To
                         R. Claudet                      ADB headquarters                  2001         2002
                         C. Locsin                       ADB headquarters                  2002         2002
                         T. Koike                        ADB headquarters                  2003         2003
                         A. Idris                        ADB headquarters                  2003         2005
                         K. Felsinger                    ADB headquarters                  2005         2006
                         P. Marro                        ADB headquarters                  2006         2006
Validator:               J. Lufkin, Consultant           Peer Reviewer:                N. Gamo, Senior Evaluation
                                                                                        Officer, IED2
Quality Reviewer:        H. Feig, Lead Evaluation        Director:                     H. Hettige, IED2
                          Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; CDC = Commonwealth Development Corporation; GSIC = Government of Singapore
Investment Corporation; HDFC = Housing Development Finance Corporation; ICICI = Industrial Credit & Investment
Corporation of India; IDBI = Industrial Development Bank of India; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department,
Division 2; IFCI = Industrial Finance Corporation of India; RBI = Reserve Bank of India; SBI = State Bank of India; UTI
= Unit Trust of India; XARR = extended annual review report.
2


                                       PROJECT BASIC DATA

Project Number: 38926                           XARR Circulation Date:       Dec 2011
Investment/Loan Number: 7211/2169               XARR Validation Date:        Dec 2013
Project Name: Equity Investment in and Loan to Infrastructure Development      Approved         Actual
Finance Company                                                                ($ million)    ($ million)
Country:             India                    Total Project Cost:                  50.0           50.0
Sector:              Finance                    ADB Financing:
                                                Loan                               50.0           50.0
Cofinanciers:        Not applicable             Cofinancing:                     Not             Not
                                                                              applicable      applicable
Approval Date:       19 Apr 2005                First Disbursement:          7 May 2007
Signing Date of      20 Mar 2007                Final Disbursement:          7 May 2007
Loan Agreement:
Project Officers:                               Location:                       From            To
                     K. Felsinger               ADB headquarters                 2005          2006
                     S. Kim                     ADB headquarters                 2007          2010
                     C. Engstrom                ADB headquarters                 2011          2012
                     P. Flegler                 ADB headquarters                 2013         Present
Validator:           J. Lufkin, Consultant      Peer Reviewer:               N. Gamo, Senior Evaluation
                                                                              Officer, IED2
Quality Reviewer:    H. Feig, Lead Evaluation Director:                      H. Hettige, IED2
                      Specialist, IED2
ADB = Asian Development Bank; IED2 = Independent Evaluation Department, Division 2; XARR = extended annual
review report.

                                  I.      PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A.        Project Background

1.      Since 1986, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has been instrumental in supporting
India's policy reforms in the finance sector and capital markets. Although there had been
significant improvements in credit access and development of long-term financial instruments,
large investment needs in infrastructure remained unfilled because not enough long-term
financing was available from banks and nonbank financial intermediaries. India experienced an
infrastructure bottleneck in the 1990s, which threatened the sustainability of the country's
economic growth and prompted the establishment of the Infrastructure Development Finance
Corporation (IDFC).

2.      In an effort to inspire confidence among capital market investors and initiate key
infrastructure reforms, the Government of India asked ADB, along with several other
international investors, to help formulate a strategy for the establishment of the IDFC and to
invest in the company's equity. ADB conducted several due diligence missions to help prepare
the company's business plan. It was determined that the IDFC would need about Rs10 billion
(approximately $274 million) by the start of commercial operation. On 14 October 1997, ADB
approved an equity investment of up to $30 million in the IDFC.

3.     In 2005, the IDFC entered into final preparations for an initial public offering (IPO) of its
shares. Prior to the planned IPO, ADB approved a $50 million dollar-denominated loan in April
2005 to provide additional funding for the IDFC's growing portfolio of infrastructure project loans.
                                                                                                3


B.       Project Features

4.      Of the approved equity investment of $30 million, only $15.5 million was disbursed. This
was equivalent to 61 million shares or 6.1% of the IDFC's total equity. Meanwhile, the $50
million secured loan had a maturity of 10 years with a grace period of 3 years. The loan was to
be repaid semi-annually.

5.      ADB's equity investment aimed to address the shortage of long-term financing in favor of
infrastructure projects. The loan, on the other hand, aimed to provide the IDFC with additional
funding to further supplement the IDFC's support for the growing number of infrastructure
projects.

C.       Progress Highlights

6.      The IDFC was incorporated in January 1997. From providing project finance and
government advisory services in its formative years, it has developed into a market leader
providing innovative products and solutions in infrastructure finance. The IDFC is currently
engaged in the business of asset management, loan syndication, corporate advisory,
investment banking, and institutional brokerage.

7.      From the initial equity capital the IDFC received from ADB and other investors when it
was formed, the IDFC has raised additional capital of over $1.3 billion through its IPO and
qualified institutional placement.

8.      ADB fully divested its IDFC equity holdings in September 2006. As of the date of this
validation, the IDFC has been fulfilling its repayment obligations under the loan agreement.

                                  II. PROJECT EVALUATION

A.       Development Outcomes and Impacts

         1. Contribution to Private Sector Development

9.      The XARR rated the project's contribution to private sector development excellent. The
establishment of the IDFC addressed India's problem of attracting capital to finance
infrastructure projects. From providing project finance and government advice, it additionally has
expanded to offering innovative products and financing structures through asset management,
loan syndication, corporate advisory, investment banking, and institutional brokerage
operations. The company successfully raised capital for the infrastructure sector by launching
private equity funds and therefore contributed to higher private sector participation. Its
involvement in the formulation of policy and issues related to infrastructure through various
government-formed committees in India is regarded as highly valuable. The IDFC has
developed best practices in credit appraisal, establishing itself as the leading source of
knowledge and expertise in India's infrastructure development and finance. Since initiating its
IPO in 2005, the IDFC has become the largest privately held infrastructure finance company in
India and considered third largest project finance company in Asia and the Pacific.1




1
    Thomson Reuters.
4


10.     This validation concurs with the XARR's rating of excellent for private sector
development. The IDFC has had an immense catalytic impact on private investments in
infrastructure and the XARR has provided sufficient evidence to support this.

         2. Business Success

11.     The XARR rated business success excellent. The XARR used the IDFC's return on
invested capital (ROIC) starting from 2005 when the loan was approved and prior to ADB's
divestment of its shareholdings. The real ROIC as of FY2011 when compared to the weighted
average cost of capital (WACC), corresponds to an excellent rating. 2 The XARR further
supported the given rating by establishing the IDFC's strong financial and business
performance. Since its IPO, the IDFC has experienced outstanding growth in its assets,
shareholder's equity, and earnings accounts. The IDFC has also been an industry leader among
India's financial institutions proven by its gross nonperforming assets to gross loans ratio of
0.3%, significantly better than the 2.5% average for India's financial institutions.3

12.     The XARR should have recalculated the ROIC from 1998, which was the year ADB
invested in the equity securities of the IDFC. Anyway, this validation was not able to calculate
the ROIC from 1998 because the IDFC's financial statements were not readily available. This
validation recalculated the real ROIC and WACC as of 31 March 2012 and since the ROIC is
greater than WACC plus 700 basis points, the rating of excellent for business success is
confirmed.

         3. Contribution to Economic Development

13.     As ADB's loan to the IDFC was not targeted at a specific capital investment to allow
measurement of project benefits and cost, the XARR chose to use economic return on invested
capital (EROIC) as proxy to determine the project's contribution to economic development. Real
EROIC was computed as of FY2011, which being greater than 20% corresponds to an excellent
rating according to the evaluation standards of Project Administration Instructions (PAI) No.
6.07B. Additionally, the IDFC's major participation in many large infrastructure projects through
project financing and advisory services further justified the excellent rating for economic
development.

14.    This validation computed EROIC to be greater than 20% so the contribution to economic
development rating of excellent is confirmed.

         4. Environment, Social, Health, and Safety Performance

15.     The XARR rated environment, social, health, and safety performance satisfactory stating
that the IDFC has introduced an environmental management system and procedure (EMSP),
which the International Finance Corporation (IFC) considers one of the best in India's finance
sector. The IDFC's EMSP requires subprojects to comply with India's minimum government
regulations and the IDFC's own parameters and requires submission of an environmental plan
as a part of the credit assessment process. The IDFC has updated to new environmental and
social management standards by sending its senior officers and managers to training and
seminars. Along with its achievements for environmental management, the IDFC also claims
2
    Please see para. 37 for a discussion of disparate terminal values used in the XARR to calculate ROIC and EROIC
    and their effect on ratings.
3
    The 2.5% figure is an average of nonperforming assets for Indian commercial banks, public sector banks, and
    private banks.
                                                                                                  5


that its strong advocacy on policy matters related to the infrastructure sector resulted in
meaningful government reforms on the environment.

16.      This validation concurs with the satisfactory rating. ADB conducted an environmental
due diligence on 6­10 September 2004 where it determined that the IDFC's EMSP substantially
complied with ADB policy and guidelines. It has also introduced improvements to the EMSP in
several areas pointed out by ADB. The IDFC claims that no infrastructure project failing to meet
environmental and social standards has yet passed EMSP. This validation therefore finds that
the IDFC has complied with key standards, practices, and procedures set by both the
Government of India and ADB and concurs with the satisfactory rating.

       5. Overall Development Impacts and Outcomes Rating

17.     The validation concurs with the XARR's excellent rating for the overall development
impact as the validation concurs with all the ratings given by the XARR for private sector
development; business success; contribution to economic development; and environmental,
social, health, and safety performance.

B.     ADB's Investment Profitability

18.    The XARR rated the overall ADB investment profitability for the combined equity and
loan investments excellent. For the equity investment, the XARR calculated an internal rate of
return that is slightly higher than the target internal rate of return given in the report and
recommendation of the President (RRP).

19.     The XARR evaluated ADB's loan to the IDFC by comparing its margin earnings against
a comparable loan with similar project and country risk profile. IFC's $100 million 6-year loan to
the IDFC on March 2006 was selected as the comparator loan. ADB's spread compared to
IFC's spread results to a multiple of 0.90, which corresponds to a satisfactory rating for the
profitability of ADB's loan.

20.     This validation confirms the excellent rating for ADB investment profitability but notes the
following: (i) ADB's equity investment of Rs610 million is equivalent to only $15.5 million and not
$30.0 million as indicated in the basic data as the amount disbursed; (ii) ADB received a total of
Rs3.60 billion and not Rs2.70 billion from its divestment in the IDFC--Rs0.32 billion in dividends
and Rs3.28 billion in equity sales proceeds; and (iii) the expected return from ADB's investment
in the IDFC was 19.0% in nominal dollar terms and not 25.0%. This validation recalculated the
financial internal rate of return for ADB's equity investment in the IDFC to be 1.3 times the
expected return.

C.     ADB's Operational Effectiveness (Work Quality)

       1. Screening, Appraisal, and Structuring

21.     An excellent rating was given by the XARR for screening, appraisal, and structuring. The
XARR stated that ADB was involved in formulating an operating strategy and preparing the
business plan for the IDFC, which was designed to address the infrastructure investment gap in
India. ADB also participated in the initial capital structuring plan, ensuring that although the
Government of India, the Reserve Bank of India, and the Industrial Development Bank of India
would have 40% ownership of the IDFC, private sector representatives would still constitute the
majority on the board and be given management control. It was clearly stated in the XARR that
6


the Government of India would only have a minority position on the IDFC board. With regard to
the loan, the Private Sector Operations Department determined that a $50 million dollar-
denominated loan was necessary as the domestic corporate bond market could not meet the
IDFC's funding requirements.

22.      This validation concurs with the excellent rating. ADB recognized that creation of an
institution like the IDFC was critical in finding a solution to India's infrastructure bottleneck.
Participating fully in its early planning stage increased the chances of the IDFC's success.
Making sure that the IDFC could operate as an independent body, even with the Government of
India holding a major equity stake, also contributed greatly to the IDFC's results. The approval
process of ADB's loan to the IDFC was also excellent. The RRP was very detailed in profiling
the borrower, forecasting the IDFC's future financial performance, identifying risks, and utilizing
previous lessons learned by ADB on similar loan projects to structure the loan.

       2. Monitoring and Supervision

23.    The XARR rated ADB monitoring and supervision satisfactory. The IDFC has kept ADB
informed through the submission of regular financial statements from which it prepares periodic
reports about the company's business and financial performance. Since 2010, the reports have
included monitoring of sovereign performance, industry outlook, and development effectiveness.

24.     This validation concurs with the satisfactory rating, as a strong case was made by the
XARR that ADB has kept itself sufficiently informed as to the IDFC's status and financial
situation.

       3. Role and Contribution

25.     The XARR gave ADB a rating of excellent for its role and contribution, primarily citing the
move by ADB and other foreign investors to discourage the Government of India's attempt to
change the IDFC's private sector-led status by aligning it with the State Bank of India through
the transfer of all Reserve Bank of India's IDFC shares in 2004. Also, the XARR mentions that
ADB's loan has enabled the IDFC to raise additional long-term funds from diverse sources.

26.     The validation concurs with the XARR rating of excellent, but notes that any catalytic
effect of ADB's 10-year loan in enabling the IDFC to raise additional funds should be seen in the
context of the IDFC's strong financial performance and ability to conduct a very successful IPO.
However, it is undeniable that ADB's support for the IDFC's independence was critical in
preserving the confidence of private investors, and deflected an initiative, which could have
been quite detrimental to the company's ability to raise funds for infrastructure and to its overall
standing in the market.

       4. Overall Work Quality

27.     The XARR rated ADB's overall work quality excellent. The validation downgrades ADB
overall work quality to satisfactory. For an excellent overall rating, guidelines require all three
sub-indicators to be excellent.

D.     ADB's Additionality

28.     ADB's additionally was rated satisfactory by the XARR. The XARR stated that being one
of the founding investors in 1997 allowed ADB to participate in the IDFC board and improve the
                                                                                                                    7


  IDFC's policies and systems. ADB has played a crucial role in the IDFC's success by ensuring
  that the IDFC's original objectives were maintained, and by giving the IDFC its continuous
  support and commitment.

  29.    The validation concurs with the XARR's rating of satisfactory. ADB has utilized its IDFC
  board seat well through its efforts of maintaining the consistency of the IDFC's objectives to
  ADB's own standards. The XARR makes a strong case that ADB's involvement and support of
  the IDFC has contributed to increased investor confidence toward the IDFC and that this has
  helped the IDFC attract private capital from the market.

  E.       Overall Assessment

  30.  This validation agrees with the XARR's overall rating of highly successful. Table 1
  summarizes the individual ratings.

                                           Table 1: Overall Ratings

                                                                             Reason for Disagreement and/or
           Criteria                   XARR              IED Review                     Comments
  Development outcomes
  and impacts
  1. Contribution to private      Excellent              Excellent
     sector development
  2. Business success             Excellent              Excellent
  3. Contribution to              Excellent              Excellent
     economic
     development
  4. ESHS performance        Satisfactory               Satisfactory

  Overall development               Excellent            Excellent
  outcomes and impacts
  ADB's investment                  Excellent            Excellent
  profitability
  ADB's work quality
  1. Screening, appraisal,          Excellent            Excellent
     and structuring
  2. Monitoring and                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
     supervision
  3. ADB's role and                 Excellent            Excellent
     contribution
  Overall ADB's work                Excellent          Satisfactory      For an excellent overall rating, all three
  quality                                                                sub-indicators must be excellent.
  ADB's additionality             Satisfactory         Satisfactory
  Overall assessment                Highly               Highly
                                  successful           successful
  XARR quality                                         Satisfactory
ADB = Asian Development Bank, ESHS = environment, social, health, and safety, IED = Independent Evaluation
Department, XARR = extended annual review report.
Note: From May 2012, IED views the XARR's rating terminology of "partly" or "less" as equivalent to "less than" and uses
this terminology for its own rating categories to improve clarity.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.
8


                   III.         ISSUES, LESSONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

31.     The XARR noted that while ADB's loan was denominated in dollars, all of the IDFC's
subloans are denominated in rupees so the IDFC has to incur additional costs in hedging
transactions. The XARR recommended that ADB consider providing a loan in local currency for
similar projects in the future. The XARR likewise suggested that (i) ADB increase its financial
investment for clean energy projects in India considering the substantial unfilled demand; and
(ii) ADB consider increasing its role in providing financial intermediation to the banking sector to
encourage wider private sector participation in infrastructure finance.

32.     This validation agrees with the issue and recommendations identified in the XARR. In
addition, some of the positive lessons from the project include (i) the inherent advantages of
direct investments in financial institutions as opposed to financial intermediation loan modalities
and corporate loans; (ii) the importance of good financial institution management teams for its
business success; and (iii) the importance of concurrent improvements in the regulatory
framework for private investments in infrastructure.

                          IV.    OTHER ASSESSMENTS AND FOLLOW-UP

A.     Monitoring and Evaluation Design

33.     The RRP for the equity investment did not include a monitoring and evaluation design
but the loan had a good framework for assessing the development impact of the loan.

B.     Other Aspects

34.    None.

C.     Data Sources for Validation

35.     In addition to the concept clearance paper, the RRP and XARR for the IDFC, the
validation reviewed, among others
        (i)   the IDFC Annual Report (2006­2012), and
        (ii) Thomson Reuters research

D.     Comments on XARR Quality

36.     The XARR was very comprehensive and provided adequate information to support the
ratings given. The XARR is worth commending in its impressive adherence to the guidelines of
PAI 6.07b.

37.    However, the terminal value used in the computation of ROIC and EROIC was not
consistent with the terminal value computed in Appendix 5 of the XARR. The XARR provides no
explanation why a terminal value of Rs549,140 was used in Table 11 instead of the terminal
value of Rs496,570 given in Appendix 5. Using the terminal value shown in Appendix 5 would
have resulted in lower ROIC and EROIC figures and lower ratings for business success and
contribution to economic development.

38.    There is also ambiguity in the XARR as to whether the loan was secured or unsecured.
In the Key Project Features section, the XARR describes the loan as unsecured while in the
                                                                                                                    9


ADB Profitability section, the XARR describes the loan as secured. Both the CCP and the RRP
say that the loan would be secured. IDFC confirmed that the loan was secured.

39.    As discussed in para. 20, the XARR likewise contained some incorrect information such
as the actual amount of ADB's equity investment in the IDFC and the amount received by ADB
when it divested its shares.

                           Table 2: Extended Annual Review Report Quality

                                                                                      Less than
                                                  Excellent        Satisfactory      satisfactory      Unsatisfactory
Quality and completeness of evidence
                                                                         X
and analysis to substantiate ratings
Consistency with XARR guidelines
                                                       X
(PAI 6.07b)
Plausibility of assumptions underlying
economic and financial analyses,
including calculations of EIRRs,                                         X
FIRRs, and assumptions on project
sustainability
Quality of lessons identification and
                                                                         X
recommendations
Clarity and internal consistency of the
                                                                                            X
XARR
                                                   Highly                             Less than
                                                satisfactory       Satisfactory      satisfactory      Unsatisfactory
Overall Assessment                                                      X
EIRR = economic internal rate of return, FIRR = financial internal rate of return, PAI = project administration
instruction, XARR = extended annual review report.
Source: ADB Independent Evaluation Department.

E.       Recommendations for Independent Evaluation Department Follow-Up

40.      None.
